Downton Abbey is a British period drama television series created by Julian Fellowes and co-produced by Carnival Films and Masterpiece. It first aired on ITV in the United Kingdom on 26 September 2010 and on PBS in the United States on 9 January 2011 as part of the "Masterpiece Classic" anthology.
The series, set in the fictional Yorkshire country estate of Downton Abbey, depicts the lives of the aristocratic Crawley family and their servants in the post-Edwardian era — with the great events in history having an effect on their lives and on the British social hierarchy. Such events depicted throughout the series include news of the sinking of the RMS "Titanic" in the first series; the outbreak of World War I, the Spanish influenza pandemic, and the Marconi scandal in the second series; and the Interwar period and the formation of the Irish Free State in the third series.
"Downton Abbey" has received critical acclaim from television critics and won numerous accolades, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Miniseries or Television Film and a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Miniseries. It was recognised by "Guinness World Records" as the most critically acclaimed English-language television series of 2011, and became the first international television series to receive the largest number of nominations in the history of the Primetime Emmy Awards, with twenty-seven in total. It was the most watched television series on both ITV and PBS, and subsequently became the most successful British costume drama series since the 1981 television serial of "Brideshead Revisited". By the third series, it had become one of the most widely watched television shows in the world.
Overview.
The series is set in the fictional Downton Abbey, a Yorkshire country house, the seat of the Earl and Countess of Grantham, and follows the lives of the aristocratic Crawley family and their servants during the reign of King George V. The first series spanned the two years before the Great War beginning with news of the sinking of the "Titanic" in 1912, which set the story in motion. The second series covered the years 1916 to 1919, and the 2011 Christmas Special covered the 1919 Christmas period, ending in early 1920. The third series picks up soon thereafter, covering 1920 through the autumn of 1921.
Locations.
Highclere Castle in Hampshire was used for exterior shots of Downton Abbey and most of the interior filming. The kitchen and servants' quarters and working areas and several "upstairs" bedrooms were constructed and filmed at Ealing Studios.
The village of Bampton in Oxfordshire was used to film outdoor scenes, most notably St Mary's Church and the library, which served as the entrance to the cottage hospital. First World War trench warfare in France was filmed in rural Suffolk near the village of Akenham specially designed for period war scenes. 
Many historical locations and aristocratic mansions were used to film various scenes. The fictional Haxby Park, the estate Sir Richard Carlisle intends to buy in Series 2, is part of Waddesdon Manor in Buckinghamshire. Inveraray Castle doubled as "Duneagle Castle" in the 2012 Christmas special. Greys Court in Oxfordshire was used as the family's secondary property, into which they proposed moving and calling 'Downton Place' due to financial difficulties in the third series. Also in the third series, Bates' prison scenes were filmed at Lincoln Castle in Lincolnshire. Also in the third series, parts of the servant's homes were filmed on Matthew Millett's Grandma's farm.
The Downton Abbey of the title and setting, though fictional, is described as lying in the historical County of Yorkshire. The towns of Easingwold, Kirkby Malzeard, Kirkbymoorside, Malton, Middlesbrough, Ripon, Richmond, and Thirsk, each mentioned by characters in the series, lie in present-day North Yorkshire, as does the city of York, while Leeds - similarly mentioned - lies in West Yorkshire.
Production.
Gareth Neame of Carnival Films conceived the idea of an Edwardian-era TV drama set in a country house and approached Fellowes, who had won an Academy Award for Best Writing (Original Screenplay) for "Gosford Park". Although Fellowes was reluctant to work on another project resembling "Gosford", within a few weeks he returned to Neame with an outline of the first series. Fellowes writes the scripts, and his wife Emma is an informal story editor.
Episodes.
Series one.
The first series was broadcast in the UK on 26 September 2010, and explored the lives of the Crawley family and their servants from the day after the sinking of the RMS "Titanic" in April 1912 to the outbreak of the First World War on 4 August 1914. Much of the focus is on the need for a male heir to the Grantham estate, and the troubled love life of Lady Mary as she attempts to find a suitable husband. The device that sets the drama in motion is the entail accompanying the (fictional) Earldom of Grantham (which endows both title and estate exclusively to heirs male) complicated by the dire financial state of the estate only saved when the earl – then the heir apparent – married an American heiress. On the marriage, her considerable fortune was contractually incorporated into the comital entail in perpetuity. The earl and countess, who had three daughters and no son, arranged for their eldest daughter to marry her cousin, son of the then-heir presumptive. The demise of both heirs in the sinking of the "Titanic" destroyed the plans and brought into play a distant male cousin, a solicitor from Manchester as heir presumptive to the countess's fortune.
Series two.
The second series premiered in the UK on 18 September 2011, and in the U.S. on 8 January 2012. A Christmas special was broadcast on Christmas Day 2011 in the UK.
The series comprised eight episodes, running from the Battle of the Somme in 1916 to the 1918 flu pandemic. Matthew Crawley, Thomas Barrow, and William Mason went to fight in the war; Tom Branson, an Irishman, refused to fight for the British. Lady Sybil Crawley defied her aristocratic position and joined the Voluntary Aid Detachment.
Michelle Dockery, Dame Maggie Smith, Brendan Coyle, Rob James-Collier, Dan Stevens, Elizabeth McGovern, Hugh Bonneville, Jessica Brown Findlay, Laura Carmichael, Joanne Froggatt, Phyllis Logan and Allen Leech all returned and Cal Macaninch, Iain Glen, Amy Nuttall, Zoe Boyle and Maria Doyle Kennedy joined the cast as the new valet Lang, Sir Richard Carlisle, the new housemaid Ethel, Miss Lavinia Swire and John Bates' wife Vera respectively. Filming began in March 2011.
Christmas Special 2011.
Most of the regular cast, with Nigel Havers as Lord Hepworth and Sharon Small as Lady Rosamund's new maid, Marigold Shore, appeared in a Christmas special. This single episode visited Downton between Christmas 1919 and early 1920.
Series three.
The third series of Downton Abbey premiered on 16 September 2012 in the UK, and on 6 January 2013 in the U.S. In series three, Mary and Matthew were married; Tom and Sybil, who were expecting their first child, arrived at Downton; Downton suffered financial hardships. Shirley MacLaine joined the cast as the American mother of Lady Grantham.
Christmas Special 2012.
ITV announced at the end of the last episode of Series Three, broadcast on 4 November 2012 in the UK, that a special episode would be broadcast on Christmas Day.
Actress MyAnna Buring appeared in the 2012 Christmas special, playing the role of maid Edna Braithwaite.
Prequel.
In "The Telegraph" September 2012 issue, Julian Fellowes said he's working on a spin-off prequel of "Downton Abbey" which revolves around Lord Grantham and Cora's courtship. Initially planned as a book, it was then picked up by ITV.
Series four.
On 23 November 2012, ITV announced that a fourth series has been commissioned and that filming will begin in February 2013.
Reception.
Series one.
The first episode of "Downton Abbey" had a consolidated British audience of 9.2 million viewers, a 32% audience share—making it the most successful new drama on any channel since "Whitechapel" was launched on ITV in February 2009. The total audience for the first episode, including repeats and ITV Player viewings, exceeded 11.6 million viewers. This was beaten by the next episode, with a total audience of 11.8 million viewers—including repeats and ITV Player views.
"Downton Abbey" broke the record for a single episode viewing on ITV Player, the ITV online catch-up service.
At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the first series received an average score of 92, based on 14 reviews, which indicates "universal acclaim". This result earned the show a Guinness World Record in 2011 for "Highest critical review ratings for a TV show", making "Downton Abbey" the most critically well received TV show in the world. Season 4 of Breaking Bad surpassed Downton Abbey's record later in the year, with a score of 96, making season of 1 of Downton Abbey the 2nd highest rated show of 2011. 
Sam Wollaston of "The Guardian" said,
TV review: Downton Abbey and All New Celebrity Total Wipeout, "The Guardian", 27 September 2010</ref>
Viewers were critical of the number of advertisement breaks during the first episode (five in a 90-minute episode, as well as one before and one after), claiming it ruined the continuity. ITV responded by saying that the number of breaks complied with Ofcom regulations and that the advertising was necessary to cover the high costs of production.
Series two.
The second series premiered in Britain on 18 September 2011 in the same 9 pm slot as the first series, with the first episode attracting an average audience of 9 million viewers on ITV1, a 34.6% share. The second episode attracted a similar following with an average of 9.3 million viewers. In January 2012, the PBS premiere attracted 4.2 million viewers, over double the network's average primetime audience of 2 million. The premiere audience was 18% higher than the Season 1 premiere.
The second season of "Downton Abbey" gave PBS its highest ratings since 2009. The second season averaged 5.4 million viewers, excluding station replays, DVR viewings and online streaming. The 5.4 million average improved on PBS first season numbers by 25%. Additionally, episodes of season two have been viewed 4.8 million times on PBS' digital portal, which bests season one's online viewing numbers by more than 400 percent. Overall, "Downton Abbey"-related content has racked up more than 9 million streams across all platforms, with 1.5 million unique visitors, since season 2's 8 January premiere.
Awards and nominations.
"Downton Abbey" was placed tenth on "The Guardian's" list of the Top 10 TV programmes of 2010, and came second in the Top 10 TV dramas of 2010 list, beaten only by "Doctor Who". It came first in the Top 10 new drama category.
It won two Broadcasting Press Guild awards in 2011. It won Best Drama Series and Julian Fellowes won for writing. It has also won 6 Primetime Emmy Awards.
Downton was nominated for multiple BAFTAs including the Audience Award, losing to "The Only Way is Essex" and Best Drama, ultimately losing to "Sherlock".
In September 2011, the show entered the Guinness Book of World Records as the 'most critically acclaimed television show' for the year, becoming the first British show to win the award. It beat American shows "Mad Men" and "Modern Family" to the title.
In 2012, Downton Abbey nominated and won the "Best Drama Award" at the "National Television Awards". Downton Abbey also won "Best TV Show Award" at the 2012 Elle Style Awards.
Also in 2012, Downton Abbey was parodied on "Saturday Night Live" where they imagined how the show might be advertised on the male-oriented Spike TV network, calling it "fancy "Entourage"."
In July 2012, Downton Abbey was nominated for 16 Primetime Emmy Awards, which, in combination with its 11 Emmy nominations in 2011, makes Downton the most nominated non-US show in Emmy history.
On 15 September, at the Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards, John Lunn received the Emmy for Outstanding Music Composition for Series (Original Dramatic Score), while Anne ‘Nosh’ Oldham and Christine Greenwood won the Outstanding Hairstyling for A Single Camera Series Award.
On 23 September, at the Primetime Emmy Awards, Maggie Smith took home the Outstanding Supporting Actress Award in a Drama Series.
On 20 November, Downton Abbey was shortlisted for International Programme Sales at the 2013 Broadcast Awards. The International Programme Sales category aims to recognize a UK-produced programme that has made a significant impact internationally.
On 29 November 2012, the producers of Downton Abbey were nominated for The Norman Felton Award for Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television (Drama) at the 2013 Producers Guild Awards.
On 12 December, Downton Abbey received three nominations at the 2013 Screen Actors Guild Awards. Downton was nominated for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble In a Drama Series, while Michelle Dockery and Maggie Smith were both nominated for Outstanding Performance By A Female Actor In A Drama Series.
On 13 December 2012, the Hollywood Foreign Press Association nominated Downton Abbey in three categories for the 70th Golden Globe Awards. Downton Abbey received a nomination for Best Television Series (Drama), Michelle Dockery for Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series (Drama), and Maggie Smith for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Miniseries or Motion Picture Made for Television.
Actor Allen Leech who plays Tom Branson has been nominated for the "Actor in a Supporting Role Television Award" at the 2013 Irish Film and Television Awards, and the awards take place in February 2013.
On 23 January 2013 Downton Abbey won Best Drama at the 2013 National Television Awards, one year after Downton earned the Best Drama prize at the 2012 NTAs.
On 27 January 2013 the cast of Downton Abbey won Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series at the 19th annual Screen Actors Guild Awards.
Anti-Irish charges.
Charges that the series depicts the Irish characters - and Irish history - in a negative light have been made in some Irish newspapers. The Irish War of Independence for example, is incorrectly described in the blurb as the Irish Civil War. While Irish atrocities are mentioned no mention is made of the British Black and Tans and their atrocities being committed throughout the Irish countryside at the time. Allen Leech who plays Tom Branson in the series was asked about this by an Irish reporter writing for the Irish newspaper The Herald and the actor denied the notion that the series depicted the Irish characters in a stage Irish pejorative fashion. Nevertheless his brother Kieran is depicted as boorish, rude, and drunken. The Dowager Countess describes him as a 'drunken gorilla'- an unwelcome reminder to an Irish audience of the ape like figures depicting the Irish that featured in British publications in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. 
Branson is therefore 'rescued' from his Irish connections and becomes more acceptable by adopting Anglicized ways - even learning to play cricket.
International broadcasts.
The rights to broadcast "Downton Abbey" have been acquired in over 100 countries.
STV opt out.
STV, which broadcasts ITV productions in Scotland, opted out of showing "Downton Abbey", choosing instead to screen a brand-new six-part series of "Taggart", following a long practice of opting out of Britain-wide ITV programmes. This led to backlash from Scottish viewers, who were frustrated at not being able to watch the programme. Many viewers with satellite or cable television tuned into other regional stations of the ITV network, for example ITV1 London, with viewing figures showing this is also commonplace for other ITV programmes. The series received its first Britain-wide broadcast when it was shown on ITV3 in February 2011.
STV announced in July 2011 that it will show the first and second series of "Downton Abbey", as part of its autumn schedule.
Phyllis Logan, who plays Mrs Hughes, said: "I'm delighted that STV is showing "Downton Abbey" in Scotland – it means my family and friends in Scotland will be able to watch it at the same time as the rest of the UK. This might push our viewing figures up even higher which can only be good." Iain Glen, who plays Sir Richard Carlisle, added: "I am not party to the original decision as to why STV didn't acquire the original series from ITV, but I am delighted the decision has been reversed and the people of Scotland will be able to see what all the fuss has been about."
Releases.
Blu-ray and DVD.
Internationally, the U.S. DVD release date was 11 January 2011, in New Zealand it was released on 22 June 2011 and in Australia on 4 August 2011. The release in Australia and New Zealand has an exclusive bonus disc in both the DVD and Blu-ray versions. It contains extras such as cast interviews, geography of Downton: upstairs and downstairs, a day in service and others.
On 16 September 2011, two days before the UK premiere of the second series, it was reported by Amazon.com that the first series of "Downton Abbey" had become the highest selling DVD Boxset on the online retailer's website of all time, surpassing popular American programmes such as "The Sopranos", "Friends" and "The Wire".
Soundtrack.
A soundtrack, featuring music from the series and also new songs, was released by Decca in September 2011. Music by John Lunn and Don Black features, with vocals from Mary-Jess Leaverland and Alfie Boe.
Books.
"The World of Downton Abbey", a book featuring a behind-the-scenes look at "Downton Abbey" was released on 15 September 2011. It was written by Jessica Fellowes (the niece of Julian Fellowes) and was published by HarperCollins. A second book also written by Jessica Fellowes and published by HarperCollins, "The Chronicles of Downton Abbey", was released on 13 September 2012. It is a guide to the third series and the new era which the programme has now entered.
