The third season of AMC's television series "The Walking Dead" premiered on October 14, 2012 and will feature 16 episodes. The series is based on the series of comic books of the same name by Robert Kirkman, Tony Moore, and Charlie Adlard; it was developed for television by Frank Darabont, and is executive produced by Robert Kirkman and Glen Mazzara. As in the comics, the season is set in both an abandoned prison and an active rural town of survivors. It introduces several notable characters from the comics, including The Governor, Michonne, and Tyreese.
Plot.
Eight months have passed since Hershel's farm was destroyed and Rick Grimes and his group have been on the move. His group, consisting of his wife Lori Grimes (who is pregnant, bound to give birth soon), their son Carl, Hershel Greene and his daughters Maggie and Beth, Glenn, Carol Peletier, Daryl Dixon, and T-Dog, is now more experienced in combat, and have been scavenging supplies. Most notably, Daryl Dixon has stepped up as a cohesive member of the group, and has become Rick's right-hand man and quasi-bodyguard. Rick and Daryl spot a prison complex, and the group manages to take over the prison as their shelter.
While clearing the prison of walkers, Hershel is bitten in the leg, forcing Rick to amputate it in an attempt to save his life. They discover a small group of prisoners who have survived, and update them on the zombie apocalypse, including how to kill walkers. The prisoners' leader, Tomas, proves to be unpredictable after killing a fellow prisoner, Big Tiny, who had been infected, as well as attempting to murder Rick. As a result, Rick kills Tomas and locks out Tomas' ally, Andrew, into a yard filled with walkers. The two remaining prisoners who appear to be more docile and cooperative, Axel and Oscar, are left in a prison cell block for them to inhabit. 
Hershel, nursed by Carol, who he had taken on as his protege, survives his injury, and begins to walk with crutches. The group then fortifies the prison, however Andrew, who had survived, sabotages the prison's locks and overruns the area with walkers. The group is separated in the process, and T-Dog is bitten; he then sacrifices his life to save Carol, who disappears in the chaos. Lori goes into labor, and, realizing she is unable to give birth safely, asks Maggie to perform an emergency c-section to save the baby, at the expense of her own life. After Lori says her goodbyes to Carl, Maggie operates on Lori and delivers the baby. Lori dies of blood loss, and Carl shoots her to prevent her from reanimating. Meanwhile, the prison alarms go off; Oscar believes that the emergency generators have been activated. Axel and Oscar prove their worth to Rick by assisting him in shutting off the generators and killing Andrew. When the group reunites, Rick discovers that Lori has died. He slowly loses his sanity, aggressively slaughtering the remaining walkers in the prison and receiving phone calls from the deceased members of his group, including Lori. His phone call with Lori allows him to let go of her death and reunite with the group, which has begun taking care of the baby. Carol is found soon after by a relieved Daryl, having fought her way into a basement cell before collapsing, and the group is back together, if only for a short time.
Andrea and Michonne, the woman who saved her while escaping Hershel's farm, spot the wreckage of a crashed military helicopter, where they are spotted by a group of men that includes Daryl's missing older brother, Merle. The two are taken into the small town of Woodbury, a seemingly ideal and peaceful town led by their kind and sympathetic leader, The Governor. The town's 73 residents live in harmony reminiscent of their lives before the zombie apocalypse. Andrea is enticed by The Governor and by Merle's apparent change of heart, although Michonne is suspicious of them. The Governor is revealed to have hidden intentions, running secret experiments with his assistant Milton, as well as killing numerous military personnel to take possession of their supplies. He is also taking care of his daughter Penny, who is a walker, and is keeping heads - both walker and human - in an aquarium as trophies. Michonne discovers and kills a large number of walkers locked up by the Governor. After a confrontation with the Governor in which Michonne puts her katana to his throat, she decides to leave Woodbury without Andrea, who eventually adapts to the town's way of life and begins an intimate relationship with the Governor.
The Governor then sends Merle and three of his men to go after Michonne. Michonne kills two of them, leaving Garguilo and Merle, who wounds Michonne by shooting her in the leg. Merle, fearing for his life, wants to turn back, but Gargulio wants to keep going. Merle kills him and later lies to the Governor, telling him that he succeeded in killing Michonne in the woods. Michonne then witnesses Merle's capture of Glenn and Maggie, who had been searching for supplies and formula for Rick's baby. Michonne delivers the supplies to the prison, where she is treated for her wound and informs Rick's group about Glenn and Maggie's capture and the town of Woodbury. Carl names his baby sister Judith, and Rick, Daryl, Michonne and Oscar travel to Woodbury to rescue Glenn and Maggie. Glenn and Maggie are interrogated by Merle and the Governor about the location of their group's shelter; Glenn is beaten up by Merle, while the Governor attempts to rape Maggie. When the Governor threatens Glenn's life, Maggie discloses that they reside in the prison.
The Governor is about to send Merle and Martinez to scout the prison when Rick, Daryl, Michonne and Oscar approach Woodbury. They penetrate Woodbury's walls and rescue Maggie and Glenn, but Oscar is shot and killed after Rick sees an apparition of his deceased enemy Shane Walsh. Michonne breaks away from the group and discovers the shocking truth about Penny and the head aquarium. The Governor and Michonne fight after Michonne stabs the zombified Penny through the head with her katana. Michonne manages to stab the Governor in the eye with a piece of broken glass. Andrea arrives on the scene and holds Michonne at gunpoint to prevent the Governor's death, but upon seeing the aquarium of heads and Penny's body, Andrea begins to lose trust in him. The Governor then turns on Merle, realizing that he had lied to him about killing Michonne. At a town meeting later that evening, the Governor accuses Merle of betraying the town by conspiring with Rick's group, and the Governor reveals to everyone that the captured member of Rick's group is Merle's brother Daryl. Merle and Daryl are rescued by Rick's group, although the two leave again because Merle would not be accepted by the group. The residents of Woodbury become agitated after the numerous attacks to their town, including a recent walker attack from a breach in the wall. Andrea manages to calm the crowd, leading the Governor to tell her that she is a more capable leader than her and declares her leader of Woodbury. When the Governor departs the town unannounced, Andrea becomes even more suspicious of him.
Meanwhile, Tyreese leads his group, consisting of his sister Sasha, Allen, his wife Donna and their son Ben inside the prison through a breach in the back wall after Donna is bitten by a walker. Once inside, they are assisted by Carl, who helps them get away from the walkers pursuing them. Carl then locks Tyreese's group in the cell block next to theirs, and Tyreese smashes the head of Donna, who had succumbed to her injuries. When Rick and his group return, Tyreese attempts to negotiate with him to stay with the group, however Rick sees an apparition of Lori, causing him to explode into a violent outburst, forcing Glenn to escort Tyreese's group outside the prison. Rick sees Lori's ghost again and follows her out of the prison. With Daryl and Rick absent, Glenn assumes leadership and instructs the group to prepare for an imminent attack by the Governor while he investigates the breach in the prison. As the survivors set up defense, Axel is killed by the Governor, who along with his men initiates a surprise attack on the prison from afar. One of the Governor's men deploys a van filled with walkers into the prison yard, destroying the outer gates and once again overrunning the yard with walkers. The Governor and his men depart and the group reunites with the exception of Rick, who is rescued by Daryl and Merle, who have decided to return to the prison.
Cast.
Main cast.
The third season features ten major roles receiving star billing, with eight returning from the previous season and two new cast members introduced; six were listed as main cast members in the second season, while Lauren Cohan and Michael Rooker are promoted from recurring status, and Danai Gurira and David Morrissey are added to the main cast as Michonne and The Governor, respectively.
Production.
AMC renewed "The Walking Dead" for a third season on October 25, 2011 after the season two premiere broke cable ratings records in the 18–49 demographic. On January 14, 2012, AMC announced that the third season will contain 16 episodes.
Filming for the season began in May 2012 in Coweta County, Georgia, with the city of Senoia being used as the filming location for the town of Woodbury. Ernest Dickerson directed the season premiere episode. Greg Nicotero, co-executive producer and special make-up FX artist on the series, directed the fifth episode of season 3 after already having directed the season 2 episode "Judge, Jury, Executioner". He also plans to return as a zombie in season 3, after portraying two different zombies in the first season. In November 2012, Glen Mazzara announced that Ernest Dickerson would direct the season finale.
After the conclusion of the third season, Mazzara will step down from his position as showrunner and executive producer for the series, in a mutual agreement by both Mazzara and AMC. The press release read, "Both parties acknowledge that there is a difference of opinion about where the show should go moving forward, and conclude that it is best to part ways."
Webisodes.
Following the ' series in 2011, another set of webisodes titled ' was produced and debuted on October 1, 2012 as a runup to Season 3.
"Talking Dead".
A second season had been commissioned in May 2012. To coincide with a marathon of the show, a special episode was aired in July 2012 following the marathon's end, featuring a tour of the various props/sets used in the third season, as well as cast/crew interviews, and a snippet of exclusive footage featuring the newly introduced character Michonne.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
