Reeva Rebecca Steenkamp (19 August 1983 – 14 February 2013) was a South African model. On 14 February 2013, she was found shot dead at the home of Paralympic and Olympic athlete Oscar Pistorius whom she had been dating since November 2012.
Early life.
Steenkamp was born in Cape Town to parents Barry Steenkamp, a horse trainer, and his second wife June. Her father had an older son Adam, her half brother, whom she considered to be a full brother. The family later moved to Port Elizabeth, where she attended St Dominic's Priory School. After school she studied law at the University of Port Elizabeth which became a part of Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, where she graduated with a Bachelor of Laws in 2005.
Career.
After university Steenkamp worked as a paralegal and as a model. She applied to the Bar in late 2011, and hoped to be a qualified legal advocate by the age of 30.
Modelling.
Steenkamp began modelling at the age of 14. She was a finalist in the Weekend Post Faces of the Future competition in 2004 and in The Herald Miss Port Elizabeth contest in 2005. As a model and cover girl, Steenkamp appeared in "FHM" magazine and was the first face of Avon cosmetics in South Africa. She also modelled for the jewellery company Sivana Diamonds. 
She was ranked #40 on FHM South Africa's "100 Sexiest Women" list in 2011 and #45 in 2012. 
Her style icon was Marc Jacobs.
She was a celebrity face of the Spirit Day anti-bullying campaign in 2012.
Television.
Steenkamp once worked as the live roaming presenter for FashionTV in South Africa.
She starred in television advertisements for a range of products, including Toyota Land Cruiser, Clover "The One", Redds and Aldor Pin Pop.
She featured as a celebrity contestant on the BBC Lifestyle show "Baking Made Easy" in 2012.
At the time of her death, Steenkamp was signed up to appear on season five of the reality TV programme "Tropika Island of Treasure" and had filmed the series episodes on location in Jamaica. The screening of the series began airing as scheduled on 16 February 2013, two days after her death. The first episode of the series was dedicated to Steenkamp and was preceded by a video tribute to her.
Personal life.
Steenkamp was a keen horse rider until she broke her back in a fall in her early twenties and had to learn to walk again.
On the South African celebrity circuit she was a regular A-list guest at red carpet events and a noted socialite on the Johannesburg party scene.
Steenkamp had been dating Oscar Pistorius, a South African Olympic and Paralympic runner, since November 2012. She had previously dated Springbok rugby player Francois Hougaard.
Death.
On 14 February 2013, Steenkamp was shot and killed at the home of her boyfriend Oscar Pistorius. Pistorius was arrested and charged with her murder.
Steenkamp's funeral was held at Victoria Park crematorium in Port Elizabeth on 19 February 2013.
