Suits is a USA Network television drama series created by Aaron Korsh, starring Patrick J. Adams as Michael "Mike" Ross and Gabriel Macht as Harvey Specter. The series, set at the fictional law firm Pearson/Hardman in New York City, follows Ross after he stumbles into a job interview with Specter, who is searching for an associate. Ross is undoubtedly the best candidate for the position, a position he obtains without having a law degree. The 12-episode first season debuted on June 23, 2011, with a 90-minute premiere. It was renewed for a second season of 16 episodes on August 11, 2011 which premiered on June 14, 2012 with the mid-season finale on August 23, 2012. The remaining 6 episodes of Season 2 began airing January 17, 2013 on USA and January 23 on Bravo Canada. On October 12, 2012, USA Network renewed "Suits" for a third season, to consist of 16 episodes.
Overview.
Season 1 (2011).
Mike Ross (Patrick J. Adams) is a brilliant college dropout. With his natural intelligence and eidetic memory, he makes a living taking the LSAT and bar exam for others. To make the money he needs to keep his grandmother in a private nursing home, he agrees to deliver a case of marijuana for his best friend Trevor (Tom Lipinski). Harvey Specter (Gabriel Macht) is one of New York City's top corporate lawyers and is promoted to senior partner at Pearson Hardman - a law firm that hires only Harvard Law School graduates. He is forced by company policy to hire an associate attorney. Mike discovers that the drug delivery is a sting operation and escapes the police by accidentally sitting for an interview with Harvey. Harvey is impressed with Mike's quick wit, encyclopedic knowledge of law, and genuine desire to be an attorney; he hires Mike and pretends that Mike is a Harvard Law graduate. Only Harvey's legal secretary and confidant Donna Paulsen (Sarah Rafferty) knows the secret.
At the firm, junior partner Louis Litt (Rick Hoffman), Harvey's jealous rival and direct supervisor of the associates, is suspicious of Mike's Harvard credentials. Meanwhile, Mike struggles to distance himself from Trevor, who has stopped dealing drugs but cannot escape his past. When Trevor leaves the state, Mike begins dating Trevor's ex-girlfriend Jenny Griffith (Vanessa Ray). Mike befriends paralegal Rachel Zane (Meghan Markle) at the office, and the two soon develop a mutual attraction, complicating his relationship with Jenny. Trevor returns to New York, only to learn that Mike is dating Jenny. In retaliation, he tells the firm's managing partner Jessica Pearson (Gina Torres) about Mike's lack of a degree.
Season 2 (2012–13).
In the season premiere, founder Daniel Hardman (David Costabile) returns to the firm, and Jessica and Harvey fear he wishes to return to his former position as managing partner. Because of this, Jessica allows Mike to continue working, despite discovering his secret. Meanwhile, Jenny confronts Mike about his feelings for Rachel, and when Mike hesitates in his response, Jenny breaks up with him. At the firm, Travis Tanner (Eric Close) accuses Harvey of burying evidence and is determined to have Harvey disbarred. Donna learns that she signed in the document and then lost it; she panics and destroys the document. She is fired by Jessica shortly after. Hardman is able to blackmail Tanner into dropping Harvey's disbarment from the settlement, and Hardman's decision to settle or Jessica's decision to go to trial is put to vote. When the partners are evenly divided on the issue, Harvey, who has the deciding vote, realizes the trial will jeopardize everyone at the firm and votes to settle, unwillingly siding with Hardman over Jessica so the firm can move past the lawsuit. This causes Hardman to call a partner vote and challenge Jessica for the position of managing partner. Soon after, Hardman promotes Louis to senior partner, and both Harvey and Jessica fail to definitively win Louis' support. Hardman becomes managing partner, but it is short lived as Mike and Harvey discover that Hardman forged and planted the document that Harvey and Donna supposedly buried. He is voted out of the firm, and Jessica regains the managing partner position. Immediately after his grandmother's death, Mike tries to start a relationship with Rachel, but she is reluctant. Mike begins a small romantic entanglement with his first love and childhood friend Tess (Elisabeth Hower) who was in town for the funeral, only to be discovered by Rachel, who has just decided that she was willing to have a relationship with him.
A week after the dust settles from Hardman Incident, Mike tries to repair his relationship with Rachel, a new case arises that hits home for Mike. He has to deal with the struggles of being the lawyer that defends a hit and run case, one that is all too similar to his childhood experience of losing his own parents. Louis Litt, relishing his new Senior Partner title, takes it upon himself to hire his own first year associate, who just may poke some holes in Mike's story about his time at Harvard. Harvey realizes that Louis's hire could expose Mike and goes to Jessica. Jessica then stops Louis from hiring the associate, giving the excuse of a "hiring freeze." Hardman then returns to battle with his old firm, working as a contract lawyer for Rachel's father, the famous Robert Zane. He strains Jessica's already low resources even further as she and Harvey are forced to try multiple gender discrimination suits in different locations. Scottie returns after stealing some of the firm's gender lawsuits. Eventually Harvey convinces Jessica and Scottie that both Scottie's firm and Pearson firm should jointly fight the the 45 cases of discrimination suits against Folsom Foods. In the end Jessica starts to accept a possible offer to merge Pearson with Scottie's firm based in the UK. Doing so would allow Jessica to finally end Daniel's attack as the British partner threatened to reveal Daniel's past, as it would not be a break of his contract with Jessica, because by law you must hand over financial documents to possible mergers. Harvey, wanting to become a named partner, becomes angry at the news, as he wanted to earn the position by merit and not through extenuating circumstances.
Season 3.
On October 13, 2012, USA Network renewed "Suits" for a third season, to consist of 16 episodes.
Development and production.
"Suits" first appeared on USA network's development slate under the title "A Legal Mind" in April 2010. In May, the network placed a cast-contingent pilot order from a pilot script written by Aaron Korsh. Patrick J. Adams was cast in the lead role of Mike Ross in July 2010. In late July, Gabriel Macht joined the cast as Harvey Specter, the attorney who hires Mike. Rick Hoffman came on board in mid-August to portray Harvey's competition at the law firm. Meghan Markle and Gina Torres completed the main cast in late August. Torres was cast as Jessica Pearson, the managing partner at the firm, and Markle portrays Rachel Zane, a paralegal who has an encyclopedic knowledge of the law. The pilot was filmed in New York City in fall 2010.
The network gave a green-light to the series with a 12-episode order on January 19, 2011. The series began filming in Toronto, Ontario on April 25, 2011, and completed August 12, 2011.
"Greenback Boogie" by Ima Robot is the theme song of the show. It was released as a single on September 18, 2010, and is included on the band's third album, "Another Man's Treasure".
Reception.
"Suits" received a score of 60 out of 100 on Metacritic, indicating mixed or average reviews. Ginia Bellafante, a critic for "The New York Times", gave the pilot a positive review: "A new legal series beginning on Thursday on USA, erupts from a Mount Vesuvius of absurdities, and yet like so much else in the USA stable, it comes in relatively good faith—not merely with a snappy sense of its own fun, but also with a chipper belief in the viability of renewal." However, this was not the general consensus, with one reviewer stating that one "might be willing to overlook the show's structural flaws if the cases themselves were wildly compelling, but unfortunately, they are of a piece with their misguided series." Critic Alan Sepinwall gave season one a critic’s rating of C, saying “Rarely, though, have I had as hard a time getting through an inflated USA pilot than I did through all 73 minutes (90 minutes when you factor in commercials) of "Suits".” Despite the mixed critical reviews, Metacritic users gave season one Universal Acclaim with a score of 8.6 and very favorable reviews.
In August 2011, the series was renewed for a second season. Season two was met with better reception, receiving a score of 73 out of 100 on Metacritic, indicating generally favorable reviews. David Hinckley, a critic for New York Daily News gave season two a review of an 80 saying “It's popcorn TV well worth settling in to watch.” While Daniel Goldberg of Slant Magazine gave it a 63 saying “Suits seems perfectly tailored to make its characters all look good, which is simultaneously its most attractive asset and its most discomfiting drawback.” Giving it a rating of 75 David Wiegand of the San Francisco Chronicle said “Adams and Macht are terrific, with the former loosening up quite considerably this year as Mike...Torres is cool, sexy and commanding as Jessica, and Markle, Hoffman and Rafferty contribute greatly to the energy of the show's core ensemble.” Metacritic users gave season two Universal Acclaim with a score of 8.8 and very favorable reviews.
On December 14, 2011, Patrick J. Adams was nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series at the 18th Screen Actors Guild Awards.
