Game of Thrones is an American epic fantasy television series created for HBO by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. It is an adaptation of "A Song of Ice and Fire", George R. R. Martin's series of fantasy novels, the first of which is titled "A Game of Thrones". Filmed in a Belfast studio and on location elsewhere in Northern Ireland, Malta, Croatia, Iceland, and Morocco, it premiered on HBO in the United States on 17 April 2011.
The series, set in the fictional continents of Westeros and Essos at the end of a decade-long summer, interweaves several plot lines. The first follows the members of several noble houses in a civil war for the Iron Throne of the Seven Kingdoms; the second covers the rising threat of the impending winter and the mythical creatures of the North; the third chronicles the attempts of the exiled last scion of the realm's deposed dynasty to reclaim the throne. Through its morally ambiguous characters, the series explores issues of social hierarchy, religion, civil war, sexuality, crime and punishment. It is the most recent big-budget work to have contributed to the popularity of the fantasy genre in mainstream media.
Highly anticipated since its early stages of development, "Game of Thrones" has received universal acclaim by critics, although its use of nudity has been criticized. The series has won numerous awards and nominations — including two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Drama Series, a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Television Series – Drama, a Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation in Long Form, and a Peabody Award. Among the ensemble cast, Peter Dinklage won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film for his role as Tyrion Lannister.
Plot.
The series roughly follows the multiple storylines of the "A Song of Ice and Fire" series. Set in the fictional Seven Kingdoms of Westeros, "Game of Thrones" chronicles the violent dynastic struggles among the realm's noble families for control of the Iron Throne. As the series opens, additional threats are beginning to rise in the icy North and in the eastern continent of Essos.
Cast and characters.
Like the novels it adapts, "Game of Thrones" has a sprawling ensemble cast, which George R.R. Martin estimated to be the largest on television. During the production of the third season, 257 cast names were recorded. The following overview reduces the list of characters in "Game of Thrones" to those played by the actors credited as part of the main cast.
Sean Bean is Lord Eddard "Ned" Stark, head of the Stark family whose members are involved in most of the series's intertwined plot lines. He and his wife Catelyn (Michelle Fairley) have five children: the eldest, Robb (Richard Madden), the dainty Sansa (Sophie Turner), the tomboy Arya (Maisie Williams), the adventurous Bran (Isaac Hempstead-Wright) and the toddler Rickon (Art Parkinson). The family's outsiders are Ned's bastard son Jon Snow (Kit Harington), and Ned's hostage and ward Theon Greyjoy (Alfie Allen).
Ned's old friend King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy) shares a loveless marriage with Queen Cersei Lannister (Lena Headey). In defiance of her father, the fabulously wealthy Lord Tywin Lannister (Charles Dance), Cersei has taken her twin, the "Kingslayer" Ser Jaime Lannister (Nikolaj Coster-Waldau) as her secret lover. She loathes her younger brother, the clever dwarf Tyrion (Peter Dinklage), who is attended by his mistress Shae (Sibel Kekilli) and the sellsword Bronn (Jerome Flynn). Cersei's oldest child is Prince Joffrey Baratheon (Jack Gleeson), who is guarded by the scarfaced warrior Sandor "the Hound" Clegane (Rory McCann). The king's "Small Council" of advisors includes the crafty Lord Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish (Aidan Gillen) and the eunuch spymaster Varys (Conleth Hill).
After Robert Baratheon's death, Joffrey's throne is contested by Robert's two brothers. Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane) is advised by the foreign priestess Melisandre (Carice van Houten) and the former smuggler Ser Davos Seaworth (Liam Cunningham), while Renly Baratheon (Gethin Anthony) is married to the ambitious noblewoman Margaery Tyrell (Natalie Dormer), but secretly loves her brother Ser Loras (Finn Jones).
Across the Narrow Sea, siblings Viserys (Harry Lloyd) and Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia Clarke) – the exiled children of the king overthrown by Robert Baratheon – are on the run for their lives, trying to win back the throne. Daenerys has been married to Khal Drogo (Jason Momoa), the leader of the nomadic Dothraki, and is guarded by the exiled knight Ser Jorah Mormont (Iain Glen). In the frigid North, Jon Snow faces the dangers beyond the Wall in the company of the men of the Night's Watch, which includes his friend Samwell Tarly (John Bradley) and Lord Commander Jeor Mormont (James Cosmo).
Production.
Conception and development.
The series began development in January 2007. HBO, after acquiring the rights to the novels with the intent of turning them into an international cable television series, hired David Benioff and D. B. Weiss to write and executive produce the series, which would cover one novel's worth of material per season. Initially, it was planned that Benioff and Weiss would write every episode save one per season, which author and co-executive producer George R. R. Martin was attached to write. However, Jane Espenson and Bryan Cogman were later added to each write one episode of the first season.
""The Sopranos" in Middle-earth" is the tagline Benioff jokingly suggested for the television adaptation, referring to its intrigue-filled content and dark tone combined with a fantasy setting. In a 2012 study, the series was listed second out of 40 recent U.S. TV drama series by deaths per episode, with an average of 14. Traditional high fantasy is described as generally incidental to the series, with HBO programming chief Michael Lombardo finding the storytelling appealing rather than the low-key magic or the exotic milieu, in spite of the network's new developmental policy to " shots at shows that we wouldn't have taken a shot at five years ago".
The budget of "Game of Thrones" has been compared to that of the TV series "Rome." The pilot reportedly cost HBO between , and the total budget for the first season has been estimated at . In the second season, the show obtained a 15% increase in budget in order to be able to stage the most important battle in the "clash of kings", the civil war that is the season's focus.
HBO hired expert language creator David J. Peterson from the Language Creation Society to develop the Dothraki language – "possessing its own unique sound, extensive vocabulary of more than 1,800 words and complex grammatical structure" – to be used in the series. The first and second drafts of the pilot script, written by Benioff and Weiss, were submitted in August 2007 and June 2008, respectively. While HBO found both drafts to their liking, a pilot was not ordered until November 2008, with the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike possibly delaying the process.
Adaptation schedule.
The correspondence between the seasons and the novels they adapt is approximate rather than exact: Showrunners David Benioff and D.B. Weiss have said that they think of "Game of Thrones" as an adaptation of the novel series as a whole, rather than of individual books, which gives them the liberty to move scenes back and forth across books according to the requirements of the screen adaptation. For instance, the final episode of Season 1 includes a few moments from the second book. Similarly, the latter half of Season 2 introduces elements from the beginning of the third book while conversely moving characters that originally appeared in the second book to instead appear in Season 3.
The three seasons ordered so far each consist of ten episodes. Most episodes from the first and second season run for about 52 minutes, while many of the third season's episodes are to be 56 or 57 minutes long. The series's pilot and the second season finale run for more than an hour, as is also likely for the third season's finale.
Filming.
Principal photography for the first season was scheduled to begin on July 26, 2010. The primary location was the Paint Hall Studios in Belfast, Northern Ireland. Exterior scenes in Northern Ireland were filmed at Sandy Brae in the Mourne Mountains (standing in for Vaes Dothrak), Castle Ward (Winterfell), Saintfield Estates (the Winterfell godswood), Tollymore Forest (outdoor scenes), Cairncastle (the execution site), the Magheramorne quarry (Castle Black) and at Shane's Castle (the tourney grounds). Doune Castle in Stirling, Scotland, was also used in the original pilot episode for exterior and interior scenes at Winterfell.
The first season's southern scenes were filmed in Malta, a change in location from the sets in Morocco used for the pilot episode. The city of Mdina was used for scenes in King's Landing, and filming also took place at Fort Manoel (representing the Sept of Baelor), at the Azure Window on the island of Gozo (the Dothraki wedding site), and at San Anton Palace, Fort Ricasoli, Fort St Angelo and St. Dominic monastery (all used for scenes in the Red Keep).
For the second season, shooting of the Southern scenes shifted from Malta to Croatia, where the city of Dubrovnik and its walls allowed exterior shots of a seaside walled medieval city. Dubrovnik and Fort Lovrijenac were used for scenes in King's Landing and the Red Keep, and the island of Lokrum, St. Dominic monastery and the Rector's Palace as well as the Dubac quarry for scenes in Qarth. Scenes set north of the Wall, in the Frostfangs and at the Fist of the First Men, were filmed in Iceland in November 2011, on the Svínafellsjökull glacier and near Smyrlabjörg and Vík on Höfðabrekkuheiði.
The third season returned to Morocco, including the city of Essaouira, to film Daenerys's scenes in Essos. The production employed three units ("Dragon", "Wolf" and "Raven") filming in parallel, six directing teams, 257 cast members and 703 crew members. One key scene featuring a live bear, Little Bart, will be filmed in Los Angeles, California.
Costuming.
The show's costumes are inspired by many cultures, such as Japanese and Persian. Dothraki outfits resemble that of the Bedouins (one was made out of fish skins to resemble dragon scales), and the Wildlings wear fur side in and skin side out like the Inuit. Wildling bone armor is made of molds taken of real bones and assembled with string and latex resembling catgut. While extras who portray Wildlings and the Night's Watch wear hats as would be normal in a cold climate, main actors usually do not so viewers can identify the characters. Björk's Alexander McQueen high-neckline dresses inspired Dormer's unusual funnel-neck outfit, and prostitute costumes are designed to be quickly removed. All clothing, whether for Wildlings or for women at the royal court, is aged for two weeks to improve realism on high-definition television.
About two dozen wigs are used for actors such as Headey, Dormer, Van Houten, and Clarke. Made of human hair and up to two feet in length, they cost up to $7,000 each and are washed and styled like real hair. Applying the wigs is a lengthy process; Clarke, for example, requires about two hours to style her brunette hair with a platinum-blonde wig and braids. Other actors such as Gleeson and Turner receive frequent haircoloring. For characters such as Clarke and her Dothrakis, hair, wigs, and costumes are processed so they appear as if they have not been washed in weeks.
Effect in Northern Ireland.
The series receives funding from Northern Ireland Screen, a government agency financed by Invest NI and the European Regional Development Fund. The first two seasons received UK£6.5 million from Invest NI and, according to government estimates, caused £43 million to be spent in the regional economy. 
Invest NI also expects the series to generate tourism revenue. According to a government minister, the series has given Northern Ireland the most worldwide publicity in its history outside politics and the Troubles. Northern Ireland Screen is preparing a bus tour of the series's filming locations for 2013.
Broadcast.
The first season of "Game of Thrones" premiered on HBO in the United States on April 17, 2011, and the second season on April 1, 2012. On the same day or in the subsequent weeks or months, the show also began airing in several other countries. The series is available only through HBO or its affiliates, not through third-party video on demand services, and in many countries not at all. This has contributed to the series being widely pirated.
Other media and products.
DVD, Blu-ray and download releases.
The ten episodes of the first season of "Game of Thrones" were published as a DVD and Blu-ray box set on March 6, 2012. The set includes extra background and behind-the-scenes material, but no deleted scenes, because almost all footage shot for the first season was used in the show. The box set sold 350,000 units in the first seven days of its release, the largest first-week DVD sales ever for an HBO series. The series also set an HBO series record for digital download sales. A "collector’s edition" of the box set combining the DVD and Blu-ray versions, a dragon's egg paperweight and the first episode of season two was released in November 2012.
DVD/Blu-ray box sets and digital downloads of the second season were made available on 19 February 2013. First-day sales again broke HBO records, with 241,000 box sets sold and 355,000 episodes downloaded.
Soundtrack.
The music for the series is composed by Ramin Djawadi. The first season's soundtrack, written in about ten weeks before the show's premiere, was published by Varèse Sarabande in June 2011. The second season's soundtrack album was published in June 2012.
Accompanying material.
"Thronecast: The Official Guide to Game of Thrones", a series of podcasts presented by Geoff Lloyd and produced by Koink, was available on the Sky Atlantic website and the UK iTunes store. It featured episode analysis and cast interviews.
A companion book, "Inside HBO's Game of Thrones" by series writer Bryan Cogman (ISBN 978-1452110103), was published on September 27, 2012. On 192 pages, illustrated with concept art and behind-the-scenes photographs, the book covers the creation of the series's first two seasons, as well as its principal characters and families.
Merchandise and exhibition.
HBO has licensed several companies to produce merchandise based on "Game of Thrones". Dark Horse Deluxe sells a range of "Game of Thrones"-themed goods, such as statues and action figures. Valyrian Steel produces replicas of the weapons and armor used in the series. Funko sells "Game of Thrones" bobblehead dolls. In March 2013, Brewery Ommegang is to start selling the first of a line of beers based on the series.
In 2013, a traveling exhibition of costumes, props, armor and weapons from the series is to visit Toronto (March 9–16), New York City (March 28 – April 3), Sao Paulo (April 25–30), Amsterdam (May 19–27) and Belfast (June 8–17).
Other works based on the series.
The series has also inspired other works.
Reception.
Anticipation for "Game of Thrones" was described by media as very high. It was estimated to be the most pirated TV series of 2012, a reflection of its popularity as well as its limited availability.
Cultural influence.
"Game of Thrones" has been credited with an increased popularity of fantasy themes and mainstream acceptance of the fantasy fandom. "After this weekend", "CNN.com" wrote on the eve of the second season's premiere, "you may be hard pressed to find someone who isn't a fan of some form of epic fantasy". According to Ian Bogost, "Game of Thrones" continues a trend of successful screen adaptations, beginning with Peter Jackson's 2001 "The Lord of the Rings" film trilogy and continuing with the "Harry Potter" films, that have established fantasy as a lucrative mass market genre and serve as "gateway drugs to fantasy fan culture".
The series' popularity greatly boosted sales of the "A Song of Ice and Fire" novels, soon republished as tie-in editions, which remained at the top of bestseller lists for months on end. "The Daily Beast" wrote that "Game of Thrones" was a particular favorite of many sitcom writers, and consequently the series has been referenced in many other TV series. 
"Game of Thrones" has also been the basis of additions to the popular vocabulary. The first season's frequent scenes in which characters explain their motives or background while having sex with prostitutes gave rise to the term "sexposition" to describe the practice of providing exposition against a backdrop of sex and nudity. "Dothraki", the name of the nomadic horsemen appearing in the series, was listed fourth in a list of words from television most used on the Internet, compiled in September 2012 by Global Language Monitor. After the second season, the media began using "Game of Thrones" as a figure of speech or as a comparison for situations of intense conflict and deceit, e.g., the court battles about U.S. healthcare legislation, the Syrian civil war or power struggles in the Chinese government.
Critical response.
The critical response to the two aired seasons of "Game of Thrones" has been very positive. Both seasons were listed on several yearly "best of" lists published by U.S. media, such as the "Washington Post" (2011), "TIME" (2011 and 2012) and "The Hollywood Reporter" (2012).
Reviewing the first season, critics noted the high production values, the well-realized world, compelling characters, and particularly the performance of the child actors. , the first season of "Game of Thrones" has a Metacritic average of 79 out of 100 based on 28 critic reviews, categorized as "generally favorable". "Variety" wrote that "there may be no show more profitable to its network than 'Game of Thrones' is to HBO. Fully produced by the pay cabler and already a global phenomenon after only one season, the fantasy skein was a gamble that has paid off handsomely."
The second season was also very well received by critics. It obtained an average Metacritic score of 88 out of 100, which the website considers "universal acclaim". "Entertainment Weekly" praised the "vivid, vital, and just plain fun" storytelling, and "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote that the show made a "strong case for being one of TV's best series", its gravitas making it the only genre show dramatically comparable to shows such as "Mad Men" or "Breaking Bad". "The New York Times" published the only mixed review, disapproving of the characters' lack of complexity and their confusing multitude, as well as the meandering plot.
The amount of sex and nudity shown on "Game of Thrones", especially in scenes that are incidental to the plot, has been the focus of much of the criticism aimed at the series. Charlie Anders wrote in io9 that while the first season was replete with light-hearted "sexposition", the second season appeared to focus on distasteful, exploitative and dehumanizing sex with little informational content. According to the "Washington Post"'s Anna Holmes, the nude scenes appeared to be aimed mainly at titillating heterosexual men, right down to the Brazilian waxes sported by the women in the series's faux-medieval setting, which made these scenes alienating to other viewers. And in the "Huffington Post", Maureen Ryan likewise noted that "Game of Thrones" mostly presented women naked, rather than men, and added that the excess of "random boobage" undercut any aspirations the series might have to address the oppression of women in a feudal society. "Saturday Night Live" parodied this aspect of the adaptation in a sketch that portrayed the series as having a horny thirteen-year-old boy as a consultant whose main concern was showing as many breasts per scene as possible.
Fandom.
The novel series "A Song of Ice and Fire" and its TV adaptation "Game of Thrones" have a broad and active international fan base. In 2012, "Vulture" ranked the series's fandom as the most devoted in popular culture, ahead of that of Lady Gaga, Justin Bieber, Harry Potter or Star Wars. The publication attributed this to "the sheer surging might and immediacy of its readers (and viewers’) obsessiveness over a story that is still in the midst of unfolding". According to the marketing director of SBS, "Game of Thrones" has the highest fan engagement rate of any TV series known to her: 5.5% of the series's 2.9 million Facebook fans were talking online about the series in 2012, compared to 1.8% of the more than ten million fans of HBO's other fantasy series "True Blood". 
Among the many fan sites dedicated to the TV and novel series, "Vulture" noted in particular "Westeros.org" and "WinterIsComing.net", which provide news reports and discussion forums, "ToweroftheHand.com", which organizes communal readings of the novels, and "Podcastoficeandfire.com", which produces a fan podcast.
Viewer numbers.
By the end of May 2012, after the penultimate episode of the second season, "Game of Thrones" had accumulated an average of 10.3 million viewers per episode, including all repeats and on-demand viewings. This made it the third most-watched series in the history of HBO. According to the tracking site TorrentFreak, "Game of Thrones" was the most-pirated TV series in 2012, with one episode having been downloaded 4,280,000 times through public BitTorrent trackers.
Awards.
The first season of "Game of Thrones" was nominated for thirteen of the 2011 Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Drama Series. It won two, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Main Title Design. Peter Dinklage, who plays Tyrion Lannister, was named best supporting actor by the Emmys, the Golden Globes, the Scream Awards and the Satellite Awards. In 2012, the second season won six of the Creative Arts Emmy Awards.
