Project Glass is a research and development program by Google to develop an augmented reality head-mounted display (HMD) named Google Glass. Project Glass products display information in a smartphone-like format hands-free, and can interact with the Internet via natural language voice commands. The eyewear's functionality and minimalist appearance (aluminium strip with 2 nose pads) has been compared to Steve Mann's EyeTap, and uses Google's Android operating system.
Project Glass is being developed by Google X Lab, which has worked on other futuristic technologies such as driverless cars. The project was announced on Google+ by Babak Parviz, an electrical engineer who has also worked on putting displays into contact lenses; Steve Lee, a project manager and "geolocation specialist"; and Sebastian Thrun, who developed Udacity as well as worked on the self-driving car project. Google has patented the design of Project Glass. Thad Starner is a Technical/Lead Manager on the project,
Development.
Prototypes.
Though head-worn displays for augmented reality are not a new idea, the project has drawn media attention primarily due to its backing by Google, as well as the prototype design, which is smaller and slimmer than previous designs for head-mounted displays. The first Project Glass demo resembles a pair of normal eyeglasses where the lens is replaced by a head-up display. In the future, new designs may allow integration of the display into people's normal eyewear.
"The New York Times" originally reported that Google Glass would be available to the public for "around the cost of current smartphones" by the end of 2012, but other reports have stated that the glasses are not expected to be available for purchase soon. The product (Google Glass Explorer Edition) will be available to United States Google I/O developers for $1,500, to be delivered in early 2013, while a consumer version will be available by the end of 2013 for under $1,500.
The product began testing in April 2012. Sergey Brin wore a prototype of the Glass to an April 5, 2012 Foundation Fighting Blindness event in San Francisco.
In May 2012, Glass was demoed in the first test video shot with the eyewear, demoing the 720p HD first-person video recording capabilities of the augmented reality display. Sergey Brin demoed the Glass on "The Gavin Newsom Show", and California Lieutenant Governor Gavin Newsom also wore the Glass. On June 27, 2012, he also demoed the Glass at Google I/O where skydivers, abseilers, and mountain bikers wore the Glass and live streamed their point of view to a Google+ Hangout, which was also shown live at the Google I/O presentation.
In February 2013, Google released a demo video showcasing the voice-augmented display of the Glass filming various experiences in first-person.
Explorer program.
An early adopter strategy called the Explorer program is available for developers and consumers to test Google Glass, and it will also gauge how people will want to use Glass. The Explorer edition receives data through Wi-Fi, or it can tether via Bluetooth to an Android device or iPhone and use its 3G or 4G data; the Glass also has a GPS chip. Users issue voice commands by first saying "ok glass", then the command, or they can scroll through the options using a finger along the side of the device. The Explorer edition has an interchangeable sunglasses accessory which twists on or off easily. Monthly updates to the Glass are planned after the program starts.
Reception.
In general, reception for Google Glass has been positive. There have been parodies and criticisms aimed at the general notion of augmented reality glasses, ranging from the potential for Google to insert advertising (its main source of revenue) to more dystopian outcomes. However, Google has stated they will not insert advertising.
At designer Diane von Furstenberg's spring 2012 fashion at New York Fashion Week, models wore Google Glasses down the runway, filming the audience.
In November 2012, Google Project Glass received recognition by "Time" Magazine as one of the "Best Inventions of the Year 2012", alongside inventions such as the Curiosity Rover.
