Kai Po Che! is a film directed by Abhishek Kapoor based on Chetan Bhagat's novel "The 3 Mistakes of My Life" , with music by Amit Trivedi and lyrics by Swanand Kirkire. Sushant Singh Rajput, Raj Kumar Yadav and Amit Sadh star as the three main protagonists while Amrita Puri plays the female lead respectively. The film title "Kai Po Che" is originally a Gujarati phrase that means "I have cut the kite" which refers to a kite competition where one of the competitors uses his kite to cut off another competitors kite and yells "Kai Po Che!" 
 The shooting started mid-April in Vadnagar, Ahmedabad. 
Kai Po Che" had a world premiere at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival on 13 February 2013 where it was the first ever Indian film to feature in the World Panorama section. Kai Po Che released world wide on February 22, 2013.
Plot.
The story revolves around three friends who want to start some business. Where one friend is an Ex district player who was a victim of politics in the cricketing space, the other one is the nephew of a hindu politician who funds their business and third one is a nerd who is the mastermind behind starting a sports shop and also a sports academy. The story deepens into the earthquake and Gujarat riots and how that affects their life
Production.
Filming.
Filming began in Vadnagar in Mehsana district of Gujarat along majority of scenes canned in old Ahmedabad and continued further in Porbandar, Sabarmati, Diu. A scene featuring the trio was shot at Hatkeshwar Mahadev temple. Reportedly, Sushant Singh Rajput had to undergo four months cricket training under two coaches to fit into the book adapted character of 'Ishaan'. A cricket match sequence was shot at a Sabarmati stadium in Gujarat. The Board of Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) has granted the director permission to use footage from a historic India-Australia Kolkata test match from 2001 in Kai Po Che. Director Abhishek Kapoor has admitted that the leading Bollywood stars didn't want to be a part of the film. Former cricketer Ajay Jadeja has been roped in for a special appearance in this film.
Title.
Chetan Bhagat, whose book is adapted for the screen, first revealed the title of the film. Subsequently, a short contest was announced by him on Twitter to create the awareness about the film and its title.
Marketing.
The director has a four-city unusual promotional strategy in place. There are plans of bonding with friends in four cities and hanging out with them. The producers, UTV, are working on it currently. Sushant Singh Rajput will host a private screening of ‘Kai Po Che!’ in his hometown Patna for his childhood friends. On February 18,2013,a star-studded premiere of Kai Po Che was organized in Cinemax,Versova,Mumbai. Several actors like Aamir Khan,Hrithik Roshan ,Huma Qureshi,Arshad Warsi have praised the film.
Soundtrack.
The music is composed by Amit Trivedi.
Release.
Kai Po Che release date is confirmed as 22nd February 2013. The film was released on 1000 screens in India. Kai Po Che!'s theatrical trailer was released alongwith Dabangg 2. The first trailer of this movie was released on Youtube on 20 December 2012.
"The 3 Mistakes of My Life" book cover will be relaunched with the poster of "Kai Po che".
Critical reception.
Kai Po Che opened to positive reviews.
Sukanya Verma for Rediff.com has given 4/5 stars and says Abhishek Kapoor's clarity of vision makes "Kai Po Che", the adaptation of a mediocre novel, so irresistible. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it 4 out of 5 and stated that the film is brimming with solid content. Meena Iyer of The Times of India gave it 4 out of 5 stars saying, "Kai Po Che is very likeable. Between tears, you find yourself smiling, because it's the story of friendship and human triumph above all else." Resham Sengar of Zee News gave the film 4/5 stars stating, "The magic of the film lies in its details!"
Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave 3.5 stars saying, "Kai Po Che is a competently crafted, well acted and consistently engaging drama that makes its point without sinking into preachy paroxysms".
Shubhra Gupta of Indian Express gave the films 3.5/5 stars adding, "Abhishek Kapoor uses 'Kai Po Che' as an apt metaphor and crafts a lovely, emotive film on abiding friendship and the values that make life worth living." India Today gave 3.5 stars to film.
Khalid Mohamed of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated that it is a good film.
Deccan Herald stated that the film is a warm film while Live Mint said that Kai Po Che! is a well-crafted entertainer.
Anupama Chopra of The Hindustan Times gave the movie 4/5 stars saying that "Kai Po Che! is Gujarati for "I've cut". It is used as a cry of victory in kite-flying contests. Here victory is hard-earned and tinged with tears and regret. But it's also deeply satisfying."
The Hindu stated that the film is breathless.
Boxoffice.
India.
"Kai Po Che" opened with a collection of nett on day one with limited release where it did good business in metros especially.
