Atoms For Peace is an experimental rock & electronic supergroup formed in late 2009 in Los Angeles, California. The group consists of Radiohead lead singer Thom Yorke (vocals, guitar and piano), Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea (bass), longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich (keyboards, synths), Joey Waronker of Beck & R.E.M. (drums) and Brazilian instrumentalist Mauro Refosco (percussion). Their debut album, "Amok", became available for streaming on February 18th, 2013 and was released on February 25th, 2013.
History.
The line-up had their first live performance at the Echoplex in Los Angeles on 2 October 2009, where they played the entirety of Thom Yorke's solo debut album, "The Eraser", as well as some new songs and Radiohead B-side "Paperbag Writer". This was followed by two shows at Orpheum Theatre on 4 and 5 October.
The band went on a two-week, eight-date tour of some major cities in the United States with opening act Flying Lotus during April 2010 before their performance at the 2010 Coachella Festival, known only as '??????'.
Atoms for Peace performed a song which Thom Yorke noted as being "the band's first official collaborative song" at Roseland Ballroom on April 5, 2010. That song, titled "Judge, Jury, and Executioner" was debuted October 2, 2009 when the band played their first shows in Los Angeles. That song's title is partially shared with the Radiohead song "Myxomatosis. (Judge, Jury, and Executioner.)".
Following the Coachella festival, Atoms for Peace performed at Fuji Rock 2010, the band's only performance to date outside the United States.
In an interview on 21 September 2011, Thom revealed that he and Flea were finishing off an album together. Flea has additionally mentioned this album in interview, and Nigel Godrich has been confirmed as producer. On September 6, 2012, Atoms for Peace released the single "Default" on iTunes, as well as presenting a new official website. The album will be titled "Amok" and is due February 25, 2013 through XL Recordings.
In February 2013, Pohoda Festival and Melt! Festival announced that Atoms for Peace will be headlining both festivals, these concerts being the second and third non-US appearance of the band.
Name.
Until February 2010, the band did not have a name and was known as either "??????" on LA marquees or "Thom Yorke????" on the official poster for the 2010 Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival. However, on the official website, the band was vaguely listed as simply "Thom Yorke". Through Radiohead's official website, Yorke officially named the band as "Atoms for Peace" upon announcing the April 2010 US tour. In March 2010, Thom Yorke tweeted "it has been decided that we call ourselves Atoms For Peace. hope you like the name.. it seemed bleedin' obvious".
The band shares a name with both the 1953 speech by American President Dwight D. Eisenhower and a song from Yorke's debut solo album "The Eraser". On their website, under their name, is the phrase ""Nerth Nuclerek? Na Vynnav"" which is in the Cornish language and can be translated as "Nuclear Power? No Thanks." This is the text from the Smiling Sun anti nuclear power logo, which has been translated into at least 49 languages, including Cornish. 
Influences.
Thom Yorke has stated that the members of Atoms for Peace bonded over a shared love of the music of Afrobeat, and said in an interview that the debut album was "the product of getting together, getting wasted and listening to Fela Kuti".
