Breaking Bad is an American television drama series created and produced by Vince Gilligan. Set and produced in Albuquerque, New Mexico, "Breaking Bad" is the story of Walter White (Bryan Cranston), a struggling high school chemistry teacher who is diagnosed with inoperable lung cancer at the beginning of the series. He turns to a life of crime, producing and selling methamphetamine with a former student, Jesse Pinkman (Aaron Paul), with the aim of securing his family's financial future before he dies.
Premiering on January 20, 2008, the series is broadcast in the United States and Canada on the cable channel AMC, and is a production of Sony Pictures Television. On August 14, 2011, AMC announced that "Breaking Bad" had been renewed for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes. This final season is split into two parts, each consisting of 8 episodes and broadcast over the course of two years; the first half premiered on July 15, 2012 and concluded on September 2, 2012, and the second half is scheduled to begin in summer 2013.
"Breaking Bad" has received widespread critical acclaim. The series has won seven Primetime Emmy Awards—including three consecutive wins for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series for Cranston, two wins for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for Paul, and three nominations for Outstanding Drama Series. Cranston has also been nominated three times for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series: Drama and nominated four times for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series, which he won for the 19th Screen Actors Guild Awards.
Production.
Conception.
"Breaking Bad" was created by Vince Gilligan, who spent several years writing the Fox series "The X-Files". Gilligan wanted to create a series in which the protagonist became the antagonist. "Television is historically good at keeping its characters in a self-imposed stasis so that shows can go on for years or even decades," he said. "When I realized this, the logical next step was to think, how can I do a show in which the fundamental drive is toward change?" He added that his goal with Walter White is to turn him from Mr. Chips into Scarface. The concept emerged as Gilligan talked with his fellow writer Thomas Schnauz, and they joked regarding their unemployment that the solution was "putting a meth lab in the back of an RV and driving around the country cooking meth and making money." 
Gilligan has said it is difficult to write for Walter White because the character is so dark and morally questionable: "I'm going to miss the show when it's over, but on some level, it'll be a relief to not have Walt in my head anymore." Gilligan later said that the idea for Walter's character intrigued him so much that he "didn't really give much thought on how well it would sell", stating that he would have given up on the premise given it was "such an odd, dark story" that could have difficulties being pitched to studios. As the series has progressed, Gilligan and the writing staff of "Breaking Bad" have made Walter increasingly unsympathetic. Gilligan said: "He's going from being a protagonist to an antagonist. We want to make people question who they're pulling for, and why." Cranston said by the fourth season: "I think Walt's figured out it's better to be a pursuer than the pursued. He's well on his way to badass." Gilligan defines the term "breaking bad" as "to raise hell".
While still pitching the show to studios, Gilligan was initially discouraged when he learned of the existence of "Weeds", and of its similarities to the premise of "Breaking Bad". While his producers convinced him that the show was different enough to still be successful, he later claimed that he would not have gone forward with the idea had he known about "Weeds" earlier.
Development history.
The network originally ordered nine episodes for the first season (including the pilot), but the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike limited the production to seven episodes. The series is set and filmed in Albuquerque, New Mexico. It is shot on 35 mm film. "Breaking Bad" reportedly costs $3 million per episode to produce, higher than the average cost for a basic cable program. 
Vince Gilligan has indicated that he intends to conclude "Breaking Bad" with the fifth season. In early August 2011, negotiations began over a deal regarding the fifth and possible final season between the network AMC and Sony Pictures Television, the production company of the series. AMC proposed a shortened fifth season (six to eight episodes, instead of 13) to cut costs, but the producers declined. Sony then approached other cable networks about possibly picking up the show if a deal could not be made. On August 14, 2011, a deal was made in which AMC renewed the series for a final 16 episodes.
Casting.
Gilligan cast Bryan Cranston for the role of Walter White based on having worked with him in a sixth season episode of the science fiction television series "The X-Files". Cranston played an anti-Semitic man with a terminal illness who took series protagonist Fox Mulder hostage. Gilligan said the character had to be simultaneously loathsome and sympathetic, and that "Bryan alone was the only actor who could do that, who could pull off that trick. And it is a trick. I have no idea how he does it." AMC network executives were initially hesitant about the casting choice, knowing of Cranston only from his role Hal on the comedy series "Malcolm in the Middle", but they were persuaded after Gilligan screened the "X-Files" episode for them.
Gilligan originally intended for Aaron Paul's character, Jesse Pinkman, to be killed at the end of "Breaking Bad"'s first season. Originally, Gilligan wanted Jesse to die in a botched drug deal as a plot device to plague the main protagonist Walter White with guilt. However, Gilligan said by the second episode of the season, he was so impressed with Paul's performance that "it became pretty clear early on that would be a huge, colossal mistake, to kill off Jesse".
Themes and symbols.
Moral consequences.
In an interview with "The New York Times", creator Vince Gilligan said the larger lesson of the series is that "actions have consequences". He elaborated on the show's philosophy: 
In a piece examining the show in comparison to "The Sopranos", "Mad Men" and "The Wire", Chuck Klosterman said that "Breaking Bad" is "built on the uncomfortable premise that there's an irrefutable difference between what's right and what's wrong, and it's the only one where the characters have real control over how they choose to live." Klosterman added that the central question of "Breaking Bad" is "What makes a man 'bad' — his actions, his motives, or his conscious decision to be a bad person?" Klosterman concluded that, in the world of "Breaking Bad", "goodness and badness are simply complicated choices, no different than anything else."
Ross Douthat of "The New York Times", in a response to Klosterman's piece, compared "Breaking Bad" and "The Sopranos", stating that both series are "morality plays" that are "both interested in moral agency". Douthat went on to say that Walter White and Tony Soprano "represent mirror-image takes on the problem of evil, damnation and free will". Walter as a man who "deliberately abandons the light for the darkness" while Tony is "someone born and raised in darkness" who turns down "opportunity after opportunity to claw his way upward to the light."
Gilligan intimated he would inject undertones of black comedy into the fifth season.
Pink teddy bear.
A motif within the second season is the image of a damaged teddy bear and its missing eye. The teddy bear first appears at the end of the music video "Fallacies" for Jesse's fake band, "TwaüghtHammër", which was released as a webisode in February 2009 leading to the second season. The teddy bear can also be spotted on the mural on Jane's bedroom wall during the final episode of the second season, further connecting the crash to Jane. It is seen in flashforwards during four episodes, the titles of which, when put together in order, form the following sentence: "Seven Thirty-Seven down over ABQ". The flashforwards are shot in black-and-white, with the sole exception of the pink teddy bear, which is an homage to the film "Schindler's List", in which the color red is used to distinguish a little girl in a coat. At the end of the season, Walter inadvertently helps cause the mid-air collision of two airplanes. The pink teddy bear is then revealed to have fallen out of one of the planes and into the White family's pool. Vince Gilligan called the plane accident an attempt to visualize "all the terrible grief that Walt has wrought upon his loved ones" and "the judgment of God."
In the first episode of the third season, the NTSB fishes the teddy bear out of his pool and Walt later finds the missing eye in the pool filter. Television critic Myles McNutt has called it "a symbol of the damage feels responsible for," and "The A.V. Club" commented that "the pink teddy bear continues to accuse." Fans and critics have compared the appearance of the teddy bear's face to the image of Gus Fring's face in the fourth season finale.
Walt Whitman.
Walter White's name is reminiscent of the poet Walt Whitman, a fact that has played a major role as a plot device, used up to the mid-season finale of season five. The finale, "Gliding Over All", is titled after poem 271 of Whitman's "Leaves of Grass", a book which is featured prominently in the series. In previous seasons, Gale Boetticher had given Walt a copy of the book, which has been seen many times since. Prior to giving this gift, Boetticher, an avid Whitman fan, recites "When I Heard the Learn'd Astronomer", one of the poems found in "Leaves of Grass". In the episode "Bullet Points", Hank finds the initials W.W. written in Boetticher's notes, and jokes with Walt that they are his initials, although Walt quickly attributes them to Whitman. 
In the episode "Hazard Pay", Walt finds his copy of "Leaves of Grass" as he is packing up his bedroom, briefly smiles and leaves the book out to read. When Walt discovers the book, he is at an especially high time in his life, where he feels that things are coming together and he is succeeding in all ventures. A poem in the book, "Song of Myself," is based on many of these same feelings, furthering the connection between Walt's life and Whitman's poetry. The book plays an especially large role in the episode "Gliding Over All", when Hank finds a copy of "Leaves of Grass" in Walt's bathroom and opens it to the cover page where he finds the inscription "To my other favorite W.W. It's an honour working with you. Fondly G.B." Hank, who has been working to find out who Boetticher had been working with, attributes the initials to Walt and Boetticher. However, there was speculation that the G.B. could have stood for Walt's former coworker and love interest, Gretchen, as her last name is Schwartz, german for Black (hence the origin of the company Gray Matter by combining the surnames of White and Black), though series creator Vince Gilligan has debunked this theory.
Episodes.
Season one (2008).
The first season was originally intended to be nine episodes, but due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike only seven episodes were filmed. The first season premiered on January 20, 2008, and concluded on March 9, 2008. The complete first season was released on Region 1 DVD on February 24, 2009 and Region A Blu-ray on March 16, 2010.
A struggling high school chemistry teacher, Walter White (Cranston), is diagnosed with inoperable, advanced lung cancer. On a ride along with his DEA agent brother-in-law Hank (Dean Norris), Walter sees a former student of his, Jesse Pinkman (Paul), fleeing the scene of a meth lab. He later contacts Jesse and devises a scheme to become partners in an attempt to combine their skills to manufacture and distribute methamphetamine. Walter says he wants to provide financial stability for his pregnant wife, Skyler (Gunn) and disabled son, and to pay for his expensive cancer treatment. During Walter and Jesse's first days of selling Albuquerque's finest meth, they encounter a series of problems with local drug dealers.
Season two (2009).
On May 7, 2008, AMC announced that "Breaking Bad" was renewed for a second, 13-episode season. Production began in July 2008, and the season premiered on March 8, 2009 and concluded on May 31, 2009. The complete second season was released on Region 1 DVD and Region A Blu-ray on March 16, 2010.
Walter continues to find himself facing insurmountable medical bills from his cancer treatment. Despite having had several bad experiences while producing meth with Jesse, Walter agrees to rejoin his partner. The two begin producing meth but run into multiple problems. Jesse's friend Badger (Matt L. Jones) is arrested while selling meth in a sting operation. Walter hires a lawyer, Saul Goodman (Bob Odenkirk), to help Badger. Walter and Jesse drive a recreational vehicle into the desert and produce meth for four days. Later, Combo, another of Jesse's friends and distributors, is killed by a rival gang for selling meth on their territory. Saul suggests the two find a new distribution model. Throughout this, Jesse has been building a relationship with his neighbor and landlord, Jane (Krysten Ritter). Jane is revealed to be recovering from addiction, but relapses and the two begin doing heroin. Saul finds them a new business partner, Gus Fring (Giancarlo Esposito), who is willing to pay $1.2 million for the 38 pounds of meth they produced. Walter hastily delivers the product to Gus, but misses his daughter's birth. Walt withholds Jesse's half of the money because of his drug use, but Jane finds out about it and blackmails Walt. Walt visits Jesse's house and sees Jane vomiting in her sleep, but does nothing to save her. Skyler confronts Walter about his frequent absences and excuses. She begins to piece together his secret life, and demands that they separate.
Season three (2010).
On April 2, 2009, AMC announced that "Breaking Bad" was renewed for a third, 13-episode season. It premiered on March 21, 2010, and concluded on June 13, 2010. The complete third season was released on Region 1 DVD and Region A Blu-ray on June 7, 2011.
Walter wishes to reunite his family, but Skyler is still suspicious of Walter's second life. Walter believes he can mend the tension between them by confessing to her that he has been producing meth. Skyler is appalled by the confession and demands a formal divorce. Meanwhile, Gus offers to pay Walter three million dollars for three months of his service. He even offers to provide Walter with a state-of-the-art production facility and a brilliant lab assistant, Gale (David Costabile). Jesse is continuing to produce and sell meth by himself. Hank is working with the DEA to investigate Jesse and is slowly gathering evidence to make an arrest. Jesse threatens to report Walter to the police if he is arrested, but Walter offers him Gale's position at the lab. After obtaining the position, Jesse begins stealing meth from the lab and selling it in secret on the side. Jesse gets romantically involved with a woman he meets in his rehab group and learns her kid brother, age 11, was put up by Gus and his street dealers to kill Combo. Jesse decides to avenge Combo. Walter aids Jesse in escaping from Gus's wrath. Gus begins to lose trust in Walter and asks Gale to take over the lab. He orders his henchmen to kill Walter and Jesse. After he is abducted by the henchmen, Walter instructs Jesse over the phone to kill Gale in order to force Gus not to kill Walter (and, by extension, Jesse) lest he eliminate his only remaining trained chemist.
Season four (2011).
On June 14, 2010, AMC announced "Breaking Bad" was renewed for a fourth, 13-episode season. Production began in January 2011, the season premiered on July 17, 2011, and concluded on October 9, 2011. Originally, mini episodes of four minutes in length were to be produced before the premiere of the fourth season, but these did not come to fruition.
Jesse follows Walter's instructions and murders Gale. Gus decides to discipline the two by enforcing stricter policies at the lab. He also tries to break Walter and Jesse's friendship by assigning them to separate work details. While Walter works in the meth lab, Jesse escorts Mike (Jonathan Banks), one of Gus’s enforcers, to retrieve payments and provide back-up. Walter and Jesse become increasingly distant and hostile to each other. Meanwhile, Hank, who has been recovering from his last engagement with the cartel, finds evidence linking Gale to Gus. He believes Gus is a major drug distributor and starts looking for tangible evidence to file charges. Gus realizes Walter's close ties with Hank could jeopardize his entire operation. Gus fires Walter and threatens to kill his entire family. Jesse and Walter put their differences aside and agree to murder Gus, convincing former cartel enforcer Hector Salamanca to detonate a suicide bomb; Hector succeeds in this endeavor, killing himself, Gus, and Tyrus, Gus' henchman. Walter and Jesse then proceed to destroy the meth lab and Walter declares to his wife, "I won."
Season five (2012–13).
On August 14, 2011, AMC announced that "Breaking Bad" was renewed for a fifth and final season consisting of 16 episodes. Season five is split into two parts, each consisting of 8 episodes. The first half premiered on July 15, 2012, while the second half is scheduled to premiere in summer 2013.
The first half of the season focuses on the reviving of Walt and Jesse's meth cooking and dealing. The other important storyline revolves around the deteriorating marriage between Walt and Skyler. Walt's intimidation of his wife eventually leads to Skyler faking a suicide attempt to force her husband's hand and place her children at her sister's home and out of harm's way. Walt, Jesse, and Mike then work hand in hand to revive the meth trade Gus' death has left wide open to Walt and other competitors. Initially, Walt decides that he doesn't wish to end his meth-making career and teams up with Jesse and Mike to start an empire of his own. Mike handles the business end, while Walt and Jesse follow around a team of house fumigators in order to use tented houses as temporary labs. With the DEA following Mike ever closer, Mike decides it is time to get out of the business for good. After Mike refuses to give Walt the ten names of jailed drug connections (nine convicts plus a lawyer) who may implicate them to the DEA, Walt shoots him through his car window, fatally wounding him. Meanwhile, Jesse continues to feel bad about the murder of a boy after a methylamine heist and quits. Walt teams up with Todd, one of the members of the fumigator's crew. Walt gets the names of the ten men in Mike's crew from Lydia and pays to have them all murdered in jail. Skyler has been storing Walt's meth earnings in a storage locker and has accumulated too much money to count and launder. Walt finally relents and agrees to quit producing meth for good. The first half of the season ends with Hank finding the book that Gale gave to Walt and seeing the line "To my other favorite W.W." on the first page, with a look of realization on his face.
Continued storyline.
Bryan Cranston has hinted that the series may continue after the season 5 finale, stating "Vince (Gilligan) feels that now we have too much story. We could actually go beyond those 16 episodes. It's not far-fetched. I wouldn't mind visiting that possibility. And this is coming from a guy who doesn't know anything of how the show's going to end. If it doesn't end up in a total apocalypse, who knows? Maybe we could revisit Walter White a year down the road and see where his life has gone. If he's still alive, that is."
At Comic-Con 2012, Gilligan addressed the possibility, saying: "I love the idea of it [...] But I have to say that my writers and I intend to tell every bit of story we can tell in this final sixteen. So, at this moment in time, I would say that the odds are a bit remote. If we were – a year or two down the line – think of something else [..., who knows? Your guess is as good as mine at this point."
He later clarified in an interview on July 18, 2012, that he has no concrete plans for a film, and that Cranston's remarks are the main thing fueling the speculation, but did not rule out the possibility. But Gilligan has also hinted at a possible spin-off series focusing on lawyer character Saul Goodman.
Cast member Betsy Brandt told TODAY.com that, "here is a big director that would like to direct the last episode as a movie and put it in theaters."
Reception.
Critical reception.
"Breaking Bad" has received widespread critical acclaim and has been praised by some critics as the greatest television drama of all time. On the review aggregator website Metacritic, the first season scored 74/100, the second season scored 85/100, the third season scored 89/100 the fourth season scored 96/100, and the fifth season so far has been rated at 99/100 . The American Film Institute listed "Breaking Bad" as one of the top ten television series of 2010 and 2011.
For the first season, the series saw a mostly positive reception. "New York Post" critic Linda Stasi praised the series, particularly the acting of Cranston and Paul, stating "Cranston and Paul are so good, it's astounding. I'd say the two have created great chemistry, but I'm ashamed to say such a cheap thing." Robert Bianco of "USA Today" also praised Cranston and Paul, exclaiming "There is humor in the show, mostly in Walt's efforts to impose scholarly logic on the business and on his idiot apprentice, a role Paul plays very well. But even their scenes lean toward the suspenseful, as the duo learns that killing someone, even in self-defense, is ugly, messy work." 
The second season saw critical acclaim. "Entertainment Weekly" critic Ken Tucker stated ""Bad" is a superlatively fresh metaphor for a middle-age crisis: It took cancer and lawbreaking to jolt Walt out of his suburban stupor, to experience life again—to take chances, risk danger, do things he didn't think himself capable of doing. None of this would work, of course, without Emmy winner Cranston's ferocious, funny selflessness as an actor. For all its bleakness and darkness, there's a glowing exhilaration about this series: It's a feel-good show about feeling really bad." "San Francisco Chronicle"'s Tim Goodman claimed "The first three episodes of Season 2 that AMC sent out continue that level of achievement with no evident missteps. In fact, it looks as if Gilligan's bold vision for "Breaking Bad", now duly rewarded against all odds, has invigorated everyone involved in the project. You can sense its maturity and rising ambition in each episode." Horror novelist Stephen King lauded the series, comparing it to the likes of "Twin Peaks" and "Blue Velvet".
The third season also saw critical acclaim. "Time" proclaimed "It's a drama that has chosen the slow burn over the flashy explosion, and it's all the hotter for that choice." "Newsday" stated "Breaking Bad" was still TV's best series and it stayed true to itself. Tim Goodman praised the writing, acting, and cinematography, pointing out the "visual adventurousness" of the series. Goodman went on to call the show's visuals "a combination of staggering beauty – the directors make use of numerous wide-angle landscape portraits — and transfixing weirdness." After the finale aired, "The A.V. Club" said that season three was "one of television's finest dramatic accomplishments. And what makes it so exciting — what makes the recognition of the current golden age so pressing — is that the season has not been, as reviewer put it in another context, 'television good.' The heart-in-the-throat quality of this season comes as much from the writers' exhilarating disregard for television conventions as from the events portrayed." 
Season four won universal critical acclaim. "The Boston Globe" referred to the show as a "taut exercise in withheld disaster" and declared the show "riveting". The "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" labelled the series "smart and thought provoking that elevates the artistic achievements of the medium". Season four was listed by many critics as one of the best seasons of television in 2011. "Time" listed Walter White's "I am the one who knocks" line as one of the best television lines of 2011. "The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" listed it as the best series of 2011 while noting that, ""Breaking Bad" is that rare TV series that has never made a seriously damaging storytelling misstep." "The A.V. Club"'s review of the finale summed it up as a "fantastically fitting end for a season that ran in slow motion, starting and continuing with so many crises begging for resolution week after week. Now the decks are cleared, but that doesn't mean anybody is home free. Nothing's ever easy on "Breaking Bad"." The reviewer continued to exalt the season, and proclaimed, "What a season of television — truly something none of us could ever have expected, or claimed we deserved."
Awards and nominations.
The series has won numerous awards and nominations, including seven Primetime Emmy Awards and three Outstanding Drama Series nominations. For his portrayal of Walter White, Bryan Cranston won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series three consecutive years in 2008, 2009, and 2010. Cranston also won the TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama in 2009 and the Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series: Drama in 2008, 2009, and 2010, as well as the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series and the Saturn Award for Best Actor on Television in 2012. Aaron Paul won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series in 2010 and 2012. Paul also won the Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor on Television in 2010 and 2012. For his work on season four, Giancarlo Esposito won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series. In 2010 and 2012, "Breaking Bad" won the TCA Award for Outstanding Achievement in Drama. In 2009 and 2010, the series won the Satellite Award for Best Television Series – Drama, along with the Saturn Award for Best Syndicated/Cable Television Series in 2010, 2011, and 2012. The series won the in both 2012 and 2013. Overall, the show has won 35 industry awards and been nominated for 117.
