Norman Mark Reedus (born January 6, 1969) is an American actor, perhaps best known for his portrayal of Daryl Dixon in the television series "The Walking Dead" and Murphy McManus in the 1999 film " The Boondock Saints" and its released 10 years later. He has also directed several videos and modeled for various fashion designers.
Early life and career.
Reedus was born in Hollywood, Florida, and months later moved to Los Angeles, California. He also spent some time living in Japan, England, and Spain. In Los Angeles, he worked at a Harley Davidson shop in Venice and contributed artwork to various shows as a painter, photographer, sculptor, and video artist. He got his first taste of acting in the play "Maps for Drowners" at the Tiffany Theater on Sunset Boulevard. He was first discovered at a party in Los Angeles where he started screaming with giant sunglasses on, until someone asked if he wanted to be in a play.
Film and television.
His first film was in 1997 the Guillermo del Toro horror thriller film "Mimic", where he played the character Jeremy. He has also played roles in the films "Floating", "Six Ways to Sunday", "Deuces Wild", "Blade II", "Gossip", "8mm", "American Gangster", "Hero Wanted" and "Moscow Chill". In 2005 he had a bit-part in the Christian Alvart German film "Antibodies" as a German Polizist (policeman). In 2008 he starred in the film "Red Canyon".
Norman is perhaps best known for playing the role of Murphy MacManus in the 1999 movie "The Boondock Saints" opposite Sean Patrick Flanery and Willem Dafoe. He also starred opposite Flanery in the sequel 2009 "". 
As of 2010 he stars as Daryl Dixon in the AMC television series "The Walking Dead". The character was not originally in the comic book series of the same name, but was created specifically for Reedus after his audition for the character of Merle Dixon. The Walking Dead comic creator, Robert Kirkman has stated he feels "absolutely blessed has honored the show with his presence, and the way he has come in and taken over that role and defined Daryl Dixon. A lot of Norman's portrayal of the character in the first season inspired all the writers to do what we did with him in the second season. We love writing him and end up doing cool stuff with him."
Reedus has apparently been cast in an upcoming Michael Bay movie.
Modeling, music videos, and art.
Reedus has modeled for Prada, Alessandro Dell'Acqua, Durban, Levi's, Lexus and most recently Morgenthal Fredrics. He has appeared in seven music videos: Flat Top by Goo Goo Dolls,Cats In The Cradle by Ugly Kid Joe, Strange Currencies by R.E.M., Fake Plastic Trees by Radiohead, Violently Happy by Björk, "Wicked as it Seems" by Keith Richards and Judas by Lady Gaga. He is also a painter, sculptor, and photographer who currently shows his artwork in galleries in New York, Berlin, and Frankfurt.
Personal life.
Reedus was in a long term relationship with Danish fashion model Helena Christensen from 1998 until 2003. Together they have a son, Mingus Lucien Reedus (born October 13, 1999).
In 2005, while in Berlin, Germany, Reedus was in a car accident. He had to have surgery and his left eye has a metal eye socket. He has several tattoos: his father's name on the left side of his chest, a devil on his upper right arm, "Mingus" in red on his right forearm, a star on his right hand, two demons on his back, a heart on his right wrist and a snake on his left leg.
Filmography.
Directing.
Reedus has directed several short films and music videos. His three short films are titled "The Rub", "I Thought of You", and "A Filthy Little Fruit". His first feature film was released in early 2008. He runs a New York-based film production company named Bigbaldhead.
