Murder 3 is an Indian film and the sequel to the 2011 film, "Murder 2". Directed by Vishesh Bhatt and produced by Mukesh Bhatt from Vishesh Films. This is the third installment in the Murder series and is an official Bollywood remake of the Colombian thriller "The Hidden Face". "Murder 3" was released on February 15, 2013.
Story.
A hot-shot fashion and wildlife photographer Vikram (Randeep Hooda) gets into a relationship with a waitress from a lounge, Nisha (Sara Loren). She moves in with him in his palatial house outside of the city. The old world house, made decades ago is as beautiful as scary it is. It holds many secrets which Nisha is soon to unearth; of the life of the man who made it and of Vikram, who is dealing with the mysterious disappearance of his former girlfriend Roshni (Aditi Rao Hydari).
Casting.
The makers of the film, who also worked on "Murder" and "Murder 2" decided that Emraan Hashmi would not be returning for the third movie. "Randeep Hooda" will be playing the leading role. After initial talks with Esha Gupta fell through, Aditi Rao Hydari was finally cast as the female lead. Pakistani actress Mona Lizza was then chosen as the second female lead, as the film is a one hero, two heroine project.
Production.
Shooting of the film has happened in Cape Town, South Africa and Goa, India. Mahesh Bhatt said ""Murder 3" is the 2013 equivalent of the controversial film, Arth hi in the thriller genre which released in 1983. Then it was the institution of marriage that was deconstructed and 30 years later Murder 3 deconstructs love and questions its very existence in today's world of relationship crimes. Now that we have the official rights of the film ("The Hidden Face"), we look to doing it justice and taking the Murder franchise forward."
Critical reception.
Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it 4 out of 5 and stated that Murder 3 is one of the finest thrillers to come out of Vishesh Films. An outstanding story narrated with ferocious enthusiasm. Vishesh Bhatt hits a boundary in his very first attempt!
Sukanya Verma for Rediff.com has given 2/5 stars and says "Murder 3" has some badly-acted thrills. 
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack of the film is composed by Pritam & Roxen (band) while the lyrics are penned by Sayeed Quadri. The audio will be released by Sony Music India. A single track called "Teri Jhuki Nazar" which is sung by Shafqat Amanat Ali was released on 7th January, 2013. Another single track "Mat Aazma Re" which is sung by KK was released on 15th January, 2013. 3rd single track "Jaata Hai Tujh Tak" which is sung by Nikhil D'Souza was released on 22nd January, 2013. 4th single track "Hum Jee Lenge" which is sung by Mustafa Zahid Vocalist of Roxen (band) was released on 31st January, 2013.
