"The Vampire Diaries", an American supernatural drama, was renewed for a fourth season by the U.S. channel The CW on May 3, 2012, seven days before the third season's finale. It premiered on October 11, 2012 unlike the previous seasons that aired in September to avoid competition from major television shows. The Season 4 will consist of 23 episodes instead of the usual 22 episodes. All the previous season's characters returned as series regulars with 
The season will focus on Elena Gilbert, Stefan Salvatore and Damon Salvatore adjusting to Elena's new life as a vampire and their search for the cure of Vampirism and will introduce a new villain in the process.
On January 11, 2013, it was announced that a back-door pilot focused on the originals, titled "The Originals" will air sometime in April for a potential series pick-up.
On February 11, 2013, The CW renewed the series for a fifth season. 
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Production.
On May 3, 2012 The CW renewed "The Vampire Diaries" for a fourth season. Unlike previous seasons, it started on October 11. Kevin Williamson, Julie Plec, Leslie Morgenstein and Bob Levy are executive producers for the series.
Casting.
The series stars Nina Dobrev as Elena Gilbert and Katherine Pierce, Paul Wesley as Stefan Salvatore, Ian Somerhalder as Damon Salvatore, Steven R. McQueen as Jeremy Gilbert, Kat Graham as Bonnie Bennett, Candice Accola as Caroline Forbes, Zach Roerig as Matt Donovan, Michael Trevino as Tyler Lockwood and Joseph Morgan as Klaus. Eventually Claire Holt as Rebekah Mikaelson will become a series regular in the second half of the season.
On August 7, 2012 it was announced that Phoebe Tonkin and Todd Williams will join the show as recurring characters in the fourth season. Phoebe Tonkin will portray Hayley, a friend of Tyler's. Todd Williams will portray Connor, a vampire hunter. 
The Olympic gymnast Gabby Douglas made an appearance in "My Brother's Keeper" as a volunteer decorator for the Miss Mystic Falls Beauty Pageant. On the CW website, an interview with Douglas shares her experience on set and with the cast.
Starting with episode 13, Charlie Bewley will join the show as Vaughn, like Connor a vampire hunter, and Camille Guaty as Professor Shane's dead wife Caitlin, who is going to reveal information about him.
On February 2013, it was announced that Daniella Pineda was cast as the witch Sophie for episode 20 "The Originals". This episode serves as a backdoor-pilot for a possible spin-off series, revolving around "the Originals" and taking place in the French Quarter of New Orleans. If the series gets picked up for the 2013-2014 season, she'd be a regular cast member.
Home media.
"The Vampire Diaries Season 4" will be available on DVD and Blu-ray on August 26, 2013.
