.xxx (pronounced "dot triple-X" or "dot x x x") is a sponsored top-level domain (sTLD) intended as a voluntary option for pornographic sites on the Internet. The sponsoring organization is the International Foundation for Online Responsibility (IFFOR). The registry is operated by ICM Registry LLC. The ICANN Board voted to approve the sTLD on 18 March 2011. It went into operation on 15 April 2011.
The TLD entered its sunrise period on 7 September 2011 at 16:00 UTC; the sunrise period ended 28 October 2011. Landrush period lasted from 8 November through 25 November, and General Availability commenced on 6 December 2011.
Background.
A gTLD (generic top-level domain) for sexually explicit material was proposed as one tool for dealing with the conflict between those who wish to provide and access such material through the Internet, and those who wish to prevent access to it, either by children and adolescents, or by employees at their workplaces.
Advocates of the idea argue that it will be easier for parents and employers to block the entire TLD, rather than using more complex and error-prone content-based filtering, without imposing any restrictions on those who wish to access it. Editors of explicit content sites are also afraid that the use of a single TLD like codice_1 would also make it easier for search engines to block all of their content.
Critics of the idea argue that because there is no requirement for providers of explicit content to use the TLD, sexually explicit material will still be commonplace in other domains, making it ineffectual at restricting access, and simply creating a new "landrush" as registrants of .com domains hosting explicit material attempt to duplicate their registrations in the codice_1 domain, competing with operators who hope to register desirable names unavailable in other TLDs. There is also concern that the existence of codice_1 will lead to legislation making its use "mandatory" for sexually explicit material, leading to legal conflicts over the definition of "sexually explicit", free speech rights, and jurisdiction.
There is also early evidence that codice_1 domain names will be registered not with the intent to focus on pornographic content, but to use the adult connotations as a benefit to a marketing strategy. An example is the registration of codice_5, which is aimed at the extreme sport of kitesurfing, thus benefiting from sexual connotations and innuendo for humor and promotional purposes. Another example of an codice_6 domain name being registered without a focus on pornographic content was the registration of codice_7, which contained pro-Islamic content despite being named after Pope Benedict XVI.
ICANN / ICM.
The .XXX TLD was first proposed in 2000 by ICM Registry and resubmitted in 2004, but it faced strong opposition from politicians and conservative groups.
ICANN announced on 1 June 2005 a preliminary approval of codice_1 as an sTLD similar to codice_9, codice_10, etc. ICM said it would charge $60/year for domains. In December 2005, discussions about the implementation of codice_1 were taken off the agenda of ICANN Governmental Advisory Committee (GAC), placing its future in doubt. In its March 2006 meeting, the GAC formulated a letter of concern to the ICANN board about codice_1. On 10 May 2006, ICANN reversed the approval. On 6 January 2007, ICANN put up for public comment a revised proposal following changes to the policy of the ICM registry including the policing of any site that signs up to use the codice_1 registry. On 30 March 2007, the ICANN board again rejected the codice_1 proposal for the third time.
On 6 June 2008, in accordance with ICANN bylaws, ICM filed an application for an independent review challenging ICANN's decision, and in September 2009, a live hearing was held in Washington DC, where both sides submitted documentary evidence and witness testimony. on 19 February 2010 ICANN's Independent Review Panel (IRP) issued its findings. The Panel found that the application for the ".XXX sTLD met the required sponsorship criteria," and that "the Board’s reconsideration of that finding was not consistent with the application of neutral, objective and fair documented policy". At the ICANN meeting in Nairobi in March 2010 the board resolved to consider "process options". A 45-day public comment was opened on 26 March 2010. At the Brussels ICANN meeting in June 2010, the ICANN board resolved to restart the process, including renewed due diligence and GAC consultations.
On 18 March 2011, ICANN's board approved the execution of the registry agreement with ICM for the codice_1 sponsored top level domain. The vote was 9 in favor, 4 against, with 3 abstentions.
ICM is expected to make over $200 million a year, with 3 to 5 million domain registrations, as companies are anticipated to defensively register their domains.
Manwin suits.
On 16 November 2011, Manwin Licensing International, a company that operates several popular adult websites including YouPorn, filed a request for a 2nd ICANN Independent Review Proceeding. In the request Manwin asks that the .xxx delegation be voided, or, if not, put up to competition on renewal.
On the same day Manwin, together with adult film studio Digital Playground, filed a suit in the Central District of California against ICM alleging antitrust and competition violations. Amongst the claims in the suit are that ICANN provided "no competitive process for the award of the .XXX registry contract" and that ICM CEO Stuart Lawley "has announced that he expects to be able (and intends) to prevent the establishment of any other (potentially competing) adult-content TLDs, including through a contractual promise by ICANN not to approve such TLDs".
Alternative implementations.
Starting in 2005, there was an alternative implementation of codice_1 by New.net, a private domain registration service unaffiliated with ICANN, via an alternative DNS root. New.net no longer offers domain names under this unofficial TLD.
Another unofficial codice_1 TLD was previously available through the alternative DNS root system administered by the now-defunct AlterNIC.
