Vishwaroopam is a 2013 Tamil spy thriller film written, directed and co-produced by Kamal Haasan who also enacts the lead role. The film has Rahul Bose, Shekar Kapur, Pooja Kumar, Andrea Jeremiah and Jaideep Ahlawat in supporting roles. Produced simultaneously in Hindi as Vishwaroop, the film features soundtrack composed by Shankar-Ehsaan-Loy, with lyrics by Vairamuthu and Haasan himself while Javed Akhtar translated them for the Hindi version.
Development of the project commenced after the release of Haasan's "Manmadhan Ambu" (2010) when several of the crew were brought in from the United States to lend their technical expertise. The direction was taken over by Haasan from Selvaraghavan and reports indicating a comparison with several English films surfaced during the production. The first teaser was revealed in April 2012 and first theatrical trailer was revealed in June 2012. "Vishwaroopam" is the first Indian film, and fourth film worldwide to utilize the new Auro 3D sound technology. The film was also the first of its kind to release via direct-broadcast satellite, also known as direct-to-home (DTH), but after protests of theatre owners this plan was dropped.
The film released worldwide, excluding Tamil Nadu, on 25 January 2013 while the Hindi version was released on 1 February 2013. Legal controversies regarding the film's portrayal of Islamism arouse as several Muslim political groups protested the film's release in Tamil Nadu, resulting in an official ban being imposed on the film in the state for 15 days by the Government of Tamil Nadu. The ban resulted in similar decisions being made in Sri Lanka and Malaysia while release was delayed in the states of Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka. Despite the fragmented release, "Vishwaroopam" garnered generally favourable reviews from critics, most of whom had downplayed claims of the film being anti-Muslim. Heeding to the requests of Muslim extremist groups, scenes perceived as controversial were muted, allowing the film for release on 7 February 2013 in Tamil Nadu.
Plot.
The film opens in a rundown pigeon shop in New York City where an old man feeds them. He then sends one pigeon away. It flies high and lands in a skyscraper off the office window of a psychologist who is conducting a session with her client Nirupama (Pooja Kumar), a nuclear oncologist, who begins to confide that her’s was a marriage of convenience that provided a safe haven for pursuing her Ph.D in the U.S.A. for past 3 years and that her husband Vishwanath alias Viz (Kamal Haasan) is a middle-aged Kathak teacher. She is also put off by Viz’ effeminate bearing and is attracted to her boss, Deepankar (Samrat Chakrabarti). Doubting whether her husband has secrets of his own, she hires a private investigator to tail him to probe grounds for divorce. She learns from the private investigator that Viz is a Muslim. In a sudden turn of events, the investigator gets killed in a sea-side warehouse by Farukh, a prominent member of the terrorist outfit led by Omar (Rahul Bose). A business card on his wallet gives away Nirupama and the terror group led by Farukh nabs the couple.
Viz is involved in a fight with the terrorists, kills Farukh and his men at the warehouse and escapes with Nirupama. Omar and Viz have a past, one that takes the story back to circa 2002, to the Al-Qaeda training camps in Afghanistan-Pakistan border. Viz's real name was Wisam Ahmad Kashmiri. He is a jihadi in Kashmir, wanted by the Indian Army, with an award of 5 lakh on his head. Omar accepts him into his team and drives him off to Afghanistan. Wisam becomes a trainer to the Al-Qaeda jihadi's and also a family friend to Omar. One day, Omar tells Wisam that American POWs are still alive, incarcerated and shifted each fortnight. He orders his deputy Salim (Jaideep Ahlawat) to behead the Captain and capture it on video. The next day, Salim tells Wisam that a new tall guest is expected in the town. Wisam later that night sees Osama Bin Laden greeting the Al Qaeda chieftains in a cave. Then, a joint US-led airforce begins bombing the town. Omar begins to doubt that there is an informer in the team but orders lynching of the wrong man.What follows is a maze of events that go back and forth in time, unraveling a plot where in the terrorists are scraping cesium from oncological devices to trigger a blast in New York City.
Nirupama is stunned to discover the true identity of Viz, his "uncle" (Shekhar Kapur), British "friend" Dr Dawkins (Miles Anderson) and the young "dancer" Ashmita (Andrea Jeremiah). Viz later reveals that he has a lot of emotional baggage and that he had executed many terrorists including Nassar (Nassar), Omar's boss. His mission is to bust the "sleeper-cell" of Al Qaeda in the US, which is planning to divert the attention through "capsules" capable of emitting mild nuclear radiation tied to pigeons while enabling Abbasi, a Nigerian suicide bomber to detonate the cesium bomb in the city.
Together, the Wisam team try to counter the plans of Omar. In the ensuing events, Wisam is arrested by the FBI before being rescued by his "uncle" Colonel Jagannath and Dr Dawkins is murdered by Salim while pickup up a video tape from an antique shop. The FBI later releases Wisam after a call from the Indian embassy and Prime Minister of India. Wisam along with the FBI, take down Abbasi and defuse the Ceasium bomb by using a microwave oven as Faraday cage to avoid incoming calls from any mobile phone. Omar and Salim try to escape in a plane. Omar tries to activate bomb through his phone, but fails. He then called Abbasi, but call is attended by Wisam, who tells him that Abbasi is not alive, Omar is shocked to hear this but escapes with Salim in his plane. The film ends with Wisam indicating that he would now go after Omar, alluding to 2 set in India.
Production.
Development.
After finishing his "Manmadan Ambu" (2010), Kamal Haasan stated in November 2010 that he was working on the scriptment of his "pet project" titled "Thalaivan Irukkiran", a film about an international community. Termed as a big budget multi-starrer film, it was expected to commence by March 2011, with a Hollywood studio reportedly coming forward to produce it. However, in early 2011, sources claimed that Kamal shelved that project and agreed to star in a Selvaraghavan directorial, being impressed by the one-line story narrated to him. Reports further suggested that the film was based on the 2001 American psychological thriller "Hannibal", with Kamal playing a cannibal, Closer to release, Kamal Haasan revealed that he had thought of the story seven years before production began and had to convince himself that the story could be made into a feature film. The film was named "Vishwaroopam", after several titles were considered, by late March and the shooting was planned to begin by mid-April and to be completed within 100 days. It was revealed that the film would be produced in three languages—Tamil, Telugu and Hindi—simultaneously. There will also be a dubbed Telugu version titled "Vishwaroopam".
On 24 May 2011, it was announced that Selvaraghavan was ousted from the project, as he was busy finishing his project with his brother Dhanush. Kamal Hassan decided to direct the film himself in addition to writing the story, screenplay and dialogues. The producing studio, Telephoto Films, had urged him to take up the project, planning for a release on 7 November 2011. The film was then disclosed to be a spy thriller on the lines of the . The film was being made as a bilingual and simultaneously shot in Tamil, Telugu and Hindi languages; all the actors had to learn their dialogues in both languages. Sanu John Varghese made his debut as a cinematographer in Tamil after previously working in the Hindi film, "Karthik Calling Karthik" and the Malayalam film "Elektra". Varghese had previously been a part of the team that Kamal Haasan had assembled for "Marmayogi", which did not take off. Mahesh Narayanan, a leading Malayalam film editor, was signed up for the project after he had acquainted with Kamal Haasan for the pre-production works of the film "Traffic", which the actor later opted out from. The team signed up N. G. Roshan as a make-up artiste after Kamal Haasan appreciated his work in the 2009 Malayalam film "Pazhassi Raja", while Mahadevan Thampi was picked to be the still photographer after Kamal Haasan had worked with him for a day during his guest appearance in "Four Friends".
Casting.
By February 2011, newcomer Sonakshi Sinha was approached to play the lead female character, and was confirmed to play Haasan's wife. Her salary for the film was touted to be . However, with the film getting delayed, she opted out by July, due to conflicting dates with her Hindi assignments. Following Sinha's exit, other leading Bollywood actresses, including Katrina Kaif, Deepika Padukone, and Sonam Kapoor were considered. Vidya Balan was also approached by the makers, but she declined the offer, owing to her prior commitments. By mid-August, Sameera Reddy was reported to have been roped in for the role, while sources stated that Anushka Shetty was finalised soon after. In early November 2011, New York based model-actress Pooja Kumar was signed in for a role after she had been recommended to Kamal Haasan by his partner, Gouthami. The initial audition for Pooja Kumar was held over Skype, with Haasan noting that she had thought the film was initially based on cannibalism. Being a non-Tamil speaker her dialogues have been dubbed by actress Abhirami, although Pooja Kumar dubbed for herself in the film's Hindi version. Telugu actress Lakshmi Manchu was offered a role in the film, but declined it due to date issues.
Shriya Saran was reported to play the second female lead in the film, with the actress dismissing the news several days later, citing that she had not even heard the script, following which Priya Anand was claimed to have bagged that role. This turned out to be false, with Kamal Haasan citing that he did not know who Priya Anand was. Isha Sharvani was meanwhile selected for a role, with reports suggesting that she would essay the character of Kamal Haasan's sister in the film. However, Sharvani too opted out later, due to "inordinate delay in the start of the shoot". By late August 2011, British model-turned-actress Amy Jackson was reported to have been added to the cast. During mid-October, singer-actress Andrea Jeremiah had been signed on for a pivotal role and paid an advance.
Rahul Bose was finalised to play the antagonist. Later that month, actor-director Shekhar Kapur informed on Twitter that he would perform a cameo role, while Samrat Chakrabarti had also been selected for a supporting role. Jaideep Ahlawat disclosed in an interview that he would play an "out-and-out negative character" in the film. Zarina Wahab told in November 2011 that she shot for a small role in "Vishwaroopam". In January 2012, Chitrangada Singh was offered a "very special role", which the actress had to decline, since her dates clashed with Sudhir Mishra's film. As Kamal Hassan is ardent reader of Richard Dawkins, he had named Miles Anderson as Dawkins in the movie.
Filming.
The film's shooting was supposed to take off on 20 April, but became delayed, since the US Consulate had refused Visas to the cast and crew. The team decided to relocate to Canada, postponing filming to June. The shooting began for the film in Chennai in August 2011 and locations filmed at included Haasan's office in October 2011, when Isha Sharvani was also a part of the shoot. The film briskly progressed in late 2011, with scenes involving Samrat Chakrabarti filmed in November of the same year. Sets resembling Afghanistan were created in Chennai, with many foreigners from Russia, Iran and Africa playing American soldiers, while Haasan wore an Afghan look. In November 2011, the team also pursued schedules in Amman and Petra in Jordan with Rahul Bose's scenes being canned. Haasan learnt Kathak from Birju Maharaj for an important portion in the film.
Due to delays, casting took a relatively long period of time, with several of the original cast dropping out of the project. "Vishwaroopam" was shot extensively overseas in countries like the United States and Canada. Domestic locations included Chennai and Mumbai.Kamal Haasan went to USA on 15 December 2011 for completing a schedule. The main outdoor shoots were shot in New York as the lead character is based there, and the production team also matched New York with the Grand Rapids in Michigan. Re-recording and dubbing work began in Mumbai in late February 2012, with Haasan arranging a dialogue coach in Tamil and Hindi to get the artistes' dubbing in place, with Atul Tiwari supervising the Hindi dialogues. The climax scenes featuring an aerial fight choreographed by Hollywood stuntman Lee Whittaker was filmed at Chandivali Studio in Andheri, Mumbai in early March 2012 with Haasan and Rahul Bose. The film was shot in digital format, after several false starts Haasan's previous projects. Speaking about it, he said "The fact that cinema is going digital is the biggest technological change today. We have to accept it, as it is happening globally and it will happen in Tamil Nadu too."
Gouthami designed the costumes for the film. Shahrukh Khan's Red Chillies Entertainment has taken care of the graphics part in 'Vishwaroopam'. A research had to be carried out on the American army's hierarchy for the costumes. N. G. Roshan, who had previously worked in notable Malayalam films, took charge of the make-up for the film. The villain had to undergo a heavy use of prosthetic make-up. A scene involving a war explosion had to show an injured jaw for him. Further, the artists appearing as war victims had blood and other forms of injuries applied on their bodies. The Jaika stunt team, that was also involved in "Billa II" (2012) at the time, worked on the action sequences. Haasan's younger daughter Akshara Haasan joined the crew as an assistant director. Kunal Rajan was roped in as a sound designer and the stunt crew for the film were imported in from Thailand. In September 2012, Haasan revealed that the film would utilize Auro 3D sound technology, making it the first Indian film and fourth film worldwide to do so.
Soundtrack.
Initially, Yuvan Shankar Raja was reported to compose the film's musical score. However, Kamal signed in the musical trio Shankar–Ehsaan–Loy to compose music for the trilingual, making it his second collaboration with them after "Aalavandhan". Lyricist Vairamuthu took charge of the lyrics of the songs in the film, after Kamal Haasan had approached him and narrated the entire plot, to which he immediately agreed to work upon. Javed Akhtar has penned lyrics for the Hindi version, while Ramajogayya Shastry has done the lyrics for the dubbed Telugu version. The audio was released on 7 December 2012. The Telugu version of the audio was released on 30 December at Hyderabad. "Vishwaroopam" was also released in Barco's 3D cinema sound.
Marketing.
The makers planned the high-budget production to premiere at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival. A special screening of the film was arranged for Hollywood-based producer Barrie M. Osborne and make-up artist Michael Westmore. Before release, it was reported to have been split into two parts, with each one having a separate release.
The first look poster and a teaser of the film were released on May Day 2012 as part of the film's marketing process. The poster consisted of Kamal Haasan wearing a green khaki jacket, with a flying pigeon and a skyline of a city consisting of several skyscrapers in the background. Snippets from the film were unveiled during the International Indian Film Academy (IIFA) weekend and awards in Singapore in June 2012, as the actor-director screened excerpts from the film, attracting critical acclaim. A one minute trailer was released at the award ceremony, which saw Kamal Haasan and Andrea take part in a press conference. Salman Khan organised a special screening of Hindi version Vishwaroop at Ketnav Studio,Mumbai on 1 February 2013.
An Auro 3D trailer of the film was released on 7 November, coinciding with Haasan's birthday. It included a webcast of Kamal's speech via Skype. The film is releasing in 3,000 prints worldwide. An early estimate by Haasan stated the film to earn from all its sources including music and distribution rights. A special screening of 'Vishwaroopam' was held at Tamil Nadu superstar Rajinikanth's house on February 6, 2013 at the 6 Degrees theatre in the Auro 3D format for his friends. On February 9, 2013 Kamal Haasan left for Paris for the French premiere on of "Vishwaroopam".
Release.
The film's Tamil version was given a U/A (Parental Guidance) certificate by the Central Board of Film Certification with minor cuts, while the Hindi version "Vishwaroop" went through minor cuts to receive the U/A certificate. The makers planned the high-budget production to premiere at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival. The film released with over 3,000 prints worldwide. While the movie released in theatres on January 25, 2013, Vishwaroopam DTH released on February 2, 2013 via 6 DTH players - Tata Sky, Airtel, Sun, Dish, Videocon & Reliance.
Vishwaroopam was scheduled to release in about 500 screens in Tamil Nadu, but the film was removed from theatres by District collectors across the State, due to Muslim protests. After initial delays, Karnataka saw a full release on January 29, 2013 in 40 theatres across the state. The Hindi version Vishwaroop was released in over 1035 screens of 800 theatres on February 1, 2013, thereby marking the biggest ever release for a Kamal Haasan film in Hindi. It was distributed by Balaji Motion Pictures. The prohibitory orders imposed under Section 144 of CrPc to ban Vishwaroopam in Tamil Nadu was lifted on February 3, 2013. Both the Tamil and Telugu versions of Vishwaroopam were screened at the Fourth Annual India International Film Festival of Tampa Bay on 16 February 2013 and 17 February 2013. 
 The temporary suspension on "Vishwaroopam" was lifted by the "Sri Lanka Public Performance Board" on February 10, 2013. In Malaysia, the "National Censorship Board" and the "Malaysian Islamic Development Department" reviewed the film and the Home ministry lifted the ban on February 19, 2013.
Reception.
"Vishwaroopam".
Vishwaroopam received highly positive reviews from critics. Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of "The Hindu" stated, "Vishwaroopam is a technically brilliant, ambitious film where most characters are not what they seem", and called the film "A gripping spy thriller of international standards". Radhika Rajamani of "Rediff" gave 3 out of 5 stars and stated, "Vishwaroopam undoubtedly rests on Kamal Haasan, who is brilliant." Vivek Ramz of "in.com" rated it 3.5 out of 5 and stated. "Vishwaroopam is a nicely made thriller and Kamal’s show all the way". "Behindwoods" rated the film 4 out of 5 stars, calling it, "One of the commercially best made movies of Tamil cinema." "IndiaGlitz" said, ""Vishwaroopam" comes with not just Hollywoodish feel but also its idiom". The critic further wrote "Sanu Varghese's cinematography is nimble and it is easily one of the biggest high points. Mahesh Narayanan's editing is proper."
"Indiandragon" of news.indiandragon.in gave 3.5 dragons and said "Viswaroopam is the Indian spy story no different but all together new"."Sify" said, "It is technically brilliant with world class making and a subject which is truly international on global terrorism." and called it a "must watch for those who seek classy, stylish and extra-strong entertainment." NDTV stated, "Vishwaroopam is likely to be appreciated by lovers of Hollywood action films." and pointed out, "The film's only minus point - the placement of songs works as speed breakers for a spy thriller." B.V.S. Prakash of Deccan Chronicle gave 3 stars and stated that the film "rides on performances." "Firstpost" stated that "Vishwaroopam is non-stop action Hollywood style".
Praveen Kumar of "OneIndia" noted that the "film is on par with Hollywood standards" and gave 3.5/5. Anuja Jaiman of "Reuters" said, ""Vishwaroopam" is a work of art that surpasses Bollywood potboilers and tries to initiate a conversation about a not-so-perfect world and its great religious divide. Watch it for Haasan and your right to freedom of expression." J Hurtado of "Twitch Film" said, "Vishwaroopam is a film that will, inevitably, be remembered as much for its bumpy road to the screen as it will be for its objective quality." Shubhra Gupta of "The Indian Express" rated the film 3 stars, saying: "This is a fill it-shut it-forget it film, whose big budget slickness never overpowers it, and which holds you while it lasts." Film journalist Sreedhar Pillai, in an interview with "IBN Live" said, "I think it ["Vishwaroopam"] is Kamal's best film as a director." and called it "a well made commercial entertainer.". 
"Vishwaroop".
Hindi version of the movie "Vishwaroop" received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Deccan Herald gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, saying ""Vishwaroop" is a helluva entertainer" and pointed out "The action sequences are, at last, on a par with Hollywood." LiveMint reviewed the Hindi version 'Vishwaroop' and stated that the film is a showcase for Haasan’s wide-ranging skills with both microwaves and machine guns. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave Vishwaroop 3 out of 5 stars and stated that the film is a Kamal Haasan show all the way, "It has an interesting premise, superb combat scenes and Kamal Haasan's bravura act as its three aces. But a stretched second hour and far from dramatic finale dilute the impact. Yet, all said and done, those with an appetite for well-made thrillers might relish this effort!" Anupama Chopra of Hindustan Times gave 3 out of 5 stars to Vishwaroop and stated that Vishwaroop has to be admired for its scale and ambition. Director, co-producer, co-writer and Hero Kamal Haasan is attempting here to launch a franchise for himself. Meena Iyer of "The Times of India" gave 3 out of 5 and stated intentions of this film and the maker are good. Kamal's performance is A-grade. However the film fails, especially in the second half because there are no lump-in-the-throat moments; nor is there any shock and awe. Mid Day gave 3 out of 5 to Vishwaroop and stated that Kamal Haasan's film is sensitive and mature but the basic problem is the inconsistent pace. Prasanna D Zore of Rediff gave the movie 2/5 stars and wrote "Vishwaroop is flawed and a big disappointment from Kamal Haasan" "At times, the film tries to preach what is just and what is unjust, but fails miserably." Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN noted "A lot of it is unabashedly entertaining, although you'll wish the film was shorter and smarter." and gave the movie 2.5/5. NDTV reviewed the Hindi version Vishwaroop and gave it 4 out of 5 stars, stating that Vishwaroop is technically dazzling. The big scenes of battle (in Afghanistan) and violent confrontation (in the US), to put it simply, are outstanding. Vinayak Chakravorty of India Today gave the movie 2.5/5 stars and reviewed, "As the sleek shots pile up, you realise what they are desperately trying to hide: Vishwaroop lacks the energy and imagination that one looks for in a good action flick." Shivesh Kumar of "IndiaWeekly" awarded the movie 3.5 out of 5 stars.
Controversies.
"Vishwaroopam" has been in the news for several critically viewed controversies. The first of this kind was the title naming issue, where the Hindu Makkal Katchi party demanded the change from its current Sanskrit title to a purely Tamil one. When Kamal Haasan announced a Direct-To-Home premiere of the film, theatre owners demanded a rollback of this plan, as they feared major revenue losses to DTH companies. Threatened by a complete theatre boycott of "Vishwaroopam", Haasan agreed to release the film first in theatres. Later, Muslim groups in Tamil Nadu demanded the ban of the film and claimed, that the film would hurt Muslim sentiments. Although the film was cleared by Central Board of Film Certification of India, District collectors in the state of Tamil Nadu gave orders to the theatre owners to not show "Vishwaroopam", citing Law and order problems, however the film released in other states with greater Muslim populations than in Tamil Nadu. The ban in Tamil Nadu triggered also the stop of screenings in neighbouring Indian states and foreign markets.
The film fraternity of India condemned the actions instructed by Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu Jayalalitha as a critical attack on freedom of speech in India, but she denied all allegations against her regarding political and business interests. After persistent pressure to cut the film by allegedly objectionable scenes, Kamal Haasan said, he could be forced to leave the state of Tamil Nadu and India, but clarified later, that this was merely said in anger of his situation. He estimated the loss of revenues, due to banning policies, somewhere between 30-60 crore Rupees. A mutual agreement with the Muslims of Tamil Nadu was finally settled on February 2, 2013, when Haasan accepted to mute five scenes.
Box office.
India.
On it's first of day of release in Tamil Nadu, 7 February, Vishwaroopam grossed Rs 5.81 crore at the box office. The Hindi version of the film is reported to have collected Rs 12.34 crore in 10 days. Based on cast member Rahul Bose's tweets on 11 February 2013, many media outlets reported that all-India gross collection of the film has crossed Rs 120 crores mark.
Overseas.
According to Trade analyst Taran Adarsh the box office collection of the Tamil version film at U.K. & IRELAND was £2,75,318 cr on 19 screens and in USA was $1,189,243cr on 45 screens on the third weekend. 
Sequel.
Kamal Haasan and Atul Tiwari mentioned that the sequel "Vishwaroopam 2" was already planned and several sequences had already been shot featuring Andrea Jeremiah in a more prominent role.
