Destiny is an upcoming video game being developed by Bungie. The game will be a first-person shooter in a "mythic science fiction" setting. As part of a ten-year publishing deal with Activision, "Destiny" will be published by Activision on the PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4 and Xbox 360 video game consoles, with Bungie expecting that the project will have a ten-year life cycle from its launch. A contract detailing Bungie and Activision's publishing agreement originally listed the game for release in Q3/Q4 2013. In February 2013, however, Activision stated it has not included the launch in its 2013 outlook, and that "there should be no speculation or expectation of a different result."
Gameplay.
Bungie has emphasized that the universe of "Destiny" will be "alive". Events may happen in-game that are not necessarily controlled or planned by the developer, which will help to create a dynamic developing experience for Bungie and a dynamic playing experience for gamers. The game's style has been described as an always-online first-person shooter that will incorporate massively multiplayer online game (MMO) elements, but Bungie has avoided defining "Destiny" as being in-kind with traditional MMO games. For instance, unlike traditional MMOs—particularly massively multiplayer online role-playing games—players will not be able to play as any race in the galaxy that they choose, but will instead be limited to playing as a human character. Instead, the game has been referred to as a "shared-world shooter".
"Destiny" will incorporate a new game engine that allows global illuminations and real-time dynamic lighting to occur together. An innovation in Bungie's "hopper" technology, which has been the backbone for "Halo"s matchmaking system, will allow better player matchmaking in order to create a more natural experience in either cooperative or competitive multiplayer modes.
Premise.
"Destiny" is set seven hundred years into the future in a post-apocalyptic setting. In a universe where humans had spread out and colonised planets in the Solar System, an event known as "the Collapse" saw the mysterious dissolution of these colonies and left mankind teetering on the brink of extinction. The only known survivors of the Collapse are those living on Earth, who were saved by "the Traveler", a white, spherical celestial body whose appearance centuries before had enabled humans to reach the stars. The Traveler now hovers above the last remaining human city, and its presence allows the "Guardians of the City"—the last defenders of the human race—the ability to wield an unknown power.
Upon mankind's first attempt to repopulate and reconstruct after the Collapse, it is discovered that hostile alien races have occupied mankind's former colonies and civilizations. The player takes on the role of a Guardian of the City, and is tasked with investigating and destroying these threats before humanity is completely wiped out by them.
Development.
The first references to the "Destiny" were shown in Bungie's 20th anniversary documentary, "O Brave New World", when it was known by its original working title "Tiger". Bungie co-founder Jason Jones noted that the name "Tiger" was chosen because the studio found that it was engaging audiences in a way that the developers had never experimented with previously, but the working title was later changed to "Destiny". 
On May 21, 2012, a publishing contract between Bungie and Activision was published by the "Los Angeles Times". The contract originally had been entered into evidence under seal in Activision's lawsuit against former Infinity Ward employees Jason West and Vincent Zampella, but was later unsealed by the judge in that case. The contract outlined an agreement between Bungie and Activision to develop and publish, respectively, four games, with the first to be released in the third or fourth quarter of 2013.
The first public details of "Destiny" were leaked in November 2012, revealing concept art and plot details. Bungie supplemented the leak with the release of further concept art, whilst expressing regret that details of an upcoming video game had once again been revealed before their planned release. In describing "Destiny", Bungie's lead writer Joseph Staten stated that the studio was approaching the game with the intention of "building a universe" that would "take on a life of its own". Further information became available in February 2013, when Bungie released a video documentary revealing information on "Destiny" and some of the core ideas behind the game, including the company's "seven pillars" philosophy, identifying the seven underlying elements of the early development process that they adopted to make the game appeal to as wide an audience as possible, with particular emphasis on making the game accessible to casual, novice gamers and dedicated fans of the genre alike.
Also revealed were plans to incorporate social media into "Destiny", allowing players to remain connected to one another even when offline. With the in-game universe being in a state of perpetual change, Bungie is exploring the potential of using a mobile phone application to keep players up to date with major events in the game so as to thwart the possibility of players logging into the game and finding the changes have drastically altered their situation.
