A Good Day to Die Hard is a 2013 American action film directed by John Moore and written by Skip Woods. It is the fifth installment in the "Die Hard" film series. Bruce Willis reprises the lead role of John McClane, who travels to Russia to help his estranged son, Jack (Jai Courtney), out of prison, but is soon caught in the crossfire of a terrorist plot.
Talks of a fourth sequel to "Die Hard" (1988) began before the release of "Live Free or Die Hard" (2007), with Willis affirming that the latter would not be the last in the series, but pre-production did not start until September 2011, when John Moore was officially announced as the director. Filming began in April 2012, primarily in Budapest, Hungary.
"A Good Day to Die Hard" premiered in Los Angeles on January 31, 2013, coinciding with the unveiling of a "Die Hard" mural at the Fox Lot, and was released in certain East and Southeast Asian territories on February 7 and in the United States and Canada at 10PM on February 13. It is the first "Die Hard" film to use Dolby Atmos Surround Mixing and the first to also be released in IMAX theaters. The film was a critical disappointment, receiving negative reviews from most critics, but has grossed over twice its budget in the box office so far.
Plot.
In Moscow, Russia, Viktor Chagarin (Sergei Kolesnikov), a high-ranking but corrupt Russian official, plans on incriminating political prisoner and government whistleblower and former billionaire Yuri Komarov (Sebastian Koch) without a fair trial when Komarov refuses to hand over a secret file believed to have convicting evidence against Chagarin. In a separate incident, Jack McClane (Jai Courtney) is arrested as a result of an assassination, but agrees to testify against Komarov for a shorter sentence.
John McClane (Bruce Willis), who has not been in touch with his son for years, learns of Jack's whereabouts and circumstances and decides to go to Russia to help him out. When John arrives and approaches the courthouse that happens to currently hold Jack and Komarov on trial, an explosion orchestrated by Chagarin and his henchmen occurs in the courthouse, and Jack breaks free with Komarov. Seeing his son, John confronts him, but their dispute is cut short when the henchmen, led by Alik (Radivoje Bukvić), chase them on the streets of Moscow, but John, Jack, and Komarov manage to escape.
Hiding in a safe house, John finds out that Jack has been a CIA Officer in an undercover operation for the past three years. Meanwhile, Collins (Cole Hauser), Jack's partner, demands the file's location from Komarov, so that the CIA can bring Chagarin down, but Collins is soon shot by Chagarin's men and dies, as John, Jack, and Komarov survive subsequent heavy gunfire and escape once again. The trio then makes their way to a hotel in the city to find the key to a vault containing the file. There, they meet Komarov's daughter, Irina (Yuliya Snigir), whom they earlier planned on joining with, but John grows suspicious of Irina. His suspicions are proven correct when Alik and his men crash in and tie John and Jack up, while Komarov is taken as a hostage, and Irina confesses to snitching on them for the "millions of dollars" to be gained. However, Jack manages to break free of his ties, and the father-son duo fights back, culminating in a gunfire exchange that results in John and Jack's escape.
That night, the two steal a car full of firearms and drive to Chernobyl, Ukraine, which is the location of the vault that houses the file, as revealed earlier by Komarov at the safe house. When they arrive, they find that Komarov, Irina, and Alik have already gotten there, but what they don't know is that on their way there, it was revealed that there was never a file in existence, and that the drawer with the file inside was actually the secret passage to a vault containing a large amount of weapons-grade uranium. Komarov then kills Alik and then calls Chagarin and tells him that he and Irina had manipulated the entire sequence of events since the beginning in an attempt to obtain the uranium and get revenge on Chagarin. Chagarin is then killed by a subordinate of Komarov's in disguise as a massager.
At this point, John and Jack enter the vault, discover Komarov's true plot, and take him under arrest. Irina, with another henchman, comes to her father's aid, but before they can escape, Jack goes after Komarov, while John goes after Irina, who is escaping on a Mi-26 helicopter. Irina tries to protect her father by firing the helicopter's cannons at Jack, but John is able to bring the helicopter out of balance by driving a truck in the hangar section of the helicopter, still shackled by a chain, out of the open back door, muttering his catchphrase of "Yippee ki-yay, motherfucker." Komarov remarks that Jack will get to watch his father die and in rage, Jack hurls Komarov off the rooftop, stating that he will die as well. Komarov falls into the spinning helicopter's rotors and is gruesomely killed. John jumps off the helicopter and reunites with Jack inside the building. Wanting to avenge her father, Irina rams the helicopter into the building, destroying the building and killing herself in the process, but John and Jack survive by leaping off the building into a large pool of water.
Afterwards, John and Jack return to New York. At the airport, they meet Lucy (Mary Elizabeth Winstead), John's oldest child and Jack's sister, and the reunited family happily walks off together.
Cast.
Other cast: Roman Luknár (Anton), Ganxsta Zolee (MRAP driver), Péter Takátsy (prosecutor), Pavel Lychnikoff (cabbie), Megalyn Echikunwoke (reporter), Melissa Tang (Lucas), Ivan Kamaras (G-Wagon driver).
Production.
Pre-production.
Production of the film was formally announced in 2010, with ' and "The A-Team" writer Skip Woods confirmed as the film's screenwriter. Noam Murro was originally attached to direct the film, but left production to direct the "300" prequel, '. John Moore was subsequently drafted in to replace him.
The film was initially titled ""Die Hard 24/7"", with speculation in the media suggesting that the film would be a crossover between the "Die Hard" and "24" franchises, with Kiefer Sutherland to reprise his role as Jack Bauer alongside John McClane. This was never confirmed by the studio, and the film's title was later revealed to be "A Good Day to Die Hard"—with no further mention of any involvement from the "24" franchise—with a release date of February 14, 2013.
Casting.
Bruce Willis returned as John McClane, and has expressed a desire to shoot "A Good Day to Die Hard" and a sixth installment in the franchise before retiring the character.
When casting the role of Jack McClane, the studios considered several actors, including Liam Hemsworth and James Badge Dale, before ultimately settling on Australian actor Jai Courtney. Mary Elizabeth Winstead also featured in the film, reprising her role as McClane's daughter Lucy.
Sebastian Koch played the film's primary antagonist, Yuri Komorov, while Yuliya Snigir and Cole Hauser featured as secondary characters Irina and Collins. The cast was completed by actors Amaury Nolasco as a friend of McClane, Pavel Lychnikoff as a taxi driver, and Megalyn Echikunwoke, Anne Vyalitsyna, and Ivan Kamaras in smaller roles.
Shooting.
Production began in Hungary in April 2012, with the capital Budapest standing in for Moscow. A military shooting range near Hajmáskér was used for shooting live ammunition, whilst vehicular stunts were shot at the Hungaroring, a Formula One racing circuit in Mogyoród. 
In July of 2012, a fire broke out on the set while shooting an aerial stunt, though no-one was injured and shooting resumed after a short delay.
In creating the film's visual style, Moore wanted the camera work to be almost entirely handheld, using three 4 Perforation 35mm ARRI cameras equipped with long lenses to capture tight close-ups, for Moore explained, “McClane is in a strange world, with little or no initial control over his environment. He’s unable to anticipate things as he normally might. He’s caught off guard, and we want the camera to mimic that surprise and confusion.” Moore also chose to create as many of the film's effects on camera as possible, only using visual effects to enhance elements or paint in backgrounds.
Post-production.
A specially censored version has been prepared for theatrical release in the UK, which has been cut for language and violence in order to attain a 12A at the request of the distributors. The U.S. version is rated R and is uncut. The film's audio was mixed in Dolby Atmos surround sound. As of February 2013, director John Moore has already begun work on a director's cut. 
Soundtrack.
Marco Beltrami, who had composed the soundtrack for the previous film, "Live Free or Die Hard", returned to score "A Good Day to Die Hard". Like the previous film, Beltrami again incorporates Michael Kamen's material from the first three films into his score. The soundtrack album was released on February 14, 2013 digitally and in retailers by Sony Classical. 
Release.
On January 31, 2013, 20th Century Fox held a special tribute to the 25th anniversary of the "Die Hard" franchise by unveiling a mural of a scene from "Die Hard" (1988) on Sound Stage 8 of the Fox Lot. Afterward, the premiere screening of "A Good Day to Die Hard" was shown. Two additional premieres were held in Europe leading up to the film's commercial release: one in Berlin, Germany on February 4 and the second in London, England on February 7. "A Good Day to Die Hard" was commercially released first in Indonesia on February 6, 2013, and then opened in certain East and Southeast Asian territories on February 7.
In the United States and Canada, the film was distributed to 2,328 theaters for 10PM and midnight showings on February 13. Select theaters also held a one-time special marathon of all "Die Hard" films to lead up to "A Good Day to Die Hard"'s nationwide release, with Bruce Willis making a personal appearance at one of these marathons in New York City to thank fans. The film then expanded to a total of 3,553 theaters, including IMAX theaters, on February 14..
Reception.
Unlike the previous films in the series, "A Good Day to Die Hard" was widely panned by critics. Based on 177 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, the film received a 16% approval rating from critics, with an average score of 4/10. By comparison, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating in the 0–100 range based on reviews from top mainstream critics, calculated an average score of 29 based on 39 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable" reaction. On both websites, the film ranked lowest among the "Die Hard" films. CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade cinemagoers gave the film was "B+" on an A+ to F scale, and that audiences skewed slightly male and older. 
A.O. Scott of "The New York Times" described "A Good Day to Die Hard" as "a handful of extended set pieces — each more elaborate and therefore somehow less exciting than the last — linked by a simple-minded plot and a handful of half-clever lines." Though complimenting the special effects, he criticizes the direction of John Moore, the lack of style, and writes that "everything that made the first "Die Hard" memorable — the nuances of character, the political subtext, the cowboy wit — has been dumbed down or scrubbed away entirely." Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" expressed similar sentiments, particularly of the direction, for which he says that Moore "has directed these sequences in a way that makes the incidents look so far-fetched and essentially unsurvivable that you can only laugh." Kenneth Turan of "The Los Angeles Times" gave the film a 2/5 and remarked that it lacked "inspiration," and that the onscreen rivalry of Willis and Courtney was "more irritant than enticement." Richard Roeper, standing in for Roger Ebert on Ebert's website, rated the film one and a half stars out of four, criticizing the implausibility of the action sequences, as well as the film's lack of sufficient characterization for McClane and the villains as compared to the other films in the series. He says that "McClane has been stripped of any real traces of an actual three-dimensional character," and that the film "never giv us a chance to get the least bit involved with any of these characters."
Among the rare positive reviews, Daniel M. Kimmel, writing for the "New England Movies Weekly", found the film to be better than "Live Free or Die Hard" and states that the car chase scene "is well worth the price of admission." With a 3.5/5 rating, Kimmel summed up his review saying, "t’s probably a good day to end the series at last, but it’s an action-packed and entertaining finale." Rick Groen of "The Globe and Mail" criticized the action scenes as being "messy," but concluded his review saying that the film "continues the franchise without undue embarrassment."
Box office.
As of February 24, "A Good Day to Die Hard" has grossed $51,802,000 in North America and $132,500,000 in other territories for a worldwide total of $184,302,000.
In North America, "A Good Day to Die Hard" grossed an estimated $840,000 from its 10PM and midnight showings at 2,328 locations on Wednesday, February 13, 2013. The next day, at an additional 1,225 locations, the film managed to accumulate $8,239,116, opening at second place behind "Safe Haven". However, for the whole 4-day Presidents' Day weekend, "A Good Day to Die Hard" opened in first place with $28,640,657, bringing its total at that point to $36,879,773.
Overseas, "A Good Day to Die Hard" grossed $10,860,000 in its first weekend. Opening in seven Asian markets at 1,182 locations a week before North America's release (February 6-7) to take advantage of the Chinese New Year holiday, the majority of the film's gross came from South Korea, with the film also setting a Fox record in Indonesia and a franchise record in Hong Kong.
