Crysis 3 is a first-person shooter video game developed by Crytek, published by Electronic Arts for PC, PlayStation 3, and Xbox 360 and released in North America on February 19, 2013. Inadvertently revealed by Electronic Arts in April 2012, then later officially announced on April 14th the game is the third main installment of the "Crysis" series, a sequel to the 2011 video game "Crysis 2", and will run on the CryEngine 3 game engine. It was one of the most anticipated upcoming games of 2013. "Crysis 3" has won PC Gamer Most Valuable Game, Game Informer Best of Show and Electric Playground Best of E3 awards.
Synopsis.
Setting.
Players take on the role of Prophet as he returns to New York in 2047, 24 years after the events of "Crysis 2". He discovers the city has been encased in a giant Nanodome created by the corrupt C.E.L.L. corporation. The New York City Liberty Dome is a veritable urban rainforest teeming with overgrown trees, dense swamplands and raging rivers. Within the Liberty Dome, seven distinct and treacherous environments become known as the Seven Wonders. Prophet is said to be on a "revenge mission" after uncovering the truth behind C.E.L.L.'s motives for building the quarantined Nanodomes. The citizens were told that the giant citywide structures were erected to protect the population and to clean these metropolises of the remains of the Ceph forces. In reality, the Nanodomes are C.E.L.L.'s covert attempt at land and technology grab in their quest for global domination.
Plot.
After the events of Crysis 2, Prophet's personality stored in Nanosuit assimilates and takes control over Alcatraz body. Joining with Psycho and a team of elite Nanosuit soldiers, he travels around the world looking for the Alpha Ceph from the knowledge he gained about Ceph existence during the events at Lingshan. One by one his team loses interest in the hunt believing that all Ceph are destroyed, until Prophet and Psycho finally traces the Alpha Ceph in Siberia, Russia, only to be disabled by CELL using K-Volts. CELL, now in search for global domination of land and technology betrays all the remaining Nanosuit soldiers and starts skinning the suit out from their body so as to recover the lost alien technology. Everyone involved in the Nanosuit program were either recruited or detained by CELL, including Scientists Nathan Gould and Claire Fontanelli. CELL runs out of Nanosuit soldiers to skin for alien technology that integrated with their suits, so the transfer of Prophet to the facility was requested. Locked in a storage device with powerful EMP shocks to keep him dormant, Prophet is transported to the nanodome in New York by CELL.
However, Karl Ernst Rasch comes to know about the corrupt intention of CELL and resigns from the post of CEO of Hargreave-Rasch Biotechnologies, deletes all the research done by him and Hargreave of Ceph Technology so as to stop CELL from acquiring it and secretly releases a brief video of Prophet's where-about, also describes the post scenario after the invasion of New York and the evolution of Ceph , thus requesting the resistance to free Prophet as only he can stop the CELL and put an end to their corrupt motives and then joins the resistance. Members of the resistance, including former nanosuit soldiers Psycho, Lazy Dane and Bandit, are able to free Prophet from the transport ship, which has docked at the New York nanodome.
Psycho explains that in Prophet's 20 year absence, CELL used Ceph technology to generate unlimited free energy. Eventually, CELL gained a monopoly over the power supply, and used it to drive everyone into debt. Those who could not pay were sent to "volunteer camps." A resistance movement formed in response to this. It eventually freed Psycho from the skinning labs, and he joined their ranks. Tara Strickland from Crysis 2 also helps the resistance politically as a senator, but is unable to do much due to CELL's political dominance. The source of CELL's power generation for the entire world, called System X, is also located in the abandoned and encased New York. It has grown into a jungle. Psycho wants System X destroyed to free the world from CELL. Prophet, though worried about his visions of the Alpha Ceph showing him the end of the world, agrees.
Psycho and Prophet enter the dome, fighting through CELL forces and feral Ceph Stalkers. They reach the resistance headquarters, where they meet Karl Ernst Rasch and Claire Fontanelli, the commander of the resistance. Rasch tries to convince her that Prophet is what the resistance needs to finally overthrow CELL. Despite affirmations from Psycho, with whom she seems to have a special relationship, Claire is skeptical of Prophet, ostensibly because of the extensive modifications, the integration of Ceph genetic material, and the deep integration with his suit. Grudgingly, she agrees.
Their first target is System X's outer defenses. Despite CELL's capacity for infinite power generation, CELL chose to power its defenses with a hydroelectric dam. Prophet hypothesizes that CELL does this because it fears something about System X. Prophet, who continues to have visions, disables the dam and then disables the System X facility. It is revealed that System X is the Alpha Ceph. An system program designed to kill the Alpha Ceph when necessary, activates but fails, and the facility self destructs. The Alpha Ceph fires a beam into the atmosphere to open a wormhole to the Ceph home world in the M33 Galaxy. Through this wormhole, they plan to send an invasion force to invade the planet revealing their true motives for inhabitating the planet since millions of years. The Ceph hivemind reactivates, and a coordinated Ceph attack ensues. Prophet resolves to kill the Alpha Ceph and end the threat once and for all.
Prophet learns that he must unlock his suit to defeat the Ceph. Prophet and Psycho head to the skinning laboratory to use the cradle to do this and to find out who was responsible for skinning Psycho. At the facility, they see firsthand the atrocities visited upon the Nanosuit soldiers by CELL. Psycho uses the cradle to remove the neural blocks put in place to prevent the Ceph from taking over Prophet's mind. It also lifts the restrictions on the nanobots in Prophet. They are now able to transform. Meanwhile, Psycho does more digging into his past, despite orders from Claire. He discovers that it was Claire who had skinned him and the others at the behest of CELL. Upset, he rebuffs efforts from Claire and Prophet to console him. Claire pleads that he was the reason she joined the resistance, and that she had no other choice. Prophet also claims that he had no other choice, and that he told him what he needed to know at the time of the Lingshan Incident. Psycho finds this unacceptable, as everyone has a choice. He hands Prophet the dogtags of Nomad, Aztec, and Jester, and leaves.
Prophet learns that because the Alpha Ceph is creating a wormhole, the CELL plans to use Archangel, a satellite based energy distribution platform that can draw power from the entire world's power grid, as a directed energy weapon to destroy all of New York and hopefully the Alpha Ceph. Unfortunately, firing it at the Alpha Ceph would cause a chain reaction that would destroy the whole planet. To make matters worse, the Ceph attack Claire and the resistance. Prophet races to rescue them, but the situation is so dire that Claire tells him to leave them, as they are only holding him back. Psycho shows up with a VTOL and rescues the resistance. They proceed to the Archangel control facility where they shut off the weapon before it unleashes enough energy to set off a chain reaction. Rasch, who had used Ceph DNA to extend his lifespan, is recovered in the facility, but is now under the control of the Ceph. He disables Prophet and tries the same on Psycho, but Claire blocks his attack and Psycho shoots Rasch. No longer under control, Rasch implores the group to leave as the Ceph tentacle renews its attack. Prophet, Psycho, and the injured Claire board the VTOL and engage in a massive air battle, eventually crashing. Claire, succumbing to her injuries, is forgiven by Psycho and dies. Psycho, laments to Prophet that he is powerless because he does not posses a Nanosuit. Prophet fights with Psycho, revealing that Rasch had incapacitated Prophet because of his integration with his suit, and that they only survived because of Psycho's humanity. Psycho, now going by his human name Michael, resolves to do the slaughtering and procures another VTOL to take the battle and Prophet to the Ceph.
Michael and Prophet kill the Alpha Ceph, destroying the wormhole device, but the beam powering the wormhole pulls Prophet into space. Now in orbit, Prophet sees a massive Ceph Ship, similar to the one in Lingshan, coming through the wormhole. His suit heavily damaged, Prophet almost gives up, but instead he pushes on. Recalling Archangel's immense power, Prophet hacks into the satellite and uses it to destroy the Ceph ship. This collapses the wormhole and ends the threat of invasion. In the explosion, Prophet is knocked off the satellite by debris and falls back to Earth. He impacts the water in Lingshan Island where 27 years ago the Ceph were initially discovered. When Prophet wakes up, he is in a house in Lingshan. In the background, there is a news broadcast of now the Senator Tara Strickland who announces that the remaining assets of the CELL corporation have been seized as part of the global recovery effort. The Nanosuit, now more symbiotic than ever before changes it's outer layer as a human body and restores original face of Prophet, thus technically ressurecting him as he grabs the dogtags of his deceased Raptor Team squad members thinking how much he sacrificed his humanity and his body in his quest for victory . He walks out to the beach, throws the tags into the water, and deciding to use his actual name "Laurence Barnes" from now onwards, walks back towards the house, cloaks repeating his famous taglines "They called me Prophet. Remember me."
Elsewhere, two frightened CELL troopers and three frazzled men hurriedly retreat down a corridor. They are being attacked and pursued by an unknown enemy accompanied by strange sounds. It is revealed that the three men comprise the CELL board of directors. A door closes without incident. The Cell troopers turn around and are shot. The three nervous men turn to find Michael sitting at a desk. He claims to have had spent some time at one of their hospitals, and he wants to file a complaint.
Development.
After "Crysis 2" received some criticism from many PC gamers because of the apparent design sacrifices made due to the limitations of the older console hardware, Crytek CEO Cevat Yerli stated that the PC version of "Crysis 3" will figuratively "melt down PCs" due to its highest image quality system requirements. The PC version of the game will require a DirectX 11 compatible video card and operating system. "Crysis 3" will utilize some of the newest features of CryEngine 3, such as displacement mapping, particle and volumetric fog shadows, improved dynamic cloth and vegetation, dynamic caustics, improved area lighting and diffuse shadows. Some of these advanced features will only be seen in the PC version with the game's highest image quality settings enabled.
A closed alpha version of the multiplayer was released to selected MyCrysis and Origin users on October 31, 2012. The map "Museum" and the game mode "Crash Site" were playable in the alpha version. The test began on November 2 and ended on November 9, 2012. A public multiplayer beta containing two maps ("Museum" and "Airport") and two game modes ("Crash Site" and "Hunter") was available for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 console platforms, as well as for the PC through Origin. 
The beta was made available on January 29, 2013 and ended on February 12, 2013. Crytek and EA announced that 3 million people participated in the beta.
Marketing.
Filmmaker Albert Hughes was commissioned to produce "The 7 Wonders of Crysis 3", a series of six short stylized videos, each of which features a different aspect of the game.
Reception.
"Crysis 3" has received generally favorable reviews from critics. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic rated the PlayStation 3 version 81.00% and 82/100, the Xbox 360 version 78.89% and 79/100 and the PC version 78.25% and 80/100.
