Once Upon a Time is an American fantasy-drama television series created by "Lost" and "" writers Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz,
that premiered on Sunday October 23, 2011, on ABC. The show airs Sunday nights at 8:00 pm ET/7:00 pm CT.
Series overview.
The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke, Maine, in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the "real world" town and robbed of their real memories by the Evil Queen, Regina (Lana Parrilla), using a powerful curse obtained from Rumplestiltskin (Robert Carlyle). The residents of Storybrooke have lived an unchanging existence for 28 years, unaware of their own lack of aging. The town's only hope lies with a bail bondswoman, Emma Swan (Jennifer Morrison), the daughter of Snow White (Ginnifer Goodwin) and Prince Charming (Josh Dallas), who was transported from the fairy tale world before she could be cursed. As such, she is the only person who can break the curse and restore the characters' lost memories, aided by her son, Henry (Jared S. Gilmore), with whom she has recently reunited (after giving him up for adoption upon his birth), and his book of fairy tales that holds the key to ending the curse. Henry is also the adopted son of Regina (who is the mayor of Storybrooke), providing a source of conflict between the two women.
Each episode focuses on a character backstory. One segment details the character's past life that, when serialized, adds a piece to the puzzle about the primary and/or secondary characters and their connection to the events that preceded the curse and its consequences. The other, set in the present day, follows a similar pattern with a different outcome but also offers similar insights. In addition, another storyline follows the results of what had happened after the curse took place and after it was broken by Emma.
Season One (2011–12).
The Evil Queen interrupts the wedding of Snow White and Prince Charming to announce that she will cast a curse on everyone and take away all their love so that she is the only one with a happy ending. Many of the fairy tale characters are transported to Storybrooke where most of them have been stripped of their original memories and identities as fairy tale characters.
Season Two (2012–13).
ABC renewed the series for a second season, which premiered on September 30, 2012. Despite Emma breaking the curse, which brings everyone's memories back, they are not immediately returned to the fairy tale world. With the introduction of magic by Rumplestiltskin/Mr. Gold into Storybrooke, the fates of the two worlds become intertwined, while a portion of the fairy tale world that was relatively spared by the curse is revealed. Captain Hook and Regina's mother Cora, the Queen of Hearts, emerge as a new threat.
Production.
Conception.
Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis conceived the show in 2004, prior to joining the writing staff of "Lost", but wanted to wait until that series was over to focus on this project.
Eight years previous to the "Once Upon a Time" pilot (the two had just completed their work on "Felicity", in 2002), Kitsis and Horowitz became inspired to write fairy tales out of a love of "mystery and excitement of exploring lots of different worlds."
They presented the premise to networks, but were refused because of its fantastical nature.
The two learned from their time on "Lost" to look at the story in a different way,
that "character has to trump mythology";
they expanded, "as people, you've got to see what the void in their heart or in their lives is to care about them ... For us, this was as much about the character journeys and seeing what was ripped from them in coming to Storybrooke – going at it that way as opposed to making it the 'break-the-curse show.
Despite the comparisons and similarities to "Lost", the writers intend them to be very different shows.
To them, "Lost" concerned itself with redemption, while "Once Upon a Time" is about "hope".
"Lost" co-creator Damon Lindelof aids in the development of the series as a consultant, but has no official credit on the show. Kitsis and Horowitz have called him a "godfather" to the series.
To differentiate the storytelling from what the audience already knew, the writing staff decided to begin the pilot with the end of the typical Snow White fairytale.
Themes concerning family and motherhood were emphasized, in contrast to the focus on fatherhood in "Lost". Kitsis and Horowitz sought to write strong female characters, rather than the classic damsel in distress. Horowitz stated their desire to approach each character the same way, asking themselves, "How do we make these icons real, make them relatable?"
The pilot is meant to be the "template of the series". Kitsis confirmed that every week will contain flashbacks between both worlds, as they "love the idea of going back and forth and informing what the character is missing in their life." The writers' desire to present a "mash up" of many small characters can be seen in a scene of the pilot, in which there is a war council featuring Geppetto, Pinocchio, and Grumpy. Horowitz elaborated, "One of the fun things for us coming up with these stories is thinking of ways these different characters can interact in ways they never have before."
The general premise, importing the Snow White core characters into the "real world", was previously seen on ABC television in the short-lived 1980s comedy "The Charmings".
The show has a similar premise to Bill Willingham's ten-year-old comic series "Fables", to which ABC bought the rights in 2008 but never made it past planning stages. After "Fables" fans raised controversy over possible appropriation, the show writers initially denied a link, but later said they may have "read a couple issues" of the comic book but while the two concepts are "in the same playground", they are "telling a different story." Bill Willingham responded to the controversy in an interview, where he stated he did not feel the show was plagiarism and "Maybe they did remember reading "Fables" back then, but didn't want to mention it because we've become a very litigious people."
Casting.
Horowitz stated that everyone they initially wanted cast in the series accepted their offered role after being sent a script. Ginnifer Goodwin was cast as Snow White, who appreciated that she would be playing a strong character that was fleshed out for the audience. The actress had just completed her work on the series "Big Love", and was looking for a new project; she turned to television after film scripts failed to interest her. Having said previously in interviews that she would love to play Snow White, Goodwin called her acceptance of the Snow White role "a no-brainer." Both Kitsis and Horowitz are self-described big fans of "Big Love", and wrote the part of Snow White with Goodwin in mind.
Joshua Dallas, who plays Prince Charming, was pleased the writers took "some dramatic license" with his character, believing the prince had become more real. He explained, "Prince Charming just happens to be a name. He's still a man with the same emotions as any other man. He's a Prince, but he's a Prince of the people. He gets his hands dirty. He's got a kingdom to run. He has a family to protect. He has an epic, epic love for Snow White. He's like everybody else. He's human."
Jennifer Morrison was hired for the part of Emma Swan. The actress explained her character as someone who "help her son Henry whom she abandoned when he was a baby and who seems like he's a little bit emotionally dysfunctional", but noted that Emma does not yet believe there is a fairytale universe. Ten-year old Jared Gilmore, known for his work on "Mad Men", took the role of her son, Henry.
The role of The Evil Queen/Regina went to Lana Parrilla. She explained the character, "There's always two stories being told when playing Regina. There's the threat of her knowing she's an evil queen and then there's just the pure simple fact that the biological mother has stepped into her world and the threat of losing her son is just enormous. That's a fear that I think any adopted mother would have. I think that's going to really help the audience relate to Regina in some level."
The role of Rumplestiltskin was given to Robert Carlyle; it was written with Carlyle in mind, though the writers initially thought he would never accept the part. Horowitz recalled Carlyle's prison sequence, which was the actor's first day on the set as "mind-blowing ... You could see Ginny actually jump, the first time he did that character. It was fantastic!" The writers offered the part of the Blue Fairy to recording artist Lady Gaga, but never heard back from her management staff.
For the second season, Meghan Ory as Ruby (Red Riding Hood) and Emilie de Ravin as Belle have joined the regular cast. New supporting characters for the second season include Princess Aurora (Sleeping Beauty), played by Sarah Bolger; Mulan, played by Jamie Chung; Prince Phillip, played by Julian Morris; and Captain Hook, portrayed by Colin O'Donoghue. On October 3, 2012 it was announced that O'Donoghue would be billed as a series regular beginning with the second-half of the second season (from episode 14).
Cultural references.
As a nod to the ties between the production teams of "Once Upon a Time" and "Lost", the new show contains allusions to "Lost", and is expected to be a continuing theme throughout the series. For example, many items found in the "Lost" universe, such as Apollo candy bars, Oceanic Airlines, Ajira Airways and MacCutcheon Whisky, can be seen in "Once Upon a Time". The town clock was stuck at 8:15, an allusion to Flight 815 from the "Lost" universe. An "Ultimate Wolverine vs. Hulk" No. 3 comic read by the character Henry in episode 9 of season 1 was written by "Lost" executive producer Damon Lindelof. In addition, former cast members of "Lost" have made recurring appearances on the series, with Emilie de Ravin being the first post-"Lost" regular to become a full-time regular on "Once Upon a Time". Jorge Garcia appears in the second season as the Giant from up above the beanstalk. Even Alan Dale was also a guest star on Lost and now a guest on Once Upon a Time.
The show, as a production of Disney-owned ABC, contains multiple allusions to the Disney versions of the stories that form the basis for the series. Snow White's dwarfs, unnamed in traditional versions of the story, here have the names they were given in the Disney film. When Snow White first meets Grumpy, he can be heard whistling the main chorus of "Heigh-Ho" from the Disney film version of "Snow White". Towards the beginning of "Heart of Darkness" as she sweeps the dwarfs' cottage, Snow White is heard humming "With a Smile and a Song", another song from the Disney film. Snow White also wears a red bow in her hair while singing the song. In "An Apple Red as Blood", the shot of the apple falling out of Snow White's hand is reminiscent of the shot in the Disney film. The Dwarves' hats are the same color as the hats in the animated movie.
Similarly, Sleeping Beauty was cursed by an individual named Maleficent, the name used in the 1959 Disney film for the wicked fairy godmother that lacked a name in many other versions.
In the second season Sleeping Beauty is called Aurora just like in the Disney movie and her love Prince Phillip also shows up to wake her from her sleep. There was also a spinning wheel next to Aurora while she was sleeping. She was also surrounded by thorns which Prince Phillip had to cut through.
Dr. Whale (Victor Frankenstein)'s name is a reference to James Whale, the director of the 1931 version of "Frankenstein". His realm resembles a black and white world like in the old monster movies.
In "The Price of Gold", Cinderella wears a blue dress to the ball just like in the movie.
Geppetto's fairy friend is called The Blue Fairy as in the 1940 Disney film, rather than the Fairy with Turquoise Hair as in Carlo Collodi's novel "The Adventures of Pinocchio", which the Disney film is based on; similarly, his conscience figure is called Jiminy Cricket rather than "the Talking Cricket". In the episode "The Stranger", when Pinocchio and Geppetto are on a raft in a storm, they are being chased by a giant whale, referencing the whale Monstro in the 1940 Disney film "Pinocchio", whereas in the Carlo Collodi story it was The Terrible Dogfish.
The episode "Hat Trick" contained numerous references to "Alice in Wonderland", specific to either the original story or the Disney version. Mary Margaret overpowers the Hatter with the first thing that comes to hand, a croquet mallet similar to the ones depicted in the Disney film. In the same episode the Mad Hatter's name, Jefferson, alludes to the 1960s psychedelia band Jefferson Airplane, who had a hit record with the song "White Rabbit". The mushroom Regina uses to make her father bigger appears in the 1951 animated film which Alice used to grow different sizes. The Blue Caterpillar appears on a mushroom smoking and says "Who are you?" which he says to Alice in the Disney film. 
Archie's Dalmatian, Pongo, is a reference to "One Hundred and One Dalmatians". The Genie of the Lamp claims to hail from Agrabah, the central location in the Disney animated film "Aladdin". In the episode "Skin Deep", a teacup with a chip in it is an allusion to the Chip character from "Beauty and the Beast", an ornate clock as a reference to Cogsworth and a candelabra in reference to Lumière. There was also a teapot in reference to Mrs. Potts. Belle's father is called Maurice just like in the movie. The costuming and the character of Gaston were also a nod to the Disney animation. Belle also wears her yellow gown and her blue and white outfit in the episode just like in the movie.
In Rumplestiltskin's castle was the scythe featured near the end of the final season of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", albeit colored differently. In episode 8 the true name of "The Dark One" is Zoso which is also one of the symbols in the album "Led Zeppelin IV". Regina also talks about a certain young mermaid she needs help with.
Henry has a "Tron" lunch box and Regina gave him a handheld video game device upon which he played "Space Paranoids", as seen in "What Happened to Frederick".
In the episode "Skin Deep", Mr. Gold confiscates a florist's truck reading "Game of Thorns", a reference to the TV series "Game of Thrones". Also in this episode, Mr. Gold moves a golden cup. This cup is alleged to be the Holy Grail.
In Mr. Gold's shop there is also a sorcerer's hat, alluding to Mickey Mouse's hat in the "Sorcerer's Apprentice" sequence in "Fantasia", and also a severed hand, an allusion and foreshadowing reference to "Peter Pan"'s Captain Hook.
In the season 1 finale "A Land Without Magic", Emma slays the dragon Maleficent with an overhead sword throw just like Prince Phillip did in the animated movie "Sleeping Beauty".
In the second season Mulan appears which is a character from a Chinese legend that the Disney movie was based on.
In the episode "The Crocodile", Smee, Hook's right hand man, wears a red cap just like in the Disney movie. Captain Hook calls Rumplestiltskin a crocodile and Rumplestiltskin cuts his hand off, but in the Disney movie a crocodile really did eat Hook's hand. Belle's interest of books is shown just like from the Disney movie and she becomes the town librarian.
In the episode "The Doctor" Jefferson mentions magic slippers that can transport the wearer between magical and non-magical worlds. This is a reference to the Silver Shoes in The Wizard of Oz.
In the episode "Into the Deep" the poppy Mulan uses to make the sleeping powder appears in both book and movie of The Wonderful Wizard of Oz.
In "Child of the Moon", Billy's fairytale counterpart is Gus, a mouse who used to live with Cinderella and there was a mouse named Gus in the Disney movie. 
In "In the Name of the Brother" Cora tells Regina that she pushed her through The Looking Glass that transported her to Wonderland, which is a reference to Lewis Carrol's novel Through the Looking Glass and What Alice Found There.
In season two, episode 14, "Manhattan", when Emma, Mr. Gold and Henry are searching the names listed on the building directory for Mr. Gold's son, the only listing without a name, which is assumed to be Mr. Gold's son, Baelfire (and Emma's ex-boyfriend, Neal), is apartment 407. 407 is a reference to Walt Disney World's Orlando, FL area code.
Opening sequence.
Beginning with the second episode of the first season, the opening sequence that appears below the show's title features a mythical creature, person, or an item that is tied into the episode.
Music.
Mark Isham composed the series' theme and music. On February 14, 2012, an extended play album featuring four cues from the score was released by ABC Studios. On May 1, 2012, a full-length 25-track soundtrack album with five different album covers was released by Intrada Records.
Setting.
The actual spread and scope of the Enchanted Forest is not currently known. Several independent kingdoms are implied by an array of different rulers, including Snow's father King Leopold (the kingdom later ruled by his widow (the Evil) Queen Regina); King Midas; Charming's (secretly adoptive) father King George (Charming and Snow rule his kingdom after deposing him); Cinderella's father-in-law; and Sir Maurice, Belle's father.
Storybrooke, Maine, is depicted as a typical oceanside small town. Although it has a "trapped in time" factor, modern conveniences such as the internet and TV broadcasts are available. Residents cannot remember how they came to live there or meet each other, but are unconcerned by this. It is established in several episodes, however, that residents affected by the curse are unable to leave the town limits of Storybrooke. The most notable exceptions are Henry, who is able to leave Storybrooke to retrieve Emma from Boston in the pilot episode due to him not being part of the original curse, but it was later learned that the only ones that were never affected besides Emma and Henry (Emma escaped the curse while Henry was born after it happened) included Regina, Cora and Killian, in part due to Regina enacted the curse while Cora and Killian were never under it. When characters have attempted to leave something prevents them, their cars break down and they get into some sort of danger. With Emma's arrival, the curse began to weaken, with clocks moving forward, crickets chirping, and Regina's apple tree showing signs of spoilage. Once the curse was broken, residents who passed the city limits found their newly restored memories of being fairy-tale characters erased; they only remembered their Storybrooke identities. Also, those who have magic powers will lose them upon leaving town, especially Regina and Killian.
The episode "Hat Trick" shows Wonderland of Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". It said that other worlds or universes exist; in "The Doctor", Dr. Frankenstein is brought to the Enchanted Forest for a short while, and later in Storybrooke (as Dr. Whale) expresses concern over whether "all" the worlds have disappeared. It was also revealed in "An Apple Red as Blood" that it can be possible to retrieve an item from the Enchanted Forest and bring it to the present day.
In the second season it was revealed that not all of the Enchanted Forest was cursed. The survivors were frozen for 28 years and just woke up when the curse broke. They established themselves in a safe haven, waiting for news of the rest of the Enchanted Forest.
Broadcast.
According to Disney, the series has been licensed to over 190 countries.
Reception.
Critical response.
The critical response to the series was generally positive. On Metacritic, it was given a score of 66 out of 100 with "generally favorable reviews".
E!'s Kristin dos Santos cites the show as one of the five new shows of the 2011–12 season to watch.
Matthew Gilbert of "The Boston Globe" gave the show a "C+" grade commenting "From a pair of "Lost" producers, this is a love-or-hate proposition. The ambition is impressive, as it asks us to imagine Goodwin's Snow White and Parrilla's Evil Queen as moderns. But Morrison is a wooden lead, and the back stories – a random collection of fairy talesdon't promise to surprise."
In a review from the "St. Louis Post-Dispatch", TV critic Gail Pennington hailed it as one of the "Most Promising Shows of The Fall" and, unlike Gilbert, had high marks for Morrison.
"USA Today"'s Robert Blanco has placed the series on its top ten list, declaring that "There's nothing else on the air quite like it." Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" preferred this series to another fairy-tale themed drama, "Grimm", citing that the premise takes its time building up the charm and that the producer "has that part nailed". She also gave excellent reviews for Morrison's character: "Her Emma is predictably cynical and prickly – fairy-tale princess, my Aunt Fanny – but she's sharp and lively enough to keep audiences begging for 'just a few more pages' before they go to bed."
Several feminist outlets were pleased with the show for its feminist twist on fairy tales. Avital Norman Nathman of "Bitch" stated that she liked the show for "infusing a feminist sensibility" into the stories.
Genie Leslie at "Feministing" commented that Emma was a "badass", that she liked how Emma was "very adamant that women be able to make their own decisions about their lives and their children", and how Emma was a "well-rounded" character who was "feminine, but not 'girly.
Natalie Wilson from "Ms." praised the show for a strong, "kick-butt" female lead, for including multiple strong women who take turns doing the saving with the men, for subverting the fetishization of true love, and for dealing with the idea of what makes a mother in a more nuanced fashion. Wilson went on to state about the lead: "Her pursuit of a 'happy ending' is not about finding a man or going to a ball all gussied up, but about detective work, about building a relationship with her son Henry, and about seeking the 'truth' as to why time stands still in the corrupt Storybrooke world."
Ratings.
The pilot episode was watched by 13 million viewers and received a 4.0 rating in Teens and Adults 18–49.
It was the season's highest-rated drama debut among Adults 18–49 and ABC's biggest debut in five years. With DVR viewers, the premiere climbed to 15.5 million viewers and a 5.2 in Adults 18–49.
The show's next three episodes had consistent ratings every week with over 11 million viewers.
The series has become the No. 1 non-sports program with viewers and young adults on Sunday nights.
The first season premiered as the top-rated drama series.
Awards and nominations.
"Once Upon a Time" was nominated for a 2012 People's Choice Award for "Favorite New TV Drama", but lost to "Person of Interest". The show was nominated at 39th People's Choice Awards in four categories: Favorite Network TV Drama, Favorite Sci-Fi/Fantasy Show, Favorite TV Fan Following, and Favorite TV Drama Actress (Ginnifer Goodwin); it lost to another ABC show "Grey's Anatomy" in the first category, "Supernatural" in the second two, and Ellen Pompeo in the last category. It was also nominated for "Best Genre Series" at the 2011 Satellite Awards, but lost to "American Horror Story". The show was nominated in this category again at the 2012 Satellite Awards, but lost to "The Walking Dead". The program also received three nominations at the 2012 Visual Effects Society Awards, but all lost to "Boardwalk Empire", "Gears of War 3", and "Terra Nova", respectively. At the 38th Saturn Awards, the series received a nomination for Best Network Television Series and Parrilla was nominated for Best Supporting Actress on Television, but lost to "Fringe" and Michelle Forbes, respectively. The show received trophies for "Favorite New TV Drama" and "Favorite Villain" for Lana Parrilla on the TV Guide.
The show was nominated at 2012 Teen Choice Awards, but lost to "The Vampire Diaries", "Pretty Little Liars" and "Awkward", respectively.
The show was nominated at 64th Creative Arts Primetime Emmy Awards, but lost to "Game of Thrones" and "The Walking Dead", respectively.
