Christoph Waltz (; born 4 October 1956) is an Austrian-German actor. Internationally, he is known for his works with American filmmaker Quentin Tarantino. He received acclaim for his portrayal of SS-Standartenführer Hans Landa in Tarantino's 2009 film "Inglourious Basterds", for which he won the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival and the BAFTA, Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild Award and Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor in 2010. He portrayed Dr. King Schultz in Tarantino's 2012 film "Django Unchained", for which he won the BAFTA, Golden Globe, and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
Early life.
Christoph Waltz was born in Vienna, Austria. He is the son of German-born Johannes Waltz and Austrian-born Elisabeth Urbancic, set and costume designers. His maternal grandfather, Rudolf von Urban, was a psychiatrist and psychologist who wrote the book "Sex Perfection and Marital Happiness" (Rider & Co 1952). His maternal grandmother was Burgtheater actress Maria Mayen, and his step-grandfather was actor Emmerich Reimers. His great-grandparents also worked in theatre.
Career.
Waltz studied acting at the Max Reinhardt Seminar in Vienna. He also attended the Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute in New York. He started as a stage actor, performing at venues such as Zurich's Schauspielhaus Zürich, Vienna's Burgtheater, and the Salzburg Festival. He became a prolific television actor. In 2000, he made his directorial debut, with the German-language television production "Wenn man sich traut". 
Before coming to the attention of a larger audience in Tarantino's "Inglourious Basterds" he had played, in 1990, the role of Dr. Hans-Joachim Dorfmann in the English-language TV series "Gravy Train". The show is a story of intrigue and misdeeds set in the offices of the European Union in Brussels. The series can be watched through Channel 4's player on YouTube. 
In Quentin Tarantino's 2009 film "Inglourious Basterds", Waltz portrayed SS-Standartenführer Hans Landa, aka "The Jew Hunter". Clever, courteous and multilingual, but also self-serving, cunning, implacable, and murderous, the character of Landa was such that Tarantino feared he "might have written a part that was un-playable". Waltz received the Best Actor Award for the performance at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival and received acclaim from critics and the public. In 2009, he began sweeping critics' awards circuits, receiving awards for Best Supporting Actor from the New York Film Critics Circle, Boston Society of Film Critics, Los Angeles Film Critics Association, and for Best Supporting Actor at the 67th Golden Globe Awards and the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards in January 2009. The following year, he won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor and won the BAFTA for Best Supporting Actor.
He is, , the only actor to win an Academy Award for appearing in a Tarantino film. Tarantino acknowledged the importance of Waltz to his film by stating: "I think that Landa is one of the best characters I've ever written and ever will write, and Christoph played it to a tee… It's true that if I couldn't have found someone as good as Christoph I might not have made "Inglourious Basterds"". 
Waltz later played gangster Benjamin Chudnofsky in "The Green Hornet" (2011); that same year he starred in "Water for Elephants", opposite Robert Pattinson and Reese Witherspoon, and in Roman Polanski's "Carnage" with Jodie Foster, John C. Reilly, and Kate Winslet.
He played German bounty hunter Dr. King Schultz, opposite Jamie Foxx, in Quentin Tarantino's "Django Unchained", for which he received the 2013 Academy, Golden Globe and the British Academy Film Awards for Best Supporting Actor. During a training accident prior to filming, Waltz injured his pelvis.
Waltz will be cast as the former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, in the movie Reykjavik based on the 1986 peace talks between the United States and USSR. 
Personal life.
Waltz is fluent in German, French, and English and speaks all three of the languages in both "Inglourious Basterds" and "Django Unchained". Although his character, Col. Hans Landa, also spoke Italian in the former movie, Waltz stated on the "Adam Carolla Podcast" that he does not actually speak the language in real life. He is his own voice actor for German translations.
He has three adult children from a prior marriage, and is raising a young daughter with his wife, costume designer Judith Holste. One of his sons is an Orthodox Jew studying in a Yeshiva in Israel (Waltz's first wife was Jewish).
Waltz lives in Berlin and Los Angeles.
Nationality.
Waltz was born to a German father in Vienna, who applied for him to become a German citizen after his birth. Waltz received Austrian citizenship in 2010 thus holding citizenships of both Austria and Germany, but considers his German passport a "legal, citizenship law banality". Asked whether he felt Viennese, he responded: "I was born in Vienna, grew up in Vienna, went to school in Vienna, graduated in Vienna, studied in Vienna, started acting in Vienna – and there would be a few further Viennese links. How much more Austrian do you want it?"
