Rita Sahatçiu Ora (born 26 November 1990) is a British singer-songwriter. In 2012, Ora released her debut album, "Ora" which debuted at number one in the United Kingdom. It also spawned three number-one singles "Hot Right Now", "How We Do (Party)" and "R.I.P." which made Ora the artist with the most number-one singles on the UK Singles Chart in 2012. Ora has a mezzo-soprano vocal range. Ora was nominated for three awards at the 2013 BRIT Awards, including the Brit Award for Best British Breakthrough Act.
Life and Career.
Early life and career start.
Rita Ora was born in 1990 in Pristina, SFR Yugoslavia (today Kosovo) to Kosovar-Albanian parents and moved to the United Kingdom when she was 1. She grew up around Portobello Road in West London, and attended St Cuthbert with St Matthias CE Primary School in Earls Court, following which she graduated from Sylvia Young Theatre School and then St Charles Catholic Sixth Form College. Today she lives in Kensington, London. Ora began singing from a young age. In 2004, she appeared in the British film "Spivs". She auditioned for "" on BBC One to be the British contestant for the 2009 Eurovision Song Contest but later withdrew from the competition after a few episodes as she did not feel ready.
In 2007, Ora had her first music release when she appeared on Craig David's track titled "Awkward" and then again in 2008 on "Where's Your Love" featuring Tinchy Stryder, for which she also appears in the music video. Ora began singing in bars in and around London, and in 2009 an A&R told Roc Nation about Ora, a few days after Ora flew out to New York and met Jay-Z. In 2009, Ora made a cameo on Jay-Z's video for "Young Forever" and "Over" by Drake. Ora caught the attention of Jay-Z and he signed her to Roc Nation, for which she was featured in a commercial for Roc Nation + Skullcandy Aviator Headphones.
"ORA" and Commercial breakthrough.
Throughout 2011, Ora released viral videos of herself working on her debut album. On 14 December 2011, DJ Fresh and Ora released the music video for "Hot Right Now" on YouTube. The single was released on 12 February 2012 and reached No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart. On 24 February 2012, Ora visited New York's Z100 radio station alongside her Roc Nation label boss Jay-Z, to premiere "How We Do (Party)", her debut single and the lead single from her upcoming studio album. "How We Do (Party)" borrows its familiar refrain from The Notorious B.I.G.'s "Party and Bullshit". She took two years to completely finish her first studio album. will.i.am, Ester Dean, Drake, The-Dream, Kanye West and Stargate all worked with Ora on her debut album.
When speaking about the sound of the album and its concept, Ora said it "definitely has pop in it, but (...) you can hear influences of jazz in there, you can hear influences of Monica and Aaliyah, and then you can hear Gwen Stefani.” She has also stated the album will be influenced by her father's record collection which, in addition to reggae, also includes such artists as Eric Clapton and B.B. King. Her first solo record, "R.I.P." featuring Tinie Tempah, was released as her first UK single on 6 May 2012. The video directed by Emil Nava was recorded in Hackney, East London, and released on 4 April 2012. Produced by Chase & Status, the song debuted at the top of the UK Singles Chart, becoming her first solo UK number 1, and second overall. In May, Ora became a guest judge on the ninth series of "The X Factor" in the UK, with the auditions filmed at the O2 Arena, London.
Whilst touring with Coldplay, she later announced that the album would be named "Ora". "Ora" was released on 27 August 2012 and debuted at the top the UK Albums Chart. Her video, "Shine Ya Light", sees the singer return to Kosovo from where she originated, riding with a flank of bikers and gigging for excited hometown crowds. Ora was nominated for Best UK/Ireland Act, Best New Artist, and Push Artist at the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards.
Ora will embark on her eight-date UK "Radioactive Tour" on January 28 through to February 9, 2013. On 14 January 2013, Ora revealed that her second album would be clearer and have more direction than her debut; "I definitely know what I want more and it's pretty straightforward with what I'm trying to say with this second album". Whilst on tour, Ora performed a song called "Fair", which she announced will be on her sophomore album which will be out near the end of 2013.
Ora will feature on the newest single from American rapper Snoop Dogg. The video for the track, titled 'Torn Apart', was shot in January in Thailand.
Artistry.
Influences.
Ora credits Gwen Stefani as her idol and biggest influence, saying in an interview “Do you know how much I love that woman? I love everything about her." Ora has also named Beyoncé Knowles as a major influence and a mentor, in addition to talking about her admiration at being able to have one of her idols, Knowles, gave her feedback on her debut album. Her other musical influences include Rihanna, Aaliyah, India.Arie, Christina Aguilera, Brandy, Monica, Madonna, Tina Turner, Aretha Franklin, Ella Fitzgerald, Etta James, Celine Dion, Bruce Springsteen, David Bowie, Vybz Kartel and Sade. Ora has mentioned her admiration for Rita Hayworth as an early inspiration for wanting to pursue an acting career. For fashion inspirations, Ora also cites Gwen Stefani as her most influential style icon. In addition to Stefani, Ora has drawn great inspiration stylistically from Marilyn Monroe and Daphne Guinness through fashionable trends in both vintage clothing and retro wear. 
Personal life.
Ora is of Kosovar Albanian ethnicity and possesses a mezzo-soprano vocal range.
