Girls is an American television series that premiered on HBO on April 15, 2012. Created by and starring Lena Dunham, "Girls" is a comedy-drama following a close group of twenty-somethings living in New York City. The show's premise and major aspects of the main character were inspired by some of 26-year-old Dunham's real-life experiences. On January 25, 2013, HBO renewed the series for a third season, which will consist of 12 episodes.
Series synopsis.
Aspiring writer Hannah gets a shock when her parents visit from East Lansing, Michigan and announce they will no longer financially support her as they have done since her graduation from Oberlin College two years prior. Left to her own devices in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, she and her friends navigate their twenties, "one mistake at a time." Allison Williams, Jemima Kirke, Zosia Mamet, Adam Driver and Alex Karpovsky co-star as Hannah's circle of friends.
Production.
Lena Dunham's 2010 second feature, "Tiny Furniture"—which she wrote, directed and starred in—received positive reviews at festivals as well as awards attention, including Best Narrative Feature at South by Southwest and Best First Screenplay at the 2010 Independent Spirit Awards. The independent film's success earned her the opportunity to collaborate with Judd Apatow for an HBO pilot. Apatow said he was drawn to Dunham's imagination and added that "Girls" would provide men with an insight into "realistic females".
Some of the struggles facing Dunham's character Hannah—including being cut off financially from her parents, becoming a writer and making bad decisions—are inspired by Dunham's real-life experiences. The show's unique and eclectic look is achieved by shopping at a number of vintage boutiques in New York, including Brooklyn Flea and Geminola owned by the mother of Jemima Kirke.
Dunham said "Girls" reflects a part of the population not portrayed in the 1998 HBO series "Sex and the City". ""Gossip Girl" was teens duking it out on the Upper East Side and "Sex and the City" was women who figured out work and friends and now want to nail family life. There was this whole in between space that hadn't really been addressed," she said. The pilot intentionally references "Sex and the City" as producers wanted to make it clear that the driving force behind "Girls" is that the characters were inspired by the former HBO series and moved to New York to pursue their dreams. Dunham herself says she "revere that show just as much as any girl of my generation."
As executive producer, Dunham and Jennifer Konner are both showrunners of the series while Dunham is also the head writer. Apatow is also executive producer, under his Apatow Productions label. Dunham wrote or co-wrote all ten episodes of the first season and directed five, including the pilot. Season one was filmed between April and August 2011 and consisted of 10 episodes.
Season Two premiered on Sunday, January 13, 2013 at 9PM on HBO and also consists of 10 episodes.
Cast.
Recurring.
Many of Dunham's co-stars are daughters of famous names in the entertainment and media industry. Jemima Kirke, a high school friend of Dunham who also appeared in "Tiny Furniture", is the daughter of Bad Company drummer Simon Kirke. Zosia Mamet is the daughter of playwright David Mamet and actress Lindsay Crouse, granddaughter of playwright Russel Crouse and great-granddaughter of writer and educator John Erskine. Allison Williams is the daughter of "NBC Nightly News" anchor Brian Williams.
Reception.
Critics lauded the show for its raw nature, humor, and refreshing tone. According to Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the series holds an average score of 87 based on 28 reviews, indicating "Universal acclaim". The website also lists the show as the highest-rated fictional debut series of 2012.
James Poniewozik from "Time" reserved high praise for the series, calling it "raw, audacious, nuanced and richly, often excruciatingly funny." Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" called "Girls" "one of the most original, spot-on, no-missed-steps series in recent memory." Reviewing the first three episodes at the 2012 SXSW Festival, he said the series conveys "real female friendships, the angst of emerging adulthood, nuanced relationships, sexuality, self-esteem, body image, intimacy in a tech-savvy world that promotes distance, the bloodlust of surviving New York on very little money and the modern parenting of entitled children, among many other things—all laced together with humor and poignancy."
Despite many positive reviews, several critics criticized the characters themselves. Gawker's John Cook strongly criticised "Girls", saying it was "a television program about the children of wealthy famous people and shitty music and Facebook and how hard it is to know who you are and Thought Catalog and sexually transmitted diseases and the exhaustion of ceaselessly dramatizing your own life while posing as someone who understands the fundamental emptiness and narcissism of that very self-dramatization." Renee Martin of Womanist-Musings.com described the show as being: "About a privileged group of vapid women whining about being forced to be even remotely responsible for themselves."
Following the season finale "The Huffington Post" TV critic Maureen Ryan positively reviewed the show, applauding Dunham's more realistic portrayal of women and their relationships than mainstream media tends to present. "Let's face it; The assumptions that media (and advertising) executives make about what and who consumers of different genders relate to and want to see are incredibly condescending...Relating to people who aren't exactly like us isn't a new thing. But to know that the healthy "Girls" audience is sticking with this kind of character—a woman who behaves in unlikable ways at times—is incredibly heartening. It upends a lot of conventional thinking that the television industry takes as a given."
"The New York Times" also applauded the series and said: ""Girls" may be the millennial generation's rebuttal to "Sex and the City", but the first season was at times as cruelly insightful and bleakly funny as "Louie" on FX or "Curb Your Enthusiasm" on HBO."
Controversy.
The premiere of the pilot was also met with criticism regarding the all-white main cast in the otherwise culturally diverse setting of New York City (the only black actors in the pilot were a homeless man and a taxi driver, and the only Asian actress had the sole trait of being good at photoshop). Lesley Arfin, a writer for the show, responded to the controversy with the comment: "What really bothered me most about "Precious" was that there was no representation of ME," Arfin tweeted; she later went back and deleted it following the uproar. Lena Dunham has given interviews where she talks about the diversity question with the series, stating that with HBO's renewal of the series for a second season, "these issues will be addressed." Donald Glover guest starred as Sandy, a black Republican and Hannah's love interest, in the first two episodes of Season 2.
Broadcast.
"Girls" premiered on April 15, 2012, on HBO in the United States. The first three episodes were screened at the 2012 SXSW Festival on March 12.
Although the series attracted modest ratings for the network, HBO renewed the series for a second season of ten episodes on April 30, 2012.
