Black Mirror is a British television drama series created by Charlie Brooker. The series is produced by Zeppotron for Endemol. Regarding the programme's content and structure, Brooker noted, "each episode has a different cast, a different setting, even a different reality. But they're all about the way we live now – and the way we might be living in 10 minutes' time if we're clumsy."
An Endemol press release describes the series as "a hybrid of "The Twilight Zone" and "Tales of the Unexpected" which taps into our contemporary unease about our modern world", with the stories having a "techno-paranoia" feel. Channel 4 describes the first episode as "a twisted parable for the Twitter age". Black Mirror Series 1 was released on DVD on 27 February 2012.
In November 2012, "Black Mirror" won the Best TV movie/mini-series award at the International Emmys.
Announced on 12 July 2012, the second series began broadcasting on 11 February 2013. Like the first series, it is made up of three episodes with unconnected narratives.
Robert Downey, Jr. has optioned the episode "The Entire History of You", to potentially be made into a film by Warner Bros. and his own production company Team Downey. 
Title.
Charlie Brooker explained the series' title to "The Guardian", noting: "If technology is a drug – and it does feel like a drug – then what, precisely, are the side-effects? This area – between delight and discomfort – is where "Black Mirror", my new drama series, is set. The "black mirror" of the title is the one you'll find on every wall, on every desk, in the palm of every hand: the cold, shiny screen of a TV, a monitor, a smartphone."
Format.
According to Brooker (speaking to "SFX") the production team did consider giving the series some kind of linking theme or presenter, but ultimately it was decided not to do so. "There were discussions. Do we set them all in the same street? Do we have some characters who appear in each episode, a bit "Three Colours: Blue/Red/White" style? We did think about having a character who introduces them, "Tales From The Crypt" style, or like Rod Serling or Alfred Hitchcock or Roald Dahl, because most anthology shows did have that... But the more we thought about it we thought it was a bit weird." 
Reception.
The series is popular and well-received in China, becoming one of the most discussed series in early 2012. User ratings on Douban reaches 9.3, with more raters than most popular American dramas.. Lu Huang at "Southern Metropolis Daily" praised the series as "better than a masterpiece". Many viewers and critics praised the depth of the series. A reporter of "The Beijing News" thought the programme was "an apocalypse of modern world", "desperate but profound". Another article from the same newspaper thought each story criticised television from different aspects. Xu Wen at "The Epoch Times" thought the stories reveal that the result of accepting unspoken rules is only to bite off their own head, and people suffer disaster when they enjoy science but ignore morality.
