John Felix Anthony Cena (born April 23, 1977)
is an American professional wrestler, rapper and actor. He is currently signed to WWE.
In WWE, Cena has won 19 championships in total, including 12 world titles (having won the WWE Championship a record 10 times and the World Heavyweight Championship twice). In addition, Cena has also won the WWE United States Championship three times, and is a four-time Tag Team Champion, having held the World Tag Team Championship twice (once each with Shawn Michaels and Batista), and the WWE Tag Team Championship twice (once each with David Otunga and The Miz). Cena also won the Royal Rumble match twice (2008 and 2013), the 2012 Money in the Bank contract for the WWE Title, and is a three-time Superstar of the Year Slammy Award winner (2009, 2010, and 2012). He has the fourth highest number of combined days as WWE Champion behind Bob Backlund, Hulk Hogan and Bruno Sammartino. Cena is the only man to fail to capture a world title upon cashing in a Money in the Bank contract. 
Cena started his professional wrestling career in 2000, wrestling for Ultimate Pro Wrestling, where he held the UPW Heavyweight Championship. In 2001, Cena signed a contract with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) and was sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW) where he held the OVW Heavyweight Championship and the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (with Rico Constantino).
Outside of wrestling, Cena has released the rap album "You Can't See Me", which debuted at No.15 on the US "Billboard" 200 chart, and starred in the feature films "The Marine" (2006), "12 Rounds" (2009), and "Legendary" (2010). Cena has also made appearances on television shows including "Manhunt", "Deal or No Deal", "MADtv", "Saturday Night Live", "Punk'd", and "Psych". Cena was also a contestant on "", where he made it to the final round before being eliminated, placing third in the overall competition.
Early life.
John Cena was born April 23, 1977, in West Newbury, Massachusetts, the son of Carol and John Cena, Sr. He is the second eldest of five brothers – Dan, Matt, Steve, and Sean. After graduating from Cushing Academy, Cena attended Springfield College in Springfield, Massachusetts. In college he was a Division III All-American center on the college football team, wearing the number 54, which is still used on some of his WWE merchandise. He graduated from Springfield in 1998 with a degree in exercise physiology, after which he pursued a career in bodybuilding, and also worked as a chauffeur for a limousine company.
Professional wrestling career.
Training (2000–2001).
UPW.
Cena started training to become a professional wrestler in 2000 at Ultimate Pro Wrestling's California-based "Ultimate University" operated by Rick Bassman. Once he was placed into an in-ring role, Cena began using a semi-robotic character known as The Prototype. Some of this period of his career was documented in the Discovery Channel program "Inside Pro Wrestling School". While in UPW, Cena held the UPW Heavyweight Championship for just shy of a month in April 2000.
OVW.
In 2001, he signed a developmental contract with the World Wrestling Federation (WWF) (now WWE) and was assigned to its developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW). During his time there, Cena wrestled as both The Prototype and Mr. P, and held the OVW Heavyweight Championship for three months and the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship (with Rico Constantino) for two months.
World Wrestling Entertainment.
Debut (2002–2004).
Cena made his television debut answering an open challenge by Kurt Angle on June 27, 2002. Inspired by a speech given by WWE Chairman Vince McMahon to the rising stars of the company, exhorting them to show "ruthless aggression" to earn a place among the legends, Cena took advantage of the opportunity to face Angle. Cena managed to counter the Angle Slam and the ankle lock submission hold, but ultimately lost to a hard amateur wrestling-style pin. Following the near-win, Cena became a fan favorite and started feuding with Chris Jericho, defeating Jericho at Vengeance. In October, Cena and Billy Kidman took part in a tag team tournament to crown the first WWE Tag Team Champions of the SmackDown! brand, losing in the first round. The next week, Cena turned on and attacked Kidman, blaming him for their loss, becoming a villain.
Shortly after the Kidman attack, on a Halloween themed episode of "SmackDown", Cena dressed as Vanilla Ice performing a freestyle rap. The next week, Cena received a new character: a rapper who cut promos while rhyming. As the gimmick grew, Cena began adopting a variant of the 1980s WWF logo – dropping the "F" – as his "signature symbol", along with the slogan " Life". Moreover, he was joined by an enforcer, Bull Buchanan, who was rechristened B-2 (also written B² and pronounced "B-Squared"). Buchanan was later replaced by Red Dogg, until he was sent to the Raw brand in February.
For the first half of 2003, Cena sought the WWE Championship and chased the reigning champion, Brock Lesnar, performing weekly "freestyles" challenging him to matches. During the feud, Cena unveiled a new finishing maneuver: the FU, a Fireman's carry powerslam, named to mock Brock Lesnar's F-5 because both moves start with Fireman's carry, with the first victim being Rikishi. Cena won a number one contenders tournament against Lesnar at Backlash. However, Cena was defeated by Lesnar. At Vengeance Cena lost a singles match against The Undertaker. At the end of the year, Cena became a fan favorite again when he joined Kurt Angle as a member of his team at Survivor Series.
United States and WWE Champion (2004–2005).
In early 2004, Cena participated in the Royal Rumble match at the 2004 Royal Rumble, making it to the final six before being eliminated by Big Show and the Match being won by Chris Benoit. The Royal Rumble elimination led to a feud with Big Show, which Cena won the United States Championship from Big Show at WrestleMania XX. During his reign, Cena came into contention with SmackDown General Manager Kurt Angle over issues arising with René Duprée and Torrie Wilson. The reign ended almost four months later, when he was stripped of the belt on July 8 by Angle after he accidentally knocked him over, thus attacking an official. Cena won the championship back defeating Booker T in a best of five series that culminated at No Mercy, only to lose it to the debuting Carlito Caribbean Cool the next week. After the loss to Carlito, the duo began a feud, which Cena was stabbed in the kidney while at a Boston-area nightclub by Carlito's bodyguard, Jesús. This worked injury was used to keep Cena out of action for a month, while Cena was filming "The Marine". Immediately on his return in November, Cena won the United States Championship back from Carlito debuting a "custom made" spinner-style championship belt.
Cena took part in the 2005 Royal Rumble match, making it to the final two. Cena and Raw brand wrestler Batista went over the top rope at the same time, ostensibly ending the match. Vince McMahon, however, appeared on stage and restarted the match in sudden death rules, with Batista eventually eliminating Cena. The next month, Cena defeated Kurt Angle to earn a spot in the SmackDown brand's WrestleMania 21 main event match, beginning a feud with WWE Champion John "Bradshaw" Layfield (JBL) and his Cabinet in the process. In the early stages of the feud, Cena lost his US belt to Cabinet member Orlando Jordan, who proceeded to "blow up" the spinner championship with JBL and returning a more traditional style belt. Cena defeated JBL at WrestleMania winning the WWE Championship, giving Cena his first world championship. Cena then had a spinner WWE Championship belt made, while JBL took the original belt and claimed to still be WWE Champion, until Cena reclaimed the original belt in an "I Quit" match at Judgment Day.
Cena was drafted to the Raw brand on the June 6, 2005, becoming the first wrestler selected by General Manager Eric Bischoff in the annual . Cena immediately entered a feud with Bischoff, after refusing to participate in the "war" against the Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) roster at One Night Stand. With Bischoff vowing to make Cena's stint on Raw difficult, he hand picked Jericho to take Cena's championship from him. During their feud, even though Cena was portrayed as the fan favorite and Jericho as the villain, a vocal section of live crowds, nonetheless, were booing Cena during their matches. More crowds followed suit during Cena's next feud with Kurt Angle, who took over as Bischoff's hand-picked number-one contender after Cena defeated Jericho in a You're Fired match on the August 22 "Raw". As the feud continued and the dissenters grew more vocal, sometimes seeming to outnumber fans by wide margins, the announce team was forced to acknowledge the booing on television and began calling Cena a "controversial champion", claiming some people disliking him on account of his "in-ring style" and his chosen fashion. Despite the mixed and negative reactions, Cena held on to his championship through his feud with Angle, losing to him by disqualification – which titles do not change hands in WWE – at Unforgiven and pinning him at Survivor Series. The feud with Angle also saw Cena add a secondary, submission based, finishing maneuver – the STFU (a Stepover Toehold Sleeper, though named for a Stepover Toehold Facelock) – when he was put into a Triple Threat Submissions Only match on the November 28 "Raw".
WWE Championship feuds and injury (2006–2007).
Cena lost the WWE Championship at New Year's Revolution, but not in the Elimination Chamber match that he had been advertised to participate in beforehand. Instead, immediately after winning the Elimination Chamber, he was forced into a match against Edge, who cashed in his Money in the Bank contract – a "guaranteed title match for the WWE Champion at a time and place of the owner's choosing." Two quick spears allowed Edge to pin Cena, winning him the championship. Three weeks later, Cena won the championship back at the Royal Rumble. After winning the championship, Cena began feuding with Triple H, which the crowd began booing Cena and cheering the intended villain, Triple H. Cena beat Triple H at Wrestlemania 22 to retain his WWE Title. The negative reaction towards Cena intensified when facing Rob Van Dam at One Night Stand. Taking place in front of a crowd of mostly "old school" ECW fans at the Hammerstein Ballroom, Cena was met with raucous jeering and chants of "Fuck you, Cena", "You can't wrestle", and "Same old shit". When he began performing different moves into the match, the fans began chanting "You still suck". Cena lost the WWE Championship at One Night Stand, with Van Dam pinning Cena after interference from Edge.
In July, Edge won the championship from Van Dam in a Triple Threat match that also involved Cena, re-igniting the feud between him and Cena from earlier in the year. After Edge went about retaining the title by dubious means – getting himself disqualified (for which Championships do not change hands) and using brass knuckles – he introduced his own version of Cena's "custom" belt, this one with his logo placed on the spinner. Cena eventually won the championship back in a match and arena of Edge's choice: a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match at Unforgiven at the Air Canada Centre in Edge's hometown of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. The match had an added stipulation that had Cena lost he would leave the Raw brand and go to SmackDown. Cena returned his version of the spinner belt on the next night's "Raw".
On the heels of his feud with Edge, Cena was placed in an inter-brand angle to determine the "Champion of Champions" – or which was the most dominant champion in WWE's three brands. Cena, the World Heavyweight Champion King Booker, and the ECW World Champion The Big Show engaged in a mini-feud leading to a Triple Threat match at Cyber Sunday, with the viewers voting on which of the three championships would be placed on the line. At the same time, Cena became involved in a storyline with non-wrestler Kevin Federline, when he began appearing on Raw with Johnny Nitro and Melina. After getting into a worked physical altercation with Federline on "Raw", Federline appeared at Cyber Sunday to hit Cena with the World Heavyweight Championship during the match, helping King Booker retain his championship. 2006 ended with Cena beginning a feud with the undefeated Umaga over the WWE Championship, while 2007 began with the end of his storyline with Kevin Federline. On the first "Raw" of the new year, Cena was pinned by Federline with an assist from Umaga, although later in the night he was able to get his hands on Federline performing an FU on him.
One night after the Royal Rumble, an impromptu team of Cena and Shawn Michaels defeated Rated-RKO (Edge and Randy Orton) for the World Tag Team Championship, making Cena a double champion. On the April 2 episode of "Raw", after losing a WWE Championship match to Cena at WrestleMania 23, Michaels turned on Cena, costing them the championship in the second of two 10 team battles royals, by throwing Cena over the top rope and eliminating the team. The Hardys (Matt and Jeff) eventually won the match and the championship. For the rest of the month, Cena feuded with Michaels, Orton, and Edge until The Great Khali declared his intentions to challenge for Cena's championship attacking and "laying out" all three of the top contenders before assaulting Cena himself and stealing the physical belt. For the next two months, Cena feuded with Khali over the championship, eventually becoming the first person in WWE to defeat him by submission at Judgment Day and then by pinfall at One Night Stand. Later that summer, Randy Orton was named the number one contender for the WWE championship, starting a feud between the two. Leading up to SummerSlam, Orton delivered a number of sneak-attacks, performing three RKOs to Cena, but in the actual match, Cena retained the championship. A rematch between the two occurred at Unforgiven, with Orton winning by disqualification after Cena ignored the referee's instructions and continued to beat on him in the corner.
During a match with Mr. Kennedy on the October 1, 2007 episode of "Raw", Cena suffered a legitimate torn pectoral muscle while executing a hip toss. Though finishing the match and taking part in the scripted attack by Randy Orton after the match, surgery the following day found that his pectoralis major muscle was torn completely from the bone, estimating at the time to require seven months to a year of rehabilitation. As a result, Cena was stripped of the title in an announcement by Vince McMahon on the next night's episode of "ECW", ending what was the longest WWE Championship reign in over 19 years. Cena's surgery was performed by orthopedic surgeon James Andrews at St. Vincent's Hospital in Birmingham, Alabama. Two weeks later, in a video update on WWE.com, Dr. Andrews and Cena's physical trainer both said that he was several weeks ahead of where he was expected to be in his rehabilitation at that time. Despite his injury, Cena attended the annual WWE Tribute to the Troops show filmed at Camp Speicher in Tikrit, Iraq on December 7, and aired on December 24.
Return and World Championship reigns (2008–2010).
Cena made an unannounced return as the final participant of the Royal Rumble match, winning the match, and the traditional WrestleMania title shot, by last eliminating Triple H. Instead of waiting until WrestleMania, the title shot was cashed in against WWE Champion Randy Orton at February's No Way Out pay-per-view in a match where Cena won by disqualification, resulting in him not getting the championship. The night after No Way Out, Cena was placed back into WrestleMania XXIV's WWE Championship match, making it a Triple Threat match also involving Triple H, during which he was pinned by Orton. At Backlash, Cena failed to regain the title in a Fatal Four-Way elimination match, in which he was pinned by Orton. Triple H won the title during that match. During the match, Cena eliminated JBL, renewing their feud from 2005. Cena defeated JBL at Judgment Day and then at One Night Stand in a First Blood match. JBL, however, defeated him in a New York City Parking Lot Brawl at The Great American Bash in July.
On the August 4 episode of "Raw", Cena became a World Tag Team Champion for a second time, teaming with Batista to defeat Cody Rhodes and Ted DiBiase, but failed to retain the titles the following week against the former champions. Batista defeated Cena at SummerSlam; shortly after, he was named one of four contenders for CM Punk's World Heavyweight Championship in the Championship scramble match at Unforgiven. He was replaced by Rey Mysterio, however, after announcing Cena had suffered a herniated disc in his neck, which would require surgery. Cena underwent successful surgery to repair the injury.
Cena made his in-ring return at the November pay-per-view event, Survivor Series, defeating Chris Jericho to win his first World Heavyweight Championship. The two continued their rivalry up to Armageddon, where Cena retained his championship. Cena lost the championship at No Way Out, to Edge after Kofi Kingston was attacked by Edge, who took his place in the Elimination Chamber match. Cena was given an opportunity to regain the title at WrestleMania XXV in a Triple Threat match also involving Big Show, which Cena won.
Cena lost the championship back to Edge in a Last Man Standing match at Backlash after interference from Big Show, who chokeslammed Cena through a big spotlight. This angle resulted in Cena beginning a feud with Big Show. Cena defeated Big Show at Judgment Day and at Extreme Rules in a Submission match by applying the STFU.
At the July pay-per-view, Night of Champions, he participated in a Triple Threat match for the WWE Championship, which also involved Triple H and WWE Champion Randy Orton. Cena, however, did not win the match. Two months later, at Breaking Point, Cena defeated Randy Orton for the WWE Championship in an "I Quit" match to win his fourth WWE Championship. At Hell in a Cell, Cena lost the title to Orton in a Hell in a Cell match. Three weeks later, at WWE Bragging Rights, Cena defeated Orton in a 60-minute Iron Man match. Cena would then successfully defend the title against both Triple H and Shawn Michaels in a triple threat match at Survivor Series, only to lose it to Sheamus at in a Tables match. 
Although Cena would regain the title at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view in an Elimination Chamber, his reign would be cut short after Mr. McMahon would make him defend the title against Batista, which he would go on to lose. Cena would defeat Batista at WrestleMania XXVI for the title, and would successfully defend it at Extreme Rules, defeating Batista in a Last Man Standing Match. Cena would go on to face Batista one more time in an I Quit match at Over the Limit which he won.
Feuding with and joining The Nexus (2010–2011).
On the June 7, 2010 episode of "Raw", Cena was suddenly thrust into a new storyline when during his main event match against CM Punk, he was attacked by all eight former contestants of WWE NXT Season 1, with Wade Barrett as their leader. Punk, his follower Luke Gallows, and other personnel around the ring were attacked as well, but Cena took the worst of the attack and was carried out on a stretcher. This group would later refer to themselves as The Nexus. At Fatal 4-Way, Cena would go on to lose the WWE Title to Sheamus, in a fatal four-way matchup involving Edge and Randy Orton, after the Nexus would interfere. Cena would again lose to Sheamus, in a steel cage match, at Money in the Bank after the Nexus would once again interfere. Cena would, in retaliation to the Nexus, form an alliance with Edge, Chris Jericho, John Morrison, R-Truth, The Great Khali and Bret Hart to face the Nexus at SummerSlam, where Cena's team defeated Nexus with the returning Daniel Bryan, a former member of Nexus, who replaced Khali after getting injured.
Hoping to end the Nexus, Cena would challenge Wade Barrett to a match at Hell in a Cell with the stipulations that if he were to lose, he would join the Nexus. After Barrett would defeat Cena, he would join the Nexus, and be forced by the Raw GM to follow their orders to avoid his contract getting terminated. Cena and fellow Nexus member, David Otunga, would defeat "Dashing" Cody Rhodes and Drew McIntyre to win the Tag Team Championship at Bragging Rights. Later on, Cena would be forced to help Barrett defeat Orton in a championship match, with Cena would do by giving Barrett the disqualification win. The following day, Cena and Otunga lost the Tag Team Championship to fellow Nexus members Heath Slater and Justin Gabriel, when Barrett ordered Otunga to lay down and lose the title. At Survivor Series, Cena officiated a match for the WWE Championship between Wade Barrett and Randy Orton. As a part of a pre-match stipulation, if Barrett didn't win the championship, Cena would be fired from the WWE.
Orton defeated Barrett to retain the title, thus terminating Cena's WWE contract. The following day on "Raw", Cena gave a farewell speech, before costing Wade Barrett the WWE Championship by interfering in his rematch with Randy Orton. A week later, Cena invaded "Raw", first as a spectator, but he then attacked members of Nexus, explaining that he would still take down Nexus one by one, despite not having a job in the WWE anymore. On the December 13 episode of "Raw", Cena was rehired by Barrett, in exchange that he would face him at in a Chairs Match. Prior to TLC, Cena teamed up with Randy Orton and Rey Mysterio to defeat Wade Barrett, The Miz and Alberto Del Rio at The WWE Tribute to the Troops. On December 19 at TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs, John Cena was victorious against Wade Barrett in a Chairs match in the main event of the evening.
On the December 27 episode of "Raw", The Nexus, minus Wade Barrett, announced they were under new management and offered to bury the hatchet with John Cena, to which Cena refused. The Nexus attacked Cena, leaving a Nexus armband in the ring during the process. As the group retreated, CM Punk, who had attacked Cena with a steel chair twice the week before, came to the ring to, what looked like attack John Cena, but instead put on the armband left behind to symbolically announce his allegiance with The Nexus. The next week, Wade Barrett returned to "Raw" and confronted CM Punk over the issue of who the leader of The Nexus was and who was responsible for Cena's attack the week before. Barrett was placed into a Triple Threat Steel Cage Match that night that would determine the No. 1 contender for the WWE Championship. CM Punk added his own stipulation to the match saying if Barrett lost, he would be banished from the group, but if he won he would remain leader. Wade Barrett would lose the match after CM Punk interfered by ripping of Barrett's armband.
On the January 17 episode of "Raw", Cena returned and faced Punk in a match. During the match, a man, who would later be revealed to be Mason Ryan, attacked Cena. During the 2011 Royal Rumble match, Cena would eliminate most of the Nexus, ending his feud with them.
Record-breaking WWE Champion (2011–present).
Cena competed in the 2011 Royal Rumble match at the pay-per-view, making it to the final five before being eliminated by The Miz, the current WWE Champion at the time, who wasn't an official participant in the match. At the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view, Cena won the chamber match to face The Miz at WrestleMania XXVII for the WWE Championship.
On the February 21 episode of "Raw", Cena replied to The Rock's comments about him from the previous week, as The Rock returned as the announced guest host of WrestleMania, in the form of a rap. That same night, Cena was placed into a WWE Tag Team Championship match, with him teaming with The Miz, where they defeated Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater to become WWE Tag Team Champions. After the match, Wade Barrett invoked Gabriel and Slater's rematch clause straight away, where they won their titles back after the Miz attacked Cena. Cena and the Rock would continue to feud with each other, on air and through social networking, though after weeks of insults, they would finally meet face-to-face. Cena would deny the Rock's claims to truly "love" the WWE, claiming that he used it only as a method to jumpstart his acting career, a claim which Johnson would angrily refute. After a brief attack by the Miz and Alex Riley, Cena would hit the Rock with the Attitude Adjustment. At WrestleMania, Cena and Miz would initially fight to a double count-out, only for the Rock to restart the match and hit Cena with a Rock Bottom to allow the Miz to retain. The next night on "Raw", Cena, in response to the Rock "screwing" him out of the title, would agree to face the Rock at the main event of WrestleMania XXVIII, making it the first match to be set up at WrestleMania one year in advance. At Extreme Rules, Cena would defeat the Miz and John Morrison to become WWE Champion. Cena went on to successfully defend the title against The Miz at Over the Limit in an "I Quit" match and R-Truth at Capitol Punishment
Cena would then begin to feud with CM Punk, who was leaving the company at Money in the Bank. Punk would be enraged at Cena and the Rock, calling the two phonies, already being announced to headline the next WrestleMania and would demand change. At Money in the Bank CM Punk would defeat Cena to win the WWE Championship, and would leave the company with the title. After Rey Mysterio would be crowned the new WWE Champion, Cena would challenge and defeat Mysterio to become WWE Champion for a record breaking ninth time, only to be interrupted by CM Punk, who too claimed to be champion. Punk would again defeat Cena at SummerSlam in a title unification match. After Alberto Del Rio would become WWE Champion by cashing in his Money in the Bank briefcase, Cena would become number one contender and would beat Del Rio at Night of Champions to become WWE Champion for the tenth time, only to lose it back to Del Rio at Hell in a Cell, in a Triple Threat Hell in a Cell match also involving CM Punk. Cena lost his rematch to Alberto Del Rio at Vengeance in a Last Man Standing match, due to interference by The Miz and R-Truth. After a few weeks of Miz and Truth attacking Cena and other employees, Cena was allowed to choose his partner to challenge Miz and Truth at Survivor Series. Cena would announce that he had chosen The Rock to be his partner. Leading up to Survivor Series, Cena and the Rock would continue to verbally assault each other, reiterating their points for their Wrestlemania match, while attacking the "Awesome Truth". At the pay-per-view, after Cena and Rock defeated Miz and Truth, Rock gave Cena another Rock Bottom.
On the December 12 episode of "Raw", during his match with Mark Henry, Cena was attacked by the returning Kane. Cena would then begin to feud with Kane, who would continue to attack Cena, crediting his digust for Cena's "Rise Above Hate" slogan and that Cena would need to embrance the hate in order to defeat the Rock at Wrestlemania. Cena, however, would fight Kane to a draw at the Royal Rumble, and then defeat him in an Ambulance match at Elimination Chamber
After Elimination Chamber, Cena and The Rock would start verbally attacking each other. At WrestleMania XXVIII, Cena faced the Rock in the main event match which had been building for a year and was billed as "once in a lifetime". Cena would go on to claim the match to be the most important of his life and that his win be a necessity, as nobody remembers second place. The climax of the match came when Cena made the mistake of attempting the People's Elbow on the Rock, as the Rock countered with a Rock Bottom to seal the victory.
The following night on "Raw", Cena addressed the Rock, admitting defeat and accepting the loss at WrestleMania; Cena then called the Rock the greatest WWE wrestler ever and invited the Rock to the ring so that he could congratulate him. However, Cena's call was answered instead by the returning Brock Lesnar, who then attacked Cena with an F-5. This would result in Cena feuding with the "RAW" General Manager John Laurinaitis, who revealed that he signed Lesnar to bring "legitimacy" and for Lesnar to become the "new face of the WWE". On April 29 at Extreme Rules, Cena defeated Lesnar in an Extreme Rules match. The following night on "Raw", Cena would be confronted and eventually attacked by Laurinaitis before declaring himself as Cena's opponent at Over the Limit. Cena would go on to lose the match against Laurinitis due to interference from Big Show. It would then further be announced by Laurinaitis that Cena would be facing Show at No Way Out with the stipulation that dependent on the victor of the match, either Cena or Laurinaitis would be fired. Cena would go on to win the match against Big Show and proceed to do the Attitude Adjustment on Laurinaitis through the announce table, while Vince McMahon would go on to fire Laurinaitis.
On the June 25 episode of "Raw", Cena announced that he would enter in his first Money in the Bank ladder match at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view to try and stop the Big Show from winning the contract. At the pay-per-view, Cena won the match by defeating Show, Chris Jericho, Kane, and The Miz, earning himself a contract that would grant him a shot at the WWE Championship anytime up to a year. On July 23 at "Raw 1000", Cena cashed in his Money in the Bank contract on CM Punk to have a match for the title; Cena won the match by disqualification after interference from Big Show, thus becoming the first person to ever cash in a Money in the Bank contract and not win a title. Show would continue to attack Cena until the Rock arrived to make the save. The following week on "Raw", a WWE Championship number one contenders match between Cena and Show ended in a no contest due to interference from Punk. Following this, both men were entered in the championship match at SummerSlam by "Raw" General Manager AJ. At the event, however, Cena would be unsuccessful in winning the championship as Punk would go on to retain the title once more. Over the next few weeks, Cena would continue to feud with Punk by refusing to call him best in the world and fighting him to a draw at Night of Champions. On September 20, Cena would be put out of action for six to eight weeks due to an arm injury, but would still attempt to compete for the WWE Championship. However, on the October 15 episode of "Raw", Cena opted out of a possible match at Hell in a Cell and instead thrusted Ryback into the title picture. On the November 5 episode of "Raw", Cena, along with Ryback, would be booked in a triple threat match for Punk's WWE Championship at Survivor Series while starting to feud with Dolph Ziggler over the topic of AJ Lee. However, at the pay-per-view, Punk would pin Cena to retain the championship. Despite this, Cena would continue to feud with Ziggler and on December 16 at faced Ziggler in a ladder match for his World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank contract on the line, but lost after AJ turned on Cena. The following night on "Raw", Cena teamed with Vickie Guerrero to face Ziggler and AJ in a mixed tag team match, however, the match ended in a disqualification after Cena was attacked by the debuting Big E Langston. Cena then defeated Ziggler on the January 7, 2013, episode of "Raw" in a singles match, and again in a steel cage match the following week, despite interference from AJ an Langston in both matches.
On January 27 at the Royal Rumble, Cena entered the Rumble at #19 and won the match after last eliminating Ryback, becoming the fourth wrestler (after Hulk Hogan, Shawn Michaels and Stone Cold Steve Austin) to win multiple Rumble matches. The following night on "Raw", Cena announced that he would pursue the WWE Championship at Wrestlemania 29, after which, he would be assaulted by The Shield. The following week on "Raw", Cena would gain vengeance on the Shield when he, along with Ryback and Sheamus, attacked the stable. This culminated in a six-man tag team match on February 17 at Elimination Chamber, where the Shield emerged victorious.
Other media.
Film.
WWE Studios, a division of WWE which produces and finances motion pictures, produced Cena's first movie — "The Marine", which was distributed theatrically by 20th Century Fox America beginning on October 13, 2006. In its first week, the film made approximately US$7 million at the United States box office. After ten weeks in theaters, the film grossed $18.7 million. Once the film was released on DVD, it fared better, making $30 million in rentals in the first twelve weeks.
His second film, also produced by WWE Studios, was "12 Rounds". Filming began on February 25, 2008 in New Orleans; the film was released on March 27, 2009.
Cena co-starred in his third film produced by WWE Studios, titled "Legendary", which was played in selected theaters starting on September 10, 2010, for a limited time, then it was released on DVD on September 28, 2010.
That same year, Cena starred in the children's film "", a film based on Lucas Cruikshank's YouTube videos of the same name, where he plays Fred's father. The movie was released on the Nickelodeon channel in September 2010.
Guest appearances.
Before his WWE debut, Cena made an appearance on the Internet stream show "Go Sick" as Bruebaker, an angry, cursing wrestler in 2001.
During his WWE career, Cena has appeared on ABC's "Jimmy Kimmel Live!" three times. Cena has also appeared on morning radio shows; including the CBS and XM versions of Opie and Anthony as part of their "walkover" on October 10, 2006. Other appearances have included NBC's "Late Night with Conan O'Brien", Fuse's "Celebrity Playlist", Fox Sports Net's "The Best Damn Sports Show Period", FOX's "MADtv", "G4's Training Camp" (with Shelton Benjamin), and two appearances on MTV's "Punk'd" (August 2006 and May 2007), as the victim of a practical joke. He also served as a co-presenter, with Hulk Hogan, at the 2005 Teen Choice Awards, as a guest judge during the third week of the 2006 season of "Nashville Star", and appeared at the 2007 Nickelodeon UK Kids Choice Awards.
In January 2007, Cena, Batista, and Ashley Massaro appeared representing WWE on an episode of "", giving the children of the family whose house was being renovated WWE merchandise and eight tickets to WrestleMania 23. Two months later, he and Bobby Lashley appeared on the NBC game show "Deal or No Deal" as "moral support" to long time WWE fan and front row staple, Rick "Sign Guy" Achberger. Edge and Randy Orton also appeared, but as antagonists. On April 9, 2008, Cena, along with fellow wrestlers Triple H and Chris Jericho, appeared on the "Idol Gives Back" fund-raising special. In March 2009, Cena made an appearance on "Saturday Night Live" during the show's cold opening sequence. On March 7, 2009, he was a guest on NPR's quiz show "Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!" in a Not My Job sequence titled "Sure, pro wrestling is a good gig, but when you win, do they throw teddy bears into the ring?"
Television.
In 2001, between his training in Ultimate Pro Wrestling and Ohio Valley Wrestling, Cena was involved in the UPN produced reality show "Manhunt". Cena portrayed Big Tim Kingman, leader of the group of bounty hunters who chased down the contestants who acted as fugitives. The show, however, was mired in controversy when it was alleged that the portions of the show were rigged to eliminate certain players, scenes were re-shot or staged to enhance drama and contestants read from scripts.
Cena was also featured on the ABC reality series "", which aired in June 2007, making it to the final round before being eliminated on June 24, placing third in the competition overall.
In 2007 Cena was also interviewed for the "CNN Special Investigations Unit" documentary, "Death Grip: Inside Pro Wrestling", which focused on steroid and drug use in professional wrestling. When asked if he had taken steroids he was heard to reply, "I can't tell you that I haven't, but you'll never prove that I have." The day after the documentary aired WWE accused CNN of taking Cena's comments out of context to present a biased point of view, backing up their claim by posting an unedited video of his answering the same question—filmed by WWE cameras from another angle—in which he is heard beginning the same statement with "Absolutely not". A text interview on the website with Cena later had him saying the news outlet should apologize for misrepresenting him, which CNN refused in a statement, saying they felt the true answer to the question began with the phrase "My answer to that question". They did, however, edit the documentary on subsequent airings to include the "Absolutely not".
Cena hosted the Australian Nickelodeon Kids Choice Awards with Natalie Bassingthwaighte on October 11, 2008 in Melbourne, Australia.
He guest starred as Ewan O'Hara in an episode of the fourth season of the comedy drama "Psych", as the brother of Juliet O'Hara, played by Maggie Lawson.
He also guest starred in the seventh episode of Disney Channel's Hannah Montana Forever as himself.
Make-A-Wish Foundation.
John Cena has granted over 300 wishes for Arizona children with life-threatening illnesses through the Make-A-Wish Foundation, and is the biggest wish granter in Make-A-Wish history. In 2009, Cena received the Chris Greicius Celebrity Award.
Endorsements.
Before his professional wrestling career, Cena appeared in an advertisement for Gold's Gym. As a wrestler he has endorsed the energy drink YJ Stinger, appearing in commercials beginning in October 2003, and Subway, for whom he filmed advertisements with their spokesperson Jared Fogle in November 2006 that began airing the next January. For a time in 2007 he also endorsed two "signature collections" of energy drinks and energy bars sold by American Body Builders. In 2008, Cena filmed a commercial as part of Gillette's "Young Guns" NASCAR campaign.
In 2009, Cena expanded his relationship with Gillette by introducing a new online campaign called "Be A Superstar" featuring himself alongside WWE Superstars Chris Jericho and Cody Rhodes. The campaign features motivational videos.
Fashion.
For the extent of his WWE career, Cena's attire has attempted to reflect the most current thug fashions and stylings within the hip hop culture that his character represents. Cena started out wearing "throwback jerseys" until WWE produced specific Cena merchandise which he began wearing. While Cena was a member of the "SmackDown!" brand, one of his WWE produced t-shirts bore the suggestive spoonerism "Ruck Fules". Whenever it appeared on television the image was censored, not by the network, but by WWE to sell more shirts under the premise that it was "too hot for TV." He also wore a chain with a large padlock, occasionally using it as a weapon, until WrestleMania 21, when it was replaced with a chromed and diamond studded "Chain Gang" spinner medallion—reminiscent of the ones worn by members of G-Unit—matching his spinner title belt.
Around the time "The Marine" was released, Cena began wearing attire more military related, including camouflage shorts, dog tags, a Marine soldier cap and a WWE produced shirt with the legend "Chain Gang Assault Battalion." Shortly after WrestleMania 23, when promotion for The Marine ended, the military attire diminished and was replaced with apparel bearing his new slogan "American Made Muscle" along with denim shorts, not seen since he was a member of the SmackDown roster. He then wore shirts that promoted Cenation and his trademark line "You Can't See Me." From late 2011 until Wrestlemania XXVIII, Cena again switched to camo shorts (honoring the U.S. Armed Forces), to coinincide with his black "Rise Above Hate" T-shirt promoting WWE's "Be a Star" anti-bullying campaign. On September 16, 2012, Cena debuted a new pink and black t-shirt and cap combo with the phrase "Rise Above Cancer" that he wore through October in partnership with Susan G. Komen for the Cure in honor of breast cancer awareness month.
Music.
In addition to his wrestling career, Cena is a rapper and a hip hop musician. Cena performed his fifth WWE theme song, "Basic Thugonomics," himself, and it was featured on the WWE soundtrack album "WWE Originals". He also recorded a song,"Untouchables", for the company's next soundtrack album "". He collaborated on the song along with Murs, E-40, and Chingo Bling.
Cena's debut album, "You Can't See Me", was recorded with his cousin Tha Trademarc. It features, amongst other songs, his entrance theme, "The Time is Now", and the single "Bad, Bad Man", for which a music video was made that parodied 1980s culture, including the television show "The A-Team". A video was also made for the second single, "Right Now," and premiered on the August 8 "Raw". Cena and Tha Trademarc were later featured on a track by The Perceptionists named "Champion Scratch." Cena will appear on Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins' upcoming album "Still Cool" featuring other guests.
Personal life.
Cena writes left-handed. He is a fan of Japanese anime and has mentioned that his favorite anime movie is "Fist of the North Star". He has also said he is a fan of the video game series "Command & Conquer" and noted that it was his favorite game. Cena is also a fan of the Boston Red Sox, Tampa Bay Rays, New England Patriots, Boston Celtics and English Premier League club Tottenham Hotspur, and Scottish premier league side Celtic F.C..Cena collects muscle cars and has over 20, some of which are one-of-a-kind.
While promoting his 2009 film, "12 Rounds", Cena announced his engagement to his girlfriend Elizabeth Huberdeau. They were married on July 11, 2009. On May 1, 2012, Cena filed for a divorce, and the divorce was settled by July 18. In November 2012, TMZ reported that Cena is dating former WWE Diva Nikki Bella.
Championships and accomplishments.
1 Cena did not accept the 2012 award, opting to award it to presenter Ric Flair instead.
