Watch Dogs (stylised as WATCH_DOGS) is an upcoming open world action-adventure video game, developed by Ubisoft Montreal for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, PlayStation 4, Wii U, and the Xbox 360. "Watch Dogs" centers on the player's ability to hack into various electronic systems, either to obtain and control information or to destroy those devices completely at specific times. The game was first unveiled during Ubisoft's press conference at E3 2012.
Gameplay.
"Watch Dogs" is an open world video game in which players control a man named Aiden Pearce (voiced by Noam Jenkins), who can hack into various electronic devices tied to the city's central operating system (ctOS), allowing various methods for the player to solve numerous objectives. Examples include hacking into people's phones to retrieve bank data and steal funds, triggering malfunctions in equipment to distract other characters and hacking into traffic lights to cause collisions. Players can also receive information on civilians via augmented reality feeds, providing the player with information on demographics, health and potential behaviour. Objectives showcased in presentations include finding specific targets to kill, evading the police and following potential victims in order to stop their would-be killers. Combat utilizes a combination of stealth components and parkour, along with the mechanics of a cover-based third-person shooter. The game features an elusive online multiplayer element in which another player can control surveillance cameras in an attempt to hack the main player.
Plot.
The storyline of "Watch Dogs" is built around the concept of information warfare, data being interconnected, and the world's increasing use of technologyquestioning who exactly runs the computers they depend on. The game is set in an alternate reality version of Chicago, Illinois, which is one of many cities to feature a supercomputer known as a "CtOS" (Central Operating System). The system controls almost every piece of technology in the city, and contains information on all of the city's residents and activities which can be used for various purposes. In the game's universe, the Northeast blackout of 2003 was found to be caused by a hacker, prompting the development of CtOS. The game will follow an anti-hero named Aiden Pearce, a highly skilled hacker described as a person who uses both "fists and wits." The gameplay demo shown at E3 depicted Aiden's attempt to assassinate a media mogul named Joseph DeMarco, who had been wrongly acquitted on charges of murder.
Development.
Ubisoft Montreal, well known for their work on the "Far Cry" and "Assassin's Creed" series, began development work on "Watch Dogs" in 2010. Ubisoft Montreal's Creative director Jonathan Morin noted that "Watch Dogs" is designed to "go beyond the limits of today's open world games", referencing both its use of information as a plot point, and allowing players to control the entire city through its hacking mechanics. 
The game was officially unveiled during Ubisoft's press conference at E3 2012. Although a copy of the trailer was accidentally posted early by Ubisoft's YouTube channel, it was quickly removed shortly before its official debut. Ubisoft has since confirmed that the game will be released for Microsoft Windows.
On February 15, 2013, an upcoming promotional image of the game was sent to Kotaku by a GameStop employee, along with more story details. Photos of the flyer suggested that "Watch Dogs" would arrive in Christmas 2013 for "all home consoles". The "all home consoles" quote and potential launch window, alongside the press quotes which call the game a "truly next-gen adventure", created debate whether it was a hint at a PS4/next-Xbox release or a Wii U release. On February 19, retailers including Amazon, GameStop, and Best Buy listed a Wii U version for pre-order. During the Sony press conference on February 20, 2013, "Watch Dogs" was confirmed to be released on the PlayStation 4. Another demo of the game was also shown at the press conference. Following the evening, the Wii U version was officially confirmed in a Ubisoft press release. On February 22, 2013, the official box art was revealed showing a masked Pearce holding his smartphone and a gun.
Reception.
Pre-release.
The gameplay demo of the PC version of "Watch Dogs" at E3 was immediately met with positive reception from critics following the press event, praising the game for its "next gen"-quality graphics and its unique gameplay. The game received numerous Best of E3 awards, including a Best of Show award from GamingExcellence. IGN selected it as Best PC Game of E3, as well as Biggest Surprise and Best New Franchise.
