Mumford & Sons are an English folk rock band. The band consists of Marcus Mumford (lead vocals, guitar, drums, mandolin), Ben Lovett (vocals, keyboards, accordion, drums), Winston Marshall (vocals, banjo, guitar, resonator guitar), and Ted Dwane (vocals, string bass, drums, guitar). Mumford & Sons were formed in December 2007, emerging out of West London, with such artists as Laura Marling, Johnny Flynn and Noah and the Whale.
Mumford & Sons recorded an EP, "Love Your Ground", and performed in small to moderate venues in the UK and the United States to expose audiences to their music and build support for an eventual album. Their debut album, "Sigh No More", was released in the UK and Ireland in October 2009, and February 2010 in the US. The album reached number one in Ireland, Australia and New Zealand, and eventually peaked at number two on the UK Albums Chart and the "Billboard" 200 in the US. The band gained popularity throughout 2010, performing for larger audiences and making their first network television appearances in the US. On 1 December 2010, the band received two Grammy Award nominations, one for Best New Artist and the other for Best Rock Song ("Little Lion Man"). The ensuing live performance at the Grammy ceremony in February 2011 led to increased airplay and popularity for singles from "Sigh No More". The band won the ARIA Music Award for Most Popular International Artist in 2010, and the Brit Award in 2011 for Best British Album.
The band's second studio album "Babel" was released in September 2012. The album debuted at number one in the UK and US, becoming the fastest selling album of 2012 in the UK, and the second-biggest selling debut in 2012 in the US. At the 2013 Grammy Awards, "Babel" won the Grammy Award for Album of the Year. In 2013 the band won a Brit Award for Best British Group.
History.
Early years: 2007–2008.
Mumford & Sons was formed in December 2007 by multi-instrumentalists Marcus Mumford, Ben Lovett, Winston Marshall, and Ted Dwane. Band members variously play guitar, drums, keyboard instruments, bass guitar, and traditional folk instruments such as banjo, mandolin,and resonator guitar. The band name originates from the fact that Marcus Mumford was the most visible member, organising the band and their performances. Lovett indicated that the name was meant to invoke the sense of an "antiquated family business name". A handful of similar bands were increasing their visibility in West London around the same time, giving rise to the label "West London folk scene". Mumford downplays that characterisation as an exaggeration—Mumford & Sons and a few other folk acts just happened to be operating in the same general area at the time. In an interview with the "Herald Sun", Marcus Mumford said, "It's not folk really. Well, some of it is, and it's certainly not a scene. Someone got over-excited about a few bands who live in a hundred-mile radius and put it in a box to sell it as a package. It's a community, not a scene. It's not exclusive." Having developed in the same musical and cultural environment, Mumford & Sons' sound has been compared to that of artists such as Noah and the Whale, Johnny Flynn, and Laura Marling, for whom Marcus Mumford used to drum.
In early 2008 the band began working with manager Adam Tudhope, who, as part of management company Everybody's, also represents Keane and Laura Marling. It was through Tudhope's connection that Mumford & Sons were exposed to their future A&R at Island, Louis Bloom, who began monitoring the band. Bloom told HitQuarters that they were still at a fledgling state and not yet ready for a label deal: "There was no one there for it, just a few friends, and they needed time to develop. Over the next six months I kept going to see them and they were literally picking up fans every time."
In February 2008, the band completed an extensive UK tour with support from Alessi's Ark, Sons of Noel and Adrian, Peggy Sue, and others. June 2008 marked the band's first appearance at the Glastonbury Festival. Mumford also toured Australia with Laura Marling, whose disinclination to interact with audiences encouraged Mumford into the spotlight. The experience helped inform his attitude toward Mumford & Sons audiences, which is to interact frequently and to try to create a comfortable, casual atmosphere. Mumford & Sons' first project was an EP entitled "Love Your Ground" which took a year to complete and was released in November 2008 on Chess Club Records.
"Sigh No More": 2009–2010.
Throughout 2008 and into 2009, Mumford & Sons performed in small to moderate venues in the UK and US, exposing audiences to "Love Your Ground" tracks and other material that would eventually become "Sigh No More". The band finally recorded "Sigh No More" with Markus Dravs, who had produced albums with artists such as Arcade Fire. At the time, band members did not even own their own instruments—Dravs initially turned them away when they showed up at the recording sessions empty-handed. The only track from "Love Your Ground" to be included on "Sigh No More" was "Little Lion Man". The band told the "Herald Sun" that they self-financed the album to avoid the artistic and technical compromises that sometimes befall studio-financed projects. They toured again in support of Laura Marling in 2009, and Mumford & Sons were contributing musicians to her 2010 album "I Speak Because I Can".
In August 2009, Mumford & Sons signed a licensing deal to Island Records in the UK, to Dew Process in Australia and New Zealand, to Glassnote Records in North America and Cooperative Music in the rest of the world, and through its own label Gentlemen of the Road. Dew Process boss Paul Piticco signed the band after having seen it at a US gig in 2009 and having appreciated its "honest" approach and unique sound. Their debut album was released on 5 October 2009 with "Little Lion Man" as the lead single. 
Dave Berry of XFM named "Little Lion Man" his record of the week, and in another interview with the band, Berry said "Screw 'of the week', it's my favourite track of the year." BBC Radio 1 DJ Zane Lowe made "Little Lion Man" his "Reaction Record" on 27 July 2009, before naming it the "Hottest Record in the World" the following evening.
In their first performance on US network television, the band played their single "Little Lion Man" on CBS's "Late Show with David Letterman" on 17 February 2010. This appearance was followed by a performance of "The Cave" on "The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" on 26 February 2010. Mumford & Sons have been commercially successful in Australia and New Zealand. The single "Little Lion Man" has been popular—by January 2010, it had topped the Triple J Hottest 100 list for all of 2009. Its margin of victory was the largest in the history of the chart. In November 2010, the band won an ARIA Music Award for Most Popular International Artist. "Sigh No More" first reached number 9 on the New Zealand charts in October 2010, and subsequently topped the chart in January 2011 due to strong popularity of singles from the album.
In a March 2010 interview, Ray Davies announced that Mumford & Sons will be appearing on his forthcoming collaborations album. Marcus confirmed this in an interview the same month, stating, "I am more excited about that than I have been about anything before in my life". Mumford & Sons performed the track "Days/This Time Tomorrow" along with Davies on 12 February 2010 on "Later... with Jools Holland".
In December 2010, Mumford & Sons earned Grammy Award nominations for Best New Artist and Best Rock Song ("Little Lion Man"). While they did not go on to win an award, the band performed their single "The Cave" at the Grammy ceremony. The performance earned positive media attention and boosted visibility for "Sigh No More"—US sales increased by 99% in the period following the ceremony in February 2011. The album subsequently peaked at number two on the UK Album Chart and the Billboard 200 in the US.
On 7 December 2010, in collaboration with Dharohar Project and Laura Marling, Mumford & Sons released an EP album recorded in Delhi, India. The album was recorded in a makeshift studio with traditional Rajasthani musicians and features four collaborations, including multicultural mash-ups of Marling's spirited "Devil's Spoke" and Mumford & Sons' "To Darkness." "Sigh No More" is certified 2x Platinum in the US and 4x Platinum in the UK.
Railroad Revival Tour.
In April 2011 the group joined Old Crow Medicine Show and Edward Sharpe and the Magnetic Zeros on the inaugural Railroad Revival Tour, which was inspired by the Festival Express tour across Canada in 1970 that included Buddy Guy, Janis Joplin, The Grateful Dead, and The Band. Travelling exclusively in vintage rail cars, the three bands performed in six "unique outdoor locations" over the course of a week starting in Oakland, California. Ketch Secor of Old Crow told "American Songwriter" that "It’s like we left all our baggage at home and just brought our instruments," often writing new songs while on the train. "We were just on these old rattling rails. It was a railroad odyssey that would have made Woody and Doc tip their hats and blow their whistles," he says. They appear in the musical documentary "Big Easy Express", directed by Emmett Malloy, being made of the trip which premiered March 2012 at the South by Southwest Film Conference and Festival (SXSW Film) in Austin, Texas—winning the Headliner Audience Award. The film went on to win "Best Long Form Video" at the 2013 Grammy Awards. 
"Babel": 2011–present.
The band continued to grow in popularity in 2011, winning several major awards and headlining larger shows and festivals. In February 2011, they received a European Border Breakers Award for their international success. They received a Brit Award for British Album of the Year with "Sigh No More" and performed "Timshel" at the ceremony. UK sales of the album subsequently increased by 266 percent. While touring the United States in early 2011, the band began writing songs for the follow-up album. Keyboardist Ben Lovett credited the creative atmosphere of Nashville, Tennessee with easing the songwriting process. While performing in Kansas City, Missouri on 3 June, the first stop of their US Tour, the band announced they had been recording a new album, initially set to be released in late 2011. They then performed several new tracks from the forthcoming album, the title of which was not revealed.
Mumford & Sons played at the Glastonbury festival on Friday 24 June 2011, and then embarked on a North American tour on which they frequently performed songs from the upcoming album. They recorded two songs for Andrea Arnold's adaptation of "Wuthering Heights", one of which (entitled "Enemy") is featured during the closing credits. In June 2012, Mumford & Sons contributed the song "Learn Me Right" with Birdy to the Pixar film "Brave", which came to be called "Not with Haste".
On 16 July 2012, Mumford & Sons officially announced the details of their second studio album "Babel", including the release date of 24 September 2012 and a track listing of 12 songs. A deluxe edition containing three exclusive songs was also announced. A week later, the album became available for pre-order. The lead single "I Will Wait" premiered on Zane Lowe's BBC Radio 1 show on 7 August. On 29 August 2012, Mumford & Sons recorded their concert at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Colorado. The Concert was later released on DVD, Vinyl and on iTunes as "Road to Red Rocks". The performance of "I Will Wait" from the concert was released ahead of the DVD on 9 September as the band's official video for the song. On 22 September 2012, the band performed two songs from the new album, "I Will Wait" and "Below My Feet", on "Saturday Night Live".
"Babel" debuted at number one on the UK Album Chart and the US Billboard 200. It became the fastest selling album of 2012 in the UK, selling over 158,000 copies in its first week, and was the biggest selling debut of any album in 2012 in the US, selling 600,000 in its first week, and over a million worldwide. The first phase of a 2013 tour in support of "Babel" was released in November 2012.
In December 2012, Winston Marshall told NME that the band already have begun rehearsing and writing for their next album. Marcus Mumford stated that the band may experiment with electric guitars and synthesisers for the album.
Musical style and influences.
The band uses bluegrass and folk instrumentation, such as a banjo, upright bass, mandolin and piano, played with a rhythmic style based in alternative rock and folk. Much of Mumford & Sons' lyrical content has a strong literary influence, its debut album name deriving from William Shakespeare's "Much Ado About Nothing". The track "Sigh No More" includes lines from the play such as "Serve God love me and mend", "For man is a giddy thing", and "One foot in sea and one on shore." The song "Roll Away Your Stone," whose title is most probably a reference to Biblical story of Lazarus (though it may also reference the myth of Sisyphus), alludes to "Macbeth"; the song includes the line "Stars hide your fires/And these here are my desires" which borrows and pares down Macbeth's line in Act 1 Scene 4:"Stars, hide your fires,/Let not light see my black and deep desires." In an interview, Mumford was quoted as saying, "You can rip off Shakespeare all you like; no lawyer's going to call you up on that one." Additionally, "The Cave" includes several references to "The Odyssey", in particular the sirens that Odysseus encounters on his journey home. The song also contains many references to G.K. Chesterton's book, "St. Francis of Assisi", in which Chesterton uses Plato's Cave as a way of explaining how St. Francis views the world from God's perspective. In addition, the song "Little Lion Man" appears to be a retelling in dramatic monologue form of Chretien de Troyes' "Yvain, the Knight of the Lion", which is the story of a knight who goes mad after betraying a promise to his wife to return to her.
Both "Timshel" and "Dust Bowl Dance" draw heavily from the John Steinbeck novels "Of Mice and Men", "East of Eden" and "The Grapes of Wrath". Mumford, in an interview, even compared touring to a Steinbeck adventure: " talked about how a journey is a thing of its own, and you can't plan it or predict it too much because that suffocates the life out it. That's kind of what touring is like. Even though there's a structure—you know what towns you're going to, and that you'll be playing a gig—pretty much anything can happen."
In the documentary "Big Easy Express", Marcus Mumford recognises the Old Crow Medicine Show influence: "I first heard Old Crow’s music when I was, like, 16, 17, and that really got me into, like, folk music, bluegrass. I mean, I’d listened to a lot of Dylan, but I hadn’t really ventured into the country world so much. So Old Crow were the band that made me fall in love with country music." Mumford acknowledges that "the band inspired them to pick up the banjo and start their now famous country nights in London." Ketch Secor, Old Crow front-man, concurs: "Those boys took the message and ran with it."
Emmylou Harris was ... 
Awards and nominations.
American Music Awards.
The American Music Awards, (AMA) is an annual American music award show created by Dick Clark in 1973.
ARIA Music Awards.
The ARIA Music Awards is an annual series of award nights celebrating the Australian music industry, put on by the Australian Recording Industry Association.
Billboard Music Awards.
The Billboard Music Awards are sponsored by Billboard magazine and is based on sales data by Nielsen SoundScan and raido information by Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems. 
BRIT Awards.
The BRIT Awards are the British Phonographic Industry's annual pop music awards.
Grammy Awards.
The Grammy Awards are awarded annually by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences of the United States for outstanding achievements in the music industry. 
MTV Video Music Awards.
The MTV Video Music Awards were established in 1984 by MTV to celebrate the top music videos of the year.
Q Awards.
The Q Awards are the United Kingdom's annual music awards run by the music magazine Q to honour musical excellence.
