Safe Haven is a 2013 American romance film starring Julianne Hough, Josh Duhamel and Cobie Smulders. It was released theatrically in North America on February 14, 2013. The film was directed by Lasse Hallström, and is an adaptation of Nicholas Sparks's novel of the same name. The film was originally set for a February 8 release, but was moved to February 14, 2013.
Plot.
Erin Tierney (Julianne Hough) leaves her abusive alcoholic husband, police officer Kevin Tierney (David Lyons), under disguise with the assistance of an elderly neighbor, Mrs. Feldman, and moves to the small town of Southport, North Carolina, where she befriends her neighbor, Jo (Cobie Smulders), and adopts the identity of "Katie". She also meets Alex Wheatley (Josh Duhamel), the manager of a local convenience store, and his children, Lexie and Josh. Alex's wife died of cancer, and he keeps letters written by her, to be given to their children in important moments of their lives.
With Jo's encouragement, Katie and Alex begin a romantic relationship. Lexie immediately accepts Katie, while Josh is initially resistant, believing Katie to be his mother's replacement, but eventually accepts her as well. Meanwhile, Kevin continues to search for Katie using his authority as a police officer, and forges reports that she is a wanted murderer. Upon seeing her picture in the police station, Alex confronts Katie and tells her to leave town. He then realizes that he should have given her a chance to explain herself and goes to find her at the ferry dock. She reveals that her husband is searching for her, and Alex promises to protect her. Meanwhile, Kevin is suspended for misusing police resources and, being intoxicated at work, after his boss discovers the water bottle Kevin is always carrying is filled with vodka. After breaking into Mrs. Feldman's home and listening to a phone message that Katie had left for her, Kevin discovers where Katie is hiding and he heads to Southport to find her.
During the Fourth of July fireworks show, Kevin breaks into Alex's convenience store while he and Josh are away and attacks Katie. Katie hides Lexie in her mother's old office and notices Kevin dousing the store with gasoline. In an attempt to stop him from igniting it, she goes out and tells him that she will return home with him. Katie manages to knock Kevin into the water, but sparks from nearby fireworks light the store on fire. Alex sees the fire from his boat and rushes to the scene, rescuing Lexie, while Katie finds herself in a physical struggle with Kevin. He takes out his gun and prepares to shoot her; a struggle ensues between them and Katie manages to shoot Kevin, killing him.
The next day, Alex retrieves his wife's letters from the fire and gives Katie the one that his wife had written "For Her" - the woman that Alex would fall in love with. Katie is surprised to learn that Alex's wife was Jo, and that she had been interacting with Jo's ghost, who was guiding Katie to be with Alex. After Katie promises to love Alex and his children, Jo leaves, and Katie reunites with her new family.
Production.
The film began principal photography on June 18, 2012 in Wilmington and Southport, North Carolina.
Reception.
"Safe Haven" has received negative reviews from critics, as it currently holds a 13% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 93 reviews with the consensus: "Schmaltzy, predictable, and melodramatic, "Safe Haven" also suffers from a ludicrous plot twist towards the end, making for a particularly ignominious Nicholas Sparks adaptation."
