Ronda Jean Rousey (born February 1, 1987) is an American mixed martial artist and judoka. She is the first and current UFC Women's Bantamweight Champion, as well as the former Strikeforce Women's Bantamweight Champion. She has defeated all of her opponents by armbar in the first round.[http://sports.yahoo.com/news/mma--ronda-rousey-liz-carmouche-ufc-157-saved-by-women-084642836.html] Rousey became the first American woman to earn an Olympic medal in Judo at the Summer Olympics in Beijing in 2008.
Rousey trains under Gokor Chivichyan of the Hayastan MMA Academy, and Edmond Tarverdyan of the Glendale Fighting Club. She formerly trained at the Olympic Training Center in Wakefield, Massachusetts under guidance of Jimmy Pedro and is now part of Team Hayastan in Santa Monica, California. Rousey also trains with Leo Frincu and Gene Lebell, along with Team Hayastan fighters such as Manny Gamburyan, Karen Darabedyan, Karo Parisyan and Sako Chivitchian. She is managed by Darin Harvey of Fight Tribe MMA. In July, 2012, Rousey enlisted former undefeated boxing and kickboxing champion Lucia Rijker as striking coach.
Rousey is the consensus #1 pound-for-pound female MMA fighter in the world, according to MMARising, MMAWeekly, and many other publications. She is also ranked #1 at 135 pounds according to the Unified Women's MMA Rankings.
Olympic judo career.
At 17, Rousey qualified for the 2004 Olympic Games in Athens, becoming the youngest judo competitor in the entire Games. Also in 2004, Rousey won a gold medal at the 2004 World Junior Judo Championships in Budapest, Hungary.
In April 2006, she became the first U.S. female athlete in nearly 10 years to win an A-Level tournament as she went 5-0 to claim gold at the Birmingham World Cup in Great Britain. Later that year, the 19-year-old won the bronze medal at the Junior World Championships, becoming the first U.S. athlete ever to win two Junior World medals.
In February 2007, Rousey moved up to 70 kg where she is currently ranked as one of the top three women in the world. She won the silver medal at the 2007 World Judo Championships in the middleweight division and the bronze medal at the 2007 Pan American Games.
In August 2008, Rousey competed at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, China. She lost her quarterfinal to the Dutch ex-world champion Edith Bosch but qualified for a Bronze medal match through the repechage bracket. Rousey defeated Annett Boehm by Yuko to win a bronze medal (note: Judo offers two bronze medals per weight class). With the victory, Rousey became the first American to win an Olympic medal in women's judo since its inception as an Olympic sport in 1992.
Mixed martial arts career.
Rousey made her mixed martial arts debut as an amateur on August 6, 2010. She defeated Hayden Munoz by submission due to an armbar in 23 seconds.
She entered the quarterfinals of the Tuff-N-Uff 145 lbs women's tournament on November 12, 2010 and submitted promotional veteran Autumn Richardson with an armbar in 57 seconds.
Rousey faced Taylor Stratford in the Tuff-N-Uff tournament semi-finals on January 7, 2011 and won by technical submission due to an armbar in 24 seconds. She then announced plans to turn pro and was replaced in the tournament.
Rousey made her professional mixed martial arts debut on March 27, 2011 at King of the Cage: Turning Point. She submitted Ediane Gomes with an armbar in 25 seconds.
Rousey faced kickboxing champion Charmaine Tweet in an MMA bout at Hard Knocks Fighting Championship: School of Hard Knocks 12 on June 17, 2011 in Calgary, Canada. She submitted Tweet with an armbar in 49 seconds.
Verbal attacks.
Rousey is notable for introducing trash talking to Women's MMA. In many interviews Rousey has used harsh language and openly downplayed the abilities of her opponents. Rousey doesn't deny the accusations and is not apologetic for something she explains is a way to generate more publicity for the sport. She has also spoken harshly of fellow Olympian Michael Phelps, and Kim Kardashian.
Strikeforce.
Rousey was scheduled to make her Strikeforce debut against Sarah D'Alelio on July 30, 2011 at in Hoffman Estates, Illinois. The fight was pushed back and eventually took place on the Strikeforce Challengers 18 main card on August 12, 2011 in Las Vegas, Nevada. Rousey defeated D'Alelio by technical submission due to an armbar early in the first round. The victory was controversial as referee Steve Mazzagatti only stopped the fight because D’Alelio appeared to make a brief sound. According to instructions given to fighters before they compete, this is typically deemed to be a verbal submission. Mazzagatti initially did nothing, but after Rousey looked at him and stated that D’Alelio had submitted, he stopped the fight. D'Alelio admitted after the fight that she let out a verbal indication of pain.
Rousey faced Julia Budd at Strikeforce Challengers 20 on November 18, 2011 in Las Vegas. She won via submission due to an armbar in the first round, dislocating Budd's elbow in the process. Following the fight, she announced plans to move down to 135 pounds to challenge Miesha Tate, the Strikeforce Women's Bantamweight Champion at the time.
Women's Bantamweight Championship.
Rousey challenged Tate for her Strikeforce title on March 3, 2012 in Columbus, Ohio. She defeated Tate by submission due to an armbar in the first round, again dislocating her opponent's elbow, to become the new Strikeforce Women's Bantamweight Champion.
Rousey appeared in "All Access: Ronda Rousey" on Showtime. The half-hour special debuted on August 8, 2012. UFC President Dana White revealed during the programme that "In the next 10 years, if there's a woman in the octagon, it's probably going to be Ronda Rousey." The second installment of the special aired on August 15, 2012. Ronda also appeared on Conan.
Rousey defended her Strikeforce title against Sarah Kaufman at on August 18, 2012 in San Diego, California. Rousey said that she would throw Kaufman's arm at her corner after ripping it off with an armbar, and threatened to choke or pound Kaufman's face to death. During the fight, Rousey would quickly take down Kaufman and submit her with an armbar in just 54 seconds to retain the Strikeforce Women's Bantamweight Championship. After the fight, Rousey challenged former Strikeforce Women's Featherweight Champion Cristiane "Cyborg" Santos to a fight at bantamweight.
Ultimate Fighting Championship.
In November 2012, the Ultimate Fighting Championship announced that Rousey had become the first female fighter to sign with the UFC.
UFC President Dana White officially announced at the pre-fight press conference that Rousey was the first UFC Women's Bantamweight Champion. 
Rousey defended her title against Liz Carmouche on February 23, 2013 at UFC 157. Despite being caught in an early submission attempt from Carmouche, Rousey got out of it and successfully defended her Bantamweight Championship title, winning the fight at 4:49 into the first round by submission due to an armbar.
Personal life.
Rousey was born in Riverside County, California. Her mother, Ann Maria Rousey DeMars (née Waddell), also had a decorated Judo career and was the first American to win a World Judo Championship with her victory in 1984. Rousey appeared in "ESPN The Magazine"'s 2012 Body Issue. Rousey's maternal grandfather was Venezuelan.
Rousey was formerly a vegan but describes her current diet as, "kind of a mix between a paleo and a warrior diet." 
Explaining about her signature armbar, Rousey said that her judoka mother jumped on her every morning to wake her up with armbars. 
She has also stated she got her nickname "Rowdy" named after retired professional wrestler Roddy Piper.
In the beginning of 2013, Rousey caused controversy when she used her Twitter account to post a link to a video about the Sandy Hook conspiracy theories.
She said that sex before a fight is good for female fighter, and she has lots of sex in the build-up before fights to boost her testosterone level.
