Seth Woodbury MacFarlane (; born October 26, 1973) is an American actor, voice actor, animator, screenwriter, comedian, producer, director and singer. He is the creator of the show "Family Guy" (1999–2002, 2005–present) and co-creator of "American Dad!" (2005–present) and "The Cleveland Show" (2009–present), for which he also voices many of the shows' various characters.
A native of Kent, Connecticut, MacFarlane is a graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design, where he studied animation, earning a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree. He was an animator and writer for Hanna-Barbera for several television shows, including "Johnny Bravo", "Cow and Chicken", "Dexter's Laboratory" and "I Am Weasel" before creating his own series for 20th Century Fox called "Family Guy" in 1999. MacFarlane went on to co-create "American Dad!" in 2005, and "The Cleveland Show" in 2009 for Fox. He also went on to serve as executive producer on the Fox sitcom "The Winner".
As an actor, he has made guest appearances on shows such as "Gilmore Girls", "The War at Home" and "FlashForward". MacFarlane's interest in science fiction and fantasy has led to cameo and guest appearances on ' and voicing the character of Johann Kraus in Guillermo del Toro's '. In 2008, he created his own YouTube series entitled "Seth MacFarlane's Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy". As a singer, MacFarlane has performed at several venues, including Carnegie Hall and the Royal Albert Hall. MacFarlane has won several awards for his work on "Family Guy", including two Primetime Emmy Awards and an Annie Award. In 2009, he won the Webby Award for Film & Video Person of the Year. He occasionally speaks at universities and colleges throughout the United States and is a supporter of gay rights.
On an episode of "Conan" that aired on February 10, 2011, MacFarlane announced that he was directing his first feature-length comedy film "Ted". The film stars Mark Wahlberg as an adult who, as a kid, wished his teddy bear would come to life. MacFarlane voiced and provided motion capture for the bear. It was released on June 29, 2012, and went on to become the highest-grossing original R-rated comedy of all time. In September 2011, MacFarlane released a debut album of American standards, "Music Is Better Than Words". Also in 2011, he began a revival of Hanna-Barbera's "The Flintstones" for the Fox network. The first episode was due to air in the U.S. in 2013, but production has been indefinitely delayed due to MacFarlane's schedule.
On October 1, 2012, it was announced that MacFarlane would host the 85th Academy Awards on February 24, 2013. He also presented the nominees for the 85th Academy Awards with actress Emma Stone on January 10, 2013. In addition to hosting, MacFarlane has also been nominated in the Academy Award for Best Original Song category for co-writing the theme song for the film "Ted" with Walter Murphy. 
Early life and education.
Seth Woodbury MacFarlane was born in Kent, Connecticut. His parents, Ann Perry (née Sager, 1947-2010) and Ronald Milton MacFarlane (1946- ), were born in Newburyport, Massachusetts. He has a younger sister, Rachael MacFarlane. MacFarlane's parents met in 1970, when they both lived and worked in Boston, Massachusetts, and married later that year. In 1972, the couple moved to Kent, where Ann Perry began working in the Admissions Office at South Kent School and later in the College Guidance and Admissions Offices at the Kent School, a selective college preparatory school where Ronald was also a teacher. During his childhood, MacFarlane developed an interest in illustration and began drawing cartoon characters Fred Flintstone and Woody Woodpecker, as early as two years old. By the age of five, MacFarlane knew that he would want to pursue a career in animation, and began by creating flip books, after his parents found a book on the subject. Four years later, aged nine, MacFarlane began publishing a weekly comic strip entitled "Walter Crouton" for "The Kent Good Times Dispatch", the local newspaper in Kent, Connecticut, which paid him five dollars per week. In one anecdote from the time, MacFarlane said in a 2011 interview he was "always like just weirdly fascinated by the Communion ceremony I did a strip that had a guy kneeling at the altar taking Communion and saying 'Can I have fries with that?' And to my 11-year-old brain that was comedy ..." The paper printed it and he got "an angry letter from our local priest ... It created sort of a little mini-controversy in our little town."
MacFarlane received his high school diploma in 1991 from the Kent School. While there, he continued experimenting with animation, and was given an 8 mm camera by his parents. MacFarlane went on to study film, video and animation at the Rhode Island School of Design (RISD), where he earned a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree. As a student, he had originally intended to work for Disney, but changed his mind upon graduating. At RISD, MacFarlane created a series of independent films, eventually meeting future "Family Guy" cast member Mike Henry, whose brother Patrick was MacFarlane's classmate. His senior year at RISD, MacFarlane created a thesis film entitled "The Life of Larry", which would eventually become the inspiration for "Family Guy". MacFarlane's professor submitted his film to the animation studio Hanna-Barbera, where he was later hired.
Career.
Hanna-Barbera years.
After college, MacFarlane was hired at Hanna-Barbera (then Hanna-Barbera Cartoons) based on the writing content of "The Life of Larry", rather than on cartooning ability. He was one of only a few people hired by the company solely based on writing talent. He worked as an animator and writer for Cartoon Network's "Cartoon Cartoons" series. He described the atmosphere at Hanna-Barbera as resembling an "old fashioned Hollywood structure, where you move from one show to another or you jump from a writing job on one show to a storyboard job on another." MacFarlane worked on four television series during his tenure at the studio: "Dexter's Laboratory", "Cow and Chicken", "I Am Weasel", and "Johnny Bravo". Working as both a writer and storyboard artist, MacFarlane spent the most time on "Johnny Bravo". He found it easier to develop his own style at "Johnny Bravo" through the show's process of scriptwriting, which "Dexter's Laboratory", "Cow and Chicken" and "I Am Weasel" did not use. As a part of the "Johnny Bravo" crew, MacFarlane met actors and voiceover artists such as Adam West and Jack Sheldon of Schoolhouse Rock! fame. Meeting these individuals later became significant to the production and success of his "Family Guy" series.
He also did freelance work for Walt Disney Television Animation, writing for "Jungle Cubs" and "". Through strict observation of writing elements such as story progression, character stakes, and plot points, MacFarlane found the work for Disney was, from a writing standpoint, very valuable in preparation for his career (particularly on "Ace Ventura"). MacFarlane also created and wrote a short titled "Zoomates" for Frederator Studios' "Oh Yeah! Cartoons" on Nickelodeon. In 1996, MacFarlane created a sequel to "The Life of Larry" entitled "Larry and Steve", which features a middle-aged character named Larry and an intellectual dog, Steve. The short was broadcast as one of Cartoon Network's "World Premiere Toons". Executives at Fox saw both "Larry" shorts and negotiations soon began for a prime-time animated series.
"Family Guy".
Although MacFarlane enjoyed working at Hanna-Barbera, he felt his real calling was for prime-time animation, which would allow a much edgier style of humor. He first pitched "Family Guy" to Fox during his tenure at Hanna-Barbera. A development executive for Hanna-Barbera, who was trying to get back into the prime-time business at the time, introduced MacFarlane to Leslie Collins and Mike Darnell, heads of the alternative comedy department at Fox. After the success of "King of the Hill" in 1997, MacFarlane called Collins once more to ask about a possible second pitch for the series. The company offered the young writer a strange deal: Fox gave him a budget of $50,000 to produce a pilot that could lead to a series (most episodes of animated prime-time productions cost at least $1 million). Recalling the experience in an interview with "The New York Times", MacFarlane stated, "I spent about six months with no sleep and no life, just drawing like crazy in my kitchen and doing this pilot".
After six months, MacFarlane returned to Fox with a "very, very simply, crudely animated film – with just enough to get the tone of the show across" to present to the executives, who loved the pilot and ordered the series immediately. In July 1998, the Fox Broadcast Company announced the purchase of "Family Guy" for a January 1999 debut. "Family Guy" was originally intended to be a series of shorts on "MADtv", much in the same way "The Simpsons" had begun on "The Tracey Ullman Show" a decade earlier. Negotiations for the show's "MADtv" connection fell through early on as a result of budgetary concerns. At age 24, MacFarlane was television's youngest executive producer.
"Family Guy" first aired January 31, 1999. MacFarlane's work in animating "Family Guy" has been influenced by Jackie Gleason and Hanna-Barbera along with examples from "The Simpsons" and "All in the Family". In addition to writing three episodes, "Death Has a Shadow", "Family Guy Viewer Mail 1" and "North by North Quahog", MacFarlane voices "Family Guy"'s main characters – Peter Griffin, Stewie Griffin, Brian Griffin and Glenn Quagmire as well as Tom Tucker, his son Jake and additional characters. Bolstered by high DVD sales and established fan loyalty, "Family Guy" developed into a $1-billion franchise. On May 4, 2008, after approximately two and a half years of negotiations, MacFarlane reached a $100-million agreement with Fox to keep "Family Guy" and "American Dad" until 2012. The agreement makes him the world's highest paid television writer.
In addition, a "Family Guy" video game was released in 2006. Two years later, in August 2007, he closed a digital content production deal with AdSense. MacFarlane takes cast members on the road to voice characters in front of live audiences. "Family Guy Live" provides fans with the opportunity to hear future scripts. In mid-2007 Chicago fans had the opportunity to hear the then upcoming sixth season premiere "Blue Harvest". Shows have been played in Montreal, New York City, Chicago, and Los Angeles.
On July 22, 2007, in an interview with "The Hollywood Reporter", MacFarlane announced that he may start working on a feature film, although "nothing's official". In September 2007, Ricky Blitt gave TV.com an interview confirming that he had already started working on the script. Then in "TV Week" on July 18, 2008, MacFarlane confirmed plans to produce a theatrically released "Family Guy" feature film sometime "within the next year". He came up with an idea for the story, "something that you could not do on the show, which him is the only reason to do a movie". He later went on to say he imagines the film to be "an old-style musical with dialogue" similar to "The Sound of Music", saying that he would "really be trying to capture, musically, that feel".
Despite its popularity, "Family Guy" has not been immune to criticism. The Parents Television Council frequently criticizes the show for its content, once organized a letter-writing campaign aimed at removing it from FOX's lineup, and has filed complaints with the Federal Communications Commission alleging that some episodes of the show contained indecent content. MacFarlane has responded to the PTC's criticism by saying, among other things, "That's like getting hate mail from Hitler. They're literally terrible human beings."
"Family Guy" has been cancelled twice, although strong fan support and DVD sales have caused Fox to reconsider. MacFarlane mentioned how these cancellations affected the lineup of writers each time Fox approved the show. "One of the positive aspects of 'Family Guy' constantly being pulled off air is that we were always having to restaff writers".
During the sixth season, episodes of "Family Guy" and "American Dad!" were delayed from regular broadcast due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike (which MacFarlane participated in to support the writers while FOX aired three "Family Guy" episodes without MacFarlane's permission). On February 12, 2008, the strike ended, and the series resumed airing regularly, beginning with "Back to the Woods".
"American Dad!".
Seth co-created "American Dad!" with Matt Weitzman and Mike Barker. "American Dad!" was first shown after Super Bowl XXXIX as a sneak preview on February 6, 2005. The show began airing regularly on Fox on May 1, 2005. MacFarlane describes the show being similar to "All in the Family".
"American Dad!" received its inspiration from President George W. Bush's policies. The show focuses on Stan Smith, an old-fashioned CIA officer and active conservative. Stan's wife Francine and children, Hayley and Steve, share a typical middle class home with Roger, an extraterrestrial rescued by Stan from Area 51, and Klaus, a goldfish who hosts the transplanted brain of an East German, 1988 Olympic skier. Seth MacFarlane provides the voices of Stan and Roger, basing Roger's voice on Paul Lynde as he played Uncle Arthur in "Bewitched". His sister Rachael MacFarlane provides the voice of Hayley.
"The Cleveland Show".
MacFarlane developed a "Family Guy" spin-off called "The Cleveland Show", which focuses on the character of Cleveland Brown and his family. The idea for the show originated from a suggestion by "Family Guy" writer and voice of Cleveland, Mike Henry. Fox ordered 22 episodes and the series first aired on September 27, 2009. The show, which was picked up to air a first season consisting of 22 episodes, was picked up by Fox for a second season, consisting of 13 episodes, bringing the total number to 35 episodes. The announcement was made on May 3, 2009 before the first season even premiered. Due to strong ratings, Fox picked up the back nine episodes of season 2, making a 22-episode season and bringing the total episode count of the show to 44. This is also the only series created by MacFarlane that does not have him voicing the main character.
"The Winner".
MacFarlane was the executive producer of a live-action sitcom starring Rob Corddry called "The Winner". The show premiered on Fox on March 4, 2007. The plot has a man named Glen discussing the time he matured at 32 and has him pursuing his only love after she moves in next door. Glen meets her son and both become good friends.
After six episodes, the show was officially cancelled on May 16, 2007. However, at "Family Guy Live" in Montreal on July 21, 2007, Seth MacFarlane stated, "It is looking like there could be a future life for "The Winner"". After MacFarlane's statement neither Fox nor MacFarlane has released any details of plans for the show to return. The show was mentioned in the "Family Guy" episode "Family Gay" where all of the horses at a racing track are named after failed Fox shows, "The Winner" being one of them.
"Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy".
On September 10, 2008, MacFarlane released a series of webisodes known as "Seth MacFarlane's Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy" with its animated shorts sponsored by Burger King and released weekly.
"Ted".
MacFarlane made his directorial live-action film debut with the release of "Ted" in 2012. Along with directing the film, he also wrote the screenplay, served as producer and starred as the titular character.
The film tells the story of John (Mark Wahlberg) and his talking teddy bear (MacFarlane) who keeps John and his girlfriend Lori (Mila Kunis) from moving on with their lives.
It received generally favorable reviews from both critics and audiences, and was a box office success, opening with the highest weekend gross of all time for an original R-rated comedy. The movie is currently the highest-grossing R-rated comedy of all time.
Other work.
MacFarlane usually participates as one of the "roasters" in the annual Comedy Central Roasts. In May 2011, it was reported that MacFarlane had signed a deal to reboot "The Flintstones" for airing in 2013. He said that he would lend his voice to Barney. However, at the San Diego Comic-Con International in July 2012, while promoting "Ted", MacFarlane revealed that the project had been shelved, due to the unimpressed response garnered by the production company, Fox.
In August 2011, Fox announced that they had ordered a 13-part updated series of "" which MacFarlane will co-produce with Ann Druyan and Steven Soter. The new series will be hosted by Neil deGrasse Tyson and is expected to begin airing on the channel in 2013, with repeats airing on the National Geographic Channel on the same night.
It is announced that he is planning on co-writing and star in his second movie called "A Million Ways to Die in the West". Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild are also co-writers for the film.
MacFarlane confirmed that he is working on what will be his fifth animated series with Alex Borstein and Gary Janetti. Currently not much is known about the series other than it will be about a family and will have a female lead role.
In 2013 MacFarlane announced that he will be working on a live action sitcom called "Dads". The series, which has been given the go-ahead for a six-episode season, revolves around Eli and Warner, two successful guys in their 30's have their world turned upside down when their dads move in with them. MacFarlane, Sulkin and Wild are executive producing the series, with Sulkin and Wild writing.
Music career.
MacFarlane is a skilled pianist and singer who, in his early years, trained with Lee and Sally Sweetland, Barbra Streisand and Frank Sinatra's vocal coaches. In 2009, he appeared as a vocalist at the BBC Proms with the John Wilson Orchestra in Prom 22 "A Celebration of Classic MGM Film Musicals". In 2012, it was announced he would again appear at the Proms with the John Wilson Orchestra in a concert celebrating Broadway musicals. He signed a record deal with Universal Republic Records and released a big band/standards album in 2011.
MacFarlane's debut studio album, "Music Is Better Than Words", was announced in 2010 and released on September 27, 2011, drawing on his training in and attraction to "the great American songbook and particularly the early- to late-'50s era of orchestration". The singer, asked about his experience with the music, said he did "old Nelson Riddle, Billy May charts one of my composers, Ron Jones, [who has a group called the Influence Jazz Orchestra that he performs with throughout L.A."
His album has been nominated in the "Best Traditional Pop Vocal Album category" at the 54th Grammy Awards.
Guest appearances.
MacFarlane has appeared in sitcoms, comedy and news programs, independent films, and other animated shows. In 2002, MacFarlane appeared in the "Gilmore Girls" episode "Lorelai's Graduation Day". Four years later on November 5, 2006, MacFarlane guest starred on Fox's "The War at Home" as "Hillary's Date", an unnamed 33-year-old man who secretly dates teenaged Hillary in the episode "I Wash My Hands of You". MacFarlane also appeared as the engineer Ensign Rivers on "Star Trek: Enterprise" in the third season episode "" and the fourth season episode "".
During 2006, MacFarlane had a role in the independent film "Life is Short". He portrayed Dr. Ned, a psychologist who advises a short man (played by "Freaks and Geeks" star Samm Levine) to have relationships with taller women. He is a frequent guest on the radio talkshow "Loveline", hosted by Dr. Drew Pinsky.
MacFarlane appeared on the November 11, 2006 episode of Fox's comedy show "MADtv" and performed a live action re-enactment of a scene from the "Family Guy" episode "Fast Times at Buddy Cianci Jr. High". In the scene, Peter and Lois suspect Chris of murdering his teacher's husband. As a reaction, a terrified Meg jumps out the window. A version with MacFarlane as Peter, Nicole Parker as Kathy Griffin as Lois, Ike Barinholtz as Dane Cook as Chris, Nicole Randall Johnson as Queen Latifah as Meg, and Keegan-Michael Key as Snoop Dogg as Stewie was recorded over the original cartoon. MacFarlane served as a host to the Canadian Awards for the Electronic & Animated Arts's Second Annual Elan Awards on February 15, 2008.
MacFarlane has also appeared on news shows and late night television shows such as "Jimmy Kimmel Live!" and "Late Show with David Letterman". On January 19, 2007, MacFarlane appeared on "Countdown with Keith Olbermann" on MSNBC to discuss Stephen Colbert's appearance on "The O'Reilly Factor" and Bill O'Reilly's return appearance on "The Colbert Report". MacFarlane introduced the segment by saying in Stewie's voice "Oh, wait Bill. Hold still, allow me to soil myself on you. Victory is mine!" Three months later on March 24, 2007, MacFarlane was interviewed on Fox's "Talkshow with Spike Feresten", and closed the show by singing the Frank Sinatra song "You Make Me Feel So Young". He also provided Stewie's voice when he appeared as a brain tumor-induced hallucination to Seeley Booth in an episode of "Bones", writing his own dialogue for the episode. On May 8, 2009, MacFarlane was a guest on "Real Time with Bill Maher".
Other than "Family Guy" and "American Dad!", MacFarlane voices characters in other cartoon shows and movies. He voiced Wayne "The Brain" McClain in an episode of "Aqua Teen Hunger Force". He has also voiced various characters on Adult Swim's "Robot Chicken", including a parody of Lion-O and Emperor Palpatine as well as Peter Griffin in the Season 2 premiere – he even parodied himself in the Season 4 premiere, in which he renewed the show simply by mentioning it in a "Family Guy"-like cutaway after its fictitious cancellation at the end of Season 3. He also played the villain "The Manotaur" in Bob Boyle's animated kids series "Yin Yang Yo!". In addition, MacFarlane voiced Johann Kraus in the 2008 film "Hellboy II: The Golden Army". He also had a guest appearance in the animated film "" where he sings "That Was Then (And This is Too)", the opening theme. He had also starred in a commercial for Hulu in which he plays an alien presenting Hulu as an "evil plot to destroy the world", progressively as his famous "Family Guy" and "American Dad!" characters. He also lent his voice to the series finale movie of the Comedy Central series, Drawn together. 
On August 1, 2009, MacFarlane performed at The BBC Proms with John Wilson and his orchestra, singing a selection of songs from MGM musicals alongside Kim Criswell, Sarah Fox, Sir Thomas Allen, and Curtis Stigers. Three songs from "High Society", "Singin' in the Rain", and "That's Entertainment" were featured. Seth also repeated the MGM musicals show on tour in the UK with the John Wilson Orchestra during November and December 2010. He made another appearance with the John Wilson orchestra in a BBC Two special, Swingin' Christmas, on December 25, 2010.
MacFarlane also played Ziggy in the 2010 film, "Tooth Fairy". In August 2010, appeared as a guest voice-over in a sci-fi themed episode of Disney's "Phineas and Ferb" entitled "Nerds of a Feather". MacFarlane is the only person to serve as roastmaster for more than one Comedy Central roast. In 2010, he filled this role for "The Comedy Central Roast of David Hasselhoff". The following year he was roastmaster of Comedy Central roasts of Donald Trump and Charlie Sheen. On September 15, 2012, he starred in the season premiere of "Saturday Night Live", his first appearance on the show.
Speaking engagements.
MacFarlane is a frequent speaking guest on college campuses. On April 16, 2006, he was invited by Stanford University's ASSU Speakers' Bureau to address an audience of over 1,000 at Memorial Auditorium. MacFarlane was invited by Harvard University's class of 2006 to deliver the "class day" address on June 7, 2006. He spoke as himself, and also as Peter Griffin, Stewie Griffin and Glenn Quagmire. He has also delivered speeches at George Washington University, Washington University in St. Louis, the University of Texas, the University of Missouri, University of Toledo, Bowling Green State University, and Loyola Marymount University.
Activism.
Political views.
MacFarlane is a supporter of the United States Democratic Party. He has donated over $200,000 to various Democratic congressional committees and to the 2008 presidential campaign of then-U.S. Senator Barack Obama. He has stated that he supports the legalization of cannabis.
Gay rights support.
MacFarlane came to support gay rights and gay marriage after a family member wondered aloud whether his gay cousin's homosexuality could be "cured". The incident angered MacFarlane, who said in a 2008 interview in "The Advocate", that such a statement "was fucking horrifying to hear from somebody that you love". He credits his parents for raising him to be a logical person.
MacFarlane is passionate about his support for gay rights. He said it is "infuriating and idiotic" that two gay partners "have to go through this fucking dog and pony act when they stop at a hotel and the guy behind the counter says, 'You want one room or two?'". He went on to say, "I'm incredibly passionate about my support for the gay community and what they're dealing with at this current point in time". MacFarlane continued, "Why is it that Johnny Spaghetti Stain in fucking Georgia can knock a woman up, legally be married to her, and then beat the shit out of her, but these two intelligent, sophisticated writers who have been together for 20 years can't get married?"
MacFarlane, in recognition of "his active, passionate commitment to Humanist values, and his fearless support of equal marriage rights and other social justice issues", was named the Harvard Humanist of the Year in 2011.
Despite his position on gay rights, MacFarlane was criticized for his portrayal of transsexualism in the "Family Guy" episode "Quagmire's Dad". Gay novelist Brent Hartinger found the episode's inclusion of transphobic remarks from Peter and Lois Griffin — as well as a scene of Brian vomiting profusely upon discovering his new girlfriend to be transgender (a satirical reference to the iconic film "The Crying Game") — to be "shockingly insensitive". Hartinger continued, "Frankly, it's literally "impossible" for me to reconcile last night's episode with MacFarlane's words, unless I come to the conclusion that the man is pretty much a complete idiot". The Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation, a LGBT media watchdog organization, shared "serious concerns being voiced from members of the community" about the episode. MacFarlane said he was "surprised" by the negative reaction to "Quagmire's Dad", saying that "it seemed that commentators were not picking up on the fact that it was a very sympathetic portrayal of a transsexual character". He further added, "Look, Brian happens to be a heterosexual character, as I am. If I found out that I had slept with a transsexual, I might throw up in the same way that a gay guy looks at a vagina and goes, 'Oh, my God, that's disgusting.'"
2008 Writers Guild of America strike.
During the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike, MacFarlane publicly sided with the Writers Guild, and fully participated in the strike. Official production of "Family Guy" was halted for most of December 2007 and various periods afterwards. Fox continued producing episodes without MacFarlane's final approval, and although he refused to work on the show during the strike, his contract with Fox required him to contribute to any episodes it subsequently produced. Rumors of continued production on "Family Guy" prompted the statement from MacFarlane that "...it would just be a colossal dick move if they did that". The strike ended on February 12, 2008.
The Seth MacFarlane Collection of the Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan Archive.
MacFarlane donated money to create The Seth MacFarlane Collection of the Carl Sagan and Ann Druyan Archive at the Library of Congress. 
MacFarlane said, "The work of Carl Sagan has been a profound influence in my life, and the life of every individual who recognizes the importance of humanity's ongoing commitment to the exploration of our universe," He also, said, "The continuance of our journey outward into space should always occupy some part of our collective attention, regardless of whatever Snooki did last week."
Humanism.
MacFarlane was presented the Harvard Humanist of the Year Award for 2011 for “his extensive body of work, his active, passionate commitment to Humanist values, and his fearless support of equal marriage rights and other social justice issues.”
Personal life.
MacFarlane identifies himself as a "Star Wars", "Star Trek" and science fiction fan. He appeared at a "Star Wars" convention to promote his new "Family Guy" episode "Blue Harvest" on May 26, 2007. MacFarlane's interest in science fiction and music are regular themes for his birthday and Christmas parties in Los Angeles. In 2009, he held a "Star Wars"-themed Christmas party. In 2010, he held a Rat Pack-themed party for his birthday with a 60-piece orchestra and performance by Frank Sinatra, Jr. MacFarlane is an outspoken atheist, and many of his works have been critical of religion in general.
In a 2004 interview with "The Daily Princetonian", MacFarlane noted his similarities to Brian Griffin on "Family Guy", revealing, "I have some Brian type issues from time to time – looking for the right person – but I date as much as the next guy". MacFarlane has also revealed that Brian is his favorite character from Family Guy, because he feels most comfortable when playing that role.
In early 2007, fellow comedian Alex Borstein reported in an interview that MacFarlane is old-fashioned in several aspects of his life, in that "his pop culture knowledge is very retro. Seth doesn't have e-mail at home, doesn't own a computer and he doesn't really watch television. He doesn't understand MySpace and despises most new music." 
On July 16, 2010, MacFarlane's mother, Ann Perry MacFarlane, died after a long battle with cancer. Her death was reported by Larry King on his show, "Larry King Live", who acknowledged a conversation he had with her during an interview with her son in May 2010. A brief opening scene from the first episode of the ninth season of "Family Guy" ("And Then There Were Fewer") mentions her lifespan, and dedicates the episode to her. 
, he was reported to be dating Emilia Clarke. The website Gossip Cop also reported that MacFarlane and Clarke were casually seeing each other, but that their relationship was not exclusive. The relationship was neither confirmed nor denied by either of the pair, and in November 2012, MacFarlane mentioned on Twitter that he is a "single guy". MacFarlane accompanied Clarke to the after-party thrown by HBO following the 70th Golden Globe Awards on January 13, 2013, and Deadline.com referred to Clarke as his girlfriend.
September 11, 2001 experience.
On the morning of September 11, 2001, MacFarlane was scheduled to return to Los Angeles on American Airlines Flight 11 from Boston. Suffering from a hangover from the previous night's celebrations, and with an incorrect departure time (8:15 a.m. instead of 7:45 a.m.) from his travel agent, he arrived at Logan International Airport about ten minutes too late to board the flight as the gates had been closed. Fifteen minutes after departure, American Airlines Flight 11 was hijacked, and at 8:46 a.m. it was flown into the North Tower of the World Trade Center, obliterating the airplane, and killing everyone on board.
Lawsuits.
On October 3, 2007, Bourne Co. Music Publishers filed a lawsuit accusing "Family Guy" of infringing its copyright on the song "When You Wish upon a Star", through a parody song entitled "I Need a Jew" appearing in the episode "When You Wish Upon a Weinstein". Bourne Co., the sole United States copyright owner of the song, alleged the parody pairs a "thinly veiled" copy of their music with antisemitic lyrics. Named in the suit were MacFarlane, 20th Century Fox Film Corp., Fox Broadcasting Co., Cartoon Network, and Walter Murphy; the suit sought to stop the program's distribution and asked for unspecified damages. Bourne argued that "I Need a Jew" uses the copyrighted melody of "When You Wish Upon a Star" without commenting on that song, and that it was therefore not a First Amendment-protected parody per the ruling in "Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc." On March 16, 2009, United States District Judge Deborah Batts held that "Family Guy" did not infringe on Bourne's copyright when it transformed the song for comical use in an episode.
In December 2007, "Family Guy" was again accused of copyright infringement when actor Art Metrano filed a lawsuit regarding a scene in "", in which Jesus performs Metrano's signature "magic" act involving absurd "faux" magical hand gestures while humming the distinctive tune "Fine and Dandy". MacFarlane, 20th Century Fox, Steve Callaghan, and Alex Borstein were all named in the suit. In July 2009 a federal district court judge rejected Fox's motion to dismiss, saying that the first three fair use factors involved—"purpose and character of the use", "nature of the infringed work", and "amount and substantiality of the taking"—counted in Metrano's favor, while the fourth—"economic impact"—had to await more fact-finding. In denying the dismissal, the court held that the reference in the scene made light of Jesus and his followers—not Metrano or his act. The case was settled out of court in 2010 with undisclosed terms.
