According to the Oxford English Dictionary (OED), ‘apostrophe’ comes ultimately from Greek (, “accent of ‘turning away’, or elision”), through Latin and French.
The apostrophe looks the same as a closing single quotation mark, although they have different meanings. The apostrophe also looks similar to, but is not the same as the prime symbol ( ′ ), which is used to indicate measurement in feet or arcminutes, as well as for various mathematical purposes, and the ʻokina (  ), which represents a glottal stop in Polynesian languages. Such incorrect substitutes as ´ (acute) and ` (grave) are not uncommon in unprofessional texts, where an ambiguous treatment of the apostrophe in digital typesetting (as explained below) is a major factor of this confusion.
English language usage.
Historical development.
The apostrophe was introduced into English in the 16th century in imitation of French practice.
French practice.
Introduced by Geoffroy Tory (1529), the apostrophe was used in place of a vowel letter to indicate elision (as in "l’heure" in place of "la heure"). It was frequently used in place of a final "e" (which was still pronounced at the time) when it was elided before a vowel, as in "un’ heure". Modern French orthography has restored the spelling "une heure".
Early English practice.
From the 16th century, following French practice, the apostrophe was used when a vowel letter was omitted either because of incidental elision ("I’m" for "I am") or because the letter no longer represented a sound ("lov’d" for "loved"). English spelling retained many inflections that were not pronounced as syllables, notably verb endings ("-est, -eth, -es, -ed") and the noun ending "-es", which marked either plurals or possessives (also known as genitives; see Possessive apostrophe, below). So apostrophe followed by "s" was often used to mark a plural, especially when the noun was a loan word (and especially a word ending in "a", as in "the two comma’s").
Standardisation.
The use of elision has continued to the present day, but significant changes have been made to the possessive and plural uses. By the 18th century, apostrophe + "s" was regularly used for all possessive singular forms, even when the letter "e" was not omitted (as in "the gate’s height"). This was regarded as representing the Old English genitive singular inflection "-es". The plural use was greatly reduced, but a need was felt to mark possessive plural. The solution was to use an apostrophe after the plural "s" (as in "girls’ dresses"). However, this was not universally accepted until the mid-19th century.
Possessive apostrophe.
The apostrophe is used to indicate possession. This convention distinguishes possessive singular forms ("Bernadette’s", "flower’s", "glass’s", "one’s") from simple plural forms ("Bernadettes", "flowers", "glasses", "ones"), and both of those from possessive plural forms ("Bernadettes'", "flowers'", "glasses'", "ones'"). For singulars, the modern possessive or genitive inflection is a survival from certain genitive inflections in Old English, and the apostrophe originally marked the loss of the old "e" (for example, "lambes" became "lamb’s").
General principles for the possessive apostrophe.
For most singular nouns the ending "'s" is added; e.g., "the cat’s whiskers".
When the noun is a normal plural, with an added "s", no extra "s" is added in the possessive; so "the neighbours' garden" (where there is more than one neighbour) is correct rather than "the neighbours's garden".
Compound nouns have their singular possessives formed with an apostrophe and an added "s", in accordance with the rules given above: "the Attorney-General's husband"; "the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports' prerogative"; "this Minister for Justice's intervention"; "her father-in-law's new wife".
A distinction is made between "joint" possession ("Jason and Sue’s e-mails": the e-mails of both Jason and Sue), and "separate" possession ("Jason’s and Sue’s e-mails": both the e-mails of Jason and the e-mails of Sue). Style guides differ only in how much detail they provide concerning these. Their consensus is that if possession is joint, only the last possessor has possessive inflection; in separate possession all the possessors have possessive inflection. If, however, any of the possessors is indicated by a pronoun, then for both joint and separate possession all of the possessors have possessive inflection ("his and her e-mails"; "his, her, and Anthea’s e-mails"; "Jason’s and her e-mails"; "His and Sue’s e-mails"; "His and Sue’s wedding"; "His and Sue’s weddings").
If the word or compound includes, or even ends with, a punctuation mark, an apostrophe and an "s" are still added in the usual way: "Westward Ho!’s railway station"; ""Awaye!"’s Paulette Whitten recorded Bob Wilson’s story"; "Washington, D.C.'s museums", assuming that the prevailing style requires full stops in "D.C."
An apostrophe is used in time and money references, among others, in constructions such as "one hour’s respite", "two weeks’ holiday" (optional apostrophe), "a dollar’s worth", "five pounds’ worth" (optional apostrophe), "one mile’s drive from here". This is like an ordinary possessive use. For example, "one hour’s respite" means "a respite of one hour" (exactly as "the cat’s whiskers" means "the whiskers of the cat"). Exceptions are accounted for in the same way: "three months pregnant" (in modern usage, one says neither "pregnant of three months", nor "one month(’)s pregnant").
No apostrophe is used in the following possessive pronouns and adjectives: "yours", "his", "hers", "ours", "its", "theirs", and "whose".
The possessive of "it" was originally "it’s", and many people continue to write it this way, though the apostrophe was dropped in the early 1800s and authorities are now unanimous that "it’s" can be only a contraction of "it is" or "it has". For example, U.S. President Thomas Jefferson used "it’s" as a possessive in his instructions dated 20 June 1803 to Lewis for his preparations for his great expedition.
All other possessive pronouns ending in "s" do take an apostrophe: "one’s"; "everyone’s"; "somebody’s", "nobody else’s", etc. With plural forms, the apostrophe follows the "s", as with nouns: "the others’ husbands" (but compare "They all looked at each other’s husbands", in which both "each" and "other" are singular).
Singular nouns ending with an “s” or “z” sound.
This subsection deals with singular nouns pronounced with a sibilant sound at the end: /s/ or /z/. The spelling of these ends with "-s", "-se", "-z", "-ze", "-ce", "-x", or "-xe".
Many respected authorities recommend that practically all singular nouns, including those ending with a sibilant sound, have possessive forms with an extra "s" after the apostrophe so that the spelling reflects the underlying pronunciation. Examples include Oxford University Press, the Modern Language Association, the BBC and "The Economist". Such authorities demand possessive singulars like these: "Senator Jones's umbrella"; "Tony Adams's friend".
However, some contemporary writers still follow the older practice of omitting the extra "s" in all cases ending with a sibilant, but usually not when written "-x" or "-xe". Some contemporary authorities such as the Associated Press Stylebook and "The Chicago Manual of Style" recommend or allow the practice of omitting the extra "s" in all words ending with an "s", but not in words ending with other sibilants ("z" and "x"). The 15th edition of "The Chicago Manual of Style" still recommended the traditional practice, which included providing for several exceptions to accommodate spoken usage such as the omission of the extra "s" after a polysyllabic word ending in a sibilant. The 16th edition of CMOS no longer recommends omitting the extra "s".
Similar examples of notable names ending in an "s" that are often given a possessive apostrophe with no additional "s" include "Dickens" and "Williams". There is often a policy of leaving off the additional "s" on any such name, but this can prove problematic when specific names are contradictory (for example, "St James’ Park" in Newcastle football ground and the area of "St. James's Park" in London). For more details on practice with geographic names, see the relevant section below.
Some writers like to reflect standard spoken practice in cases like these with "sake": "for convenience’ sake", "for goodness’ sake", "for appearance’ sake", "for compromise’ sake", etc. This punctuation is preferred in major style guides. Others prefer to add "'s": "for convenience's sake". Still others prefer to omit the apostrophe when there is an "s" sound before "sake": "for morality's sake", but "for convenience sake".
The Supreme Court of the United States is split on whether a possessive singular noun that ends with "s" should always have an additional "s" after the apostrophe, sometimes have an additional "s" after the apostrophe (for instance, based on whether the final sound of the original word is pronounced /s/ or /z/), or never have an additional "s" after the apostrophe. The informal majority view (5–4, based on past writings of the justices) has favoured the additional "s", but a strong minority disagrees.
Nouns ending with silent "s", "x" or "z".
The English possessive of French nouns ending in a silent "s", "x", or "z" is rendered differently by different authorities. Some people prefer "Descartes'" and "Dumas'", while others insist on "Descartes's" and "Dumas's". Certainly a sibilant is pronounced in these cases; the question addressed here is whether "s" needs to be added. Similar examples with "x" or "z": "Sauce Périgueux's main ingredient is truffle"; "His pince-nez's loss went unnoticed"; ""Verreaux('s) eagle, a large, predominantly black eagle, "Aquila verreauxi"..."" (OED, entry for "Verreaux", with silent "x"; see Verreaux's eagle); in each of these some writers might omit the added "s". The same principles and residual uncertainties apply with "naturalised" English words, like "Illinois" and "Arkansas".
For possessive "plurals" of words ending in silent "x", "z" or "s", the few authorities that address the issue at all typically call for an added "s" and suggest that the apostrophe precede the "s": "The Loucheux’s homeland is in the Yukon"; "Compare the two Dumas’s literary achievements". The possessive of a cited French title with a silent plural ending is uncertain: “"Trois femmes’s" long and complicated publication history”, but ""Les noces'" singular effect was 'exotic primitive'..." (with nearby sibilants "-ce-" in "noces" and "s-" in "singular"). Compare treatment of other titles, above.
Guides typically seek a principle that will yield uniformity, even for foreign words that fit awkwardly with standard English punctuation.
Possessives in geographic names.
Place names in the United States do not use the possessive apostrophe on federal maps and signs. The United States Board on Geographic Names, which has responsibility for formal naming of municipalities and geographic features, has deprecated the use of possessive apostrophes since 1890 so as not to show ownership of the place. Only five names of natural features in the U.S. are officially spelled with a genitive apostrophe (one example being Martha's Vineyard). "
On the other hand, the United Kingdom has Bishop's Stortford, Bishop's Castle and King's Lynn (among many others) but St Albans, St Andrews and St Helens. These names were mainly fixed in form many years before grammatical rules were fully standardised. While Newcastle United play football at a stadium previously called St James' Park, and Exeter City at St James Park, London has a St James's Park (this whole area of London is named after the parish of St James's Church, Piccadilly). The special circumstances of the latter case may be this: the customary pronunciation of this place name is reflected in the addition of an extra "-s"; since usage is firmly against a doubling of the final "-s" without an apostrophe, this place name has an apostrophe. This could be regarded by some people as an example of a double genitive: it refers to the park "of" the parish "of" St James.
Omission of the apostrophe in geographical names is becoming standard in some English-speaking countries, including Australia. Modern usage has been influenced by considerations of technological convenience including the economy of typewriter ribbons and films, and similar computer character "disallowance" which tend to ignore traditional canons of correctness. Practice in the United Kingdom and Canada is not so uniform.
Possessives in names of organizations.
Sometimes the apostrophe is omitted in the names of clubs, societies, and other organizations, even though the standard principles seem to require it: "Country Women's Association", but "International Aviation Association"; "Magistrates' Court of Victoria", but "Federated Ship Painters and Dockers Union". Usage is variable and inconsistent. Style guides typically advise consulting an official source for the standard form of the name (as one would do if uncertain about other aspects of the spelling of the name); some tend towards greater prescriptiveness, for or against such an apostrophe. As the case of "" shows, it is not possible to analyze these forms simply as non-possessive plurals, since "women" is the only correct plural form of "woman".
Possessives in business names.
Where a business name is based on a family name it should in theory take an apostrophe, but many leave it out (contrast "Sainsbury's" with "Harrods"). In recent times there has been an increasing tendency to drop the apostrophe. Names based on a first name are more likely to take an apostrophe, but this is not always the case (contrast "Joe's Crab Shack" with "Ralphs"). Some business names may inadvertently spell a different name if the name with an "s" at the end is also a name, such as Parson.
A small activist group called the Apostrophe Protection Society has campaigned for large retailers such as Harrods, Currys, and Selfridges to reinstate their missing punctuation. A spokesperson for Barclays PLC stated, "It has just disappeared over the years. Barclays is no longer associated with the family name." Further confusion can be caused by businesses whose names look as if they should be pronounced differently without an apostrophe, such as Paulos Circus, and other companies that leave the apostrophe out of their logos but include it in written text, such as Waterstone's and Cadwalader's.
Use in non-English names.
Names that are not strictly native to English sometimes have an apostrophe substituted to represent other characters (see also As a mark of elision, below).
Non-standard English use.
Failure to observe standard use of the apostrophe is widespread and frequently criticised as incorrect, often generating heated debate. The British founder of the Apostrophe Protection Society earned a 2001 Ig Nobel prize for "efforts to protect, promote and defend the differences between plural and possessive". A 2004 report by OCR, a British examination board, stated that "the inaccurate use of the apostrophe is so widespread as to be almost universal". A 2008 survey found that nearly half of the UK adults polled were unable to use the apostrophe correctly.
Superfluous apostrophes ("greengrocers' apostrophes").
Apostrophes used in a non-standard manner to form noun plurals are known as "greengrocers' apostrophes" or "grocers' apostrophes", often called (spelled) "greengrocer's apostrophes" and "grocer's apostrophes". They are sometimes humorously called "greengrocers apostrophe's", "rogue apostrophes", or "idiot's apostrophes" (a literal translation of the German word "Deppenapostroph", which criticises the misapplication of apostrophes in Denglisch). The practice, once common and acceptable (see Historical development), comes from the identical sound of the plural and possessive forms of most English nouns. It is often criticised as a form of hypercorrection coming from a widespread ignorance of the proper use of the apostrophe or of punctuation in general. Lynne Truss, author of "Eats, Shoots & Leaves", points out that before the 19th century, it was standard orthography to use the apostrophe to form a plural of a foreign-sounding word that ended in a vowel (e. g., "banana's", "folio's", "logo's", "quarto's", "pasta's", "ouzo's") to clarify pronunciation. Truss says this usage is no longer considered proper in formal writing.
The term is believed to have been coined in the middle of the 20th century by a teacher of languages working in Liverpool, at a time when such mistakes were common in the handwritten signs and advertisements of greengrocers (e. g., "Apple's 1/- a pound, Orange's 1/6d a pound"). Some have argued that its use in mass communication by employees of well-known companies has led to the less literate assuming it to be correct and adopting the habit themselves.
The same use of apostrophe before noun plural -s forms is sometimes made by non-native speakers of English. For example, in Dutch, the apostrophe is inserted before the "s" when pluralising most words ending in a vowel or "y" for example, "baby's" (English "babies") and "radio's" (English "radios"). This often produces so-called "Dunglish" errors when carried over into English. Hyperforeignism has been formalised in some pseudo-anglicisms. For example, the French word pin's (from English "pin") is used (with the apostrophe in both singular and plural) for collectable lapel pins. Similarly, there is an Andorran football club called FC Rànger's (after such British clubs as Rangers F.C.), a Japanese dance group called Super Monkey's, and a Japanese pop punk band called the "Titan Go King's".
Omission.
There is a tendency to drop apostrophes in many commonly used names such as St Annes, St Johns Lane, and so on.
In 2009, a resident in Royal Tunbridge Wells was accused of vandalism after he painted apostrophes on road signs that had spelt "St John's Close" as "St Johns Close".
UK supermarket chain Tesco omits the mark where standard practice would require it. Signs in Tesco advertise (among other items) . In his book "Troublesome Words", author Bill Bryson lambasts Tesco for this, stating that "the mistake is inexcusable, and those who make it are linguistic Neanderthals."
Advocates of greater or lesser use.
George Bernard Shaw, a proponent of English spelling reform on phonetic principles, argued that the apostrophe was mostly redundant. He did not use it for spelling "cant", "hes", etc. in many of his writings. He did however allow "I'm" and "it's". Hubert Selby, Jr. used a slash instead of an apostrophe mark for contractions and did not use an apostrophe at all for possessives. Lewis Carroll made greater use of apostrophes, and frequently used "sha'n't", with an apostrophe in place of the elided "ll" as well as the more usual "o". These authors' usages have not become widespread.
Other misuses.
The British pop group Hear'Say famously made unconventional use of an apostrophe in its name. Truss comments that "the naming of Hear'Say in 2001 was [...] a significant milestone on the road to punctuation anarchy". Dexys Midnight Runners, on the other hand, omit the apostrophe (though "dexys" can be understood as a plural form of "dexy", rather than a possessive form).
An apostrophe wrongly thought to be misused in popular culture occurs in the name of Liverpudlian rock band The La's. This apostrophe is often thought to be a mistake; but in fact it marks omission of the letter "d". The name comes from the Scouse slang for "The Lads".
Criticism.
Over the years, the use of apostrophes has been criticized. George Bernard Shaw called them "uncouth bacilli". In his book "American Speech", linguist Steven Byington stated of the apostrophe that "the language would be none the worse for its abolition." Adrian Room in his "English Journal" article "Axing the Apostrophe" argued that apostrophes are unnecessary and context will resolve any ambiguity. In a letter to the "English Journal", Peter Brodie stated that apostrophes are "largely decorative... rarely clarify meaning". Dr. John C. Wells, Emeritus Professor of Phonetics at University College London, says the apostrophe is "a waste of time". Peter Buck, guitarist of R.E.M. claimed, "We all hate apostrophes. There's never been a good rock album that's had an apostrophe in the title."
Non-English use.
As a mark of elision.
In many languages, especially European languages, the apostrophe is used to indicate the elision of one or more sounds, as in English.
As a glottal stop.
The apostrophe represents sounds resembling the glottal stop in the Turkic languages and in some romanizations of Semitic languages, including Arabic. In typography, this function may be performed by the closing single quotation mark. In that case, the Arabic letter "‘ayn" (ع) is correspondingly transliterated with the opening single quotation mark.
As a mark of palatalization or non-palatalization.
Some languages and transliteration systems use the apostrophe to mark the presence, or the lack of, palatalization.
To separate morphemes.
Some languages use the apostrophe to separate the root of a word and its affixes, especially if the root is foreign and unassimilated. (For another kind of morphemic separation see pinyin, below.)
Miscellaneous uses in other languages.
In Finnish, one of the consonant gradation patterns is the change of a "k" into a hiatus, e.g. "keko → keon" ("a pile → a pile's"). This hiatus has to be indicated in spelling with an apostrophe if a long vowel or a diphthong would be immediately followed by the final vowel, e.g. "ruoko → ruo'on", "vaaka → vaa'an". (This is in contrast to compound words, where the equivalent problem is solved with a hyphen, e.g. "maa-ala", "land area".) Similarly, the apostrophe is used to mark the hiatus (contraction) that occurs in poetry, e.g. "miss' on" for "missä on" ("where is").
Typographic form.
The form of the apostrophe originates in manuscript writing, as a point with a downwards tail curving clockwise. This form was inherited by the "typographic apostrophe" ( ’ ), also known as the "typeset apostrophe", or, informally, the "curly apostrophe". Later sans-serif typefaces had stylized apostrophes with a more geometric or simplified form, but usually retaining the same directional bias as a closing quotation mark.
With the invention of the typewriter, a "neutral" quotation mark form ( ' ) was created to economize on the keyboard, by using a single key to represent: the apostrophe, both opening and closing single quotation marks, single primes, and on some typewriters the exclamation point by overprinting with a period. This is known as the "typewriter apostrophe" or "vertical apostrophe". The same convention was adopted for quotation marks.
Both simplifications carried over to computer keyboards and the ASCII character set. However, although these are widely used due to their ubiquity and convenience, they are deprecated in contexts where proper typography is important.
Computing.
ASCII encoding.
The typewriter apostrophe ( ' ) was inherited by computer keyboards, and is the only apostrophe character available in the (7-bit) ASCII character encoding, at code value 0x27 (39). As such, it is a highly overloaded character. In ASCII, it represents a right single quotation mark, left single quotation mark, apostrophe, vertical line or prime (punctuation marks), or an acute accent (modifier letters).
Many earlier (pre-1985) computer displays and printers rendered the ASCII apostrophe as a typographic apostrophe, and rendered the ASCII grave accent ( ` ) U+0060 as a matching left single quotation mark. This allowed a more typographic appearance of text: codice_1 would appear as codice_2 on these systems. This can still be seen in many documents prepared at that time, and is still used in the TeX typesetting system to create typographic quotes.
Typographic apostrophe in 8-bit encodings.
Support for the typographic apostrophe ( ’ ) was introduced in a variety of 8-bit character encodings, such as the Apple Macintosh operating system's Mac Roman character set (in 1984), and later in the CP1252 encoding of Microsoft Windows. There is no such character in ISO-8859-1.
Microsoft Windows CP1252 (sometimes incorrectly called "ANSI" or "ISO-Latin") contains the typographic apostrophe at 0x92. Due to "smart quotes" in Microsoft software converting the ASCII apostrophe to this value, other software makers have been forced to adopt this as a "de facto" convention. For instance the . Some earlier non-Microsoft browsers would display a '?' for this and make web pages composed with Microsoft software somewhat hard to read.
Entering apostrophes.
Although ubiquitous in typeset material, the typographic apostrophe ( ’ ) is rather difficult to enter on a computer, since it does not have its own key on a standard keyboard. Outside the world of professional typesetting and graphic design, many people do not know how to enter this character and instead use the typewriter apostrophe ( ' ). The typewriter apostrophe has always been considered tolerable on Web pages because of the egalitarian nature of Web publishing, the low resolution of computer monitors in comparison to print, and legacy limitations provided by ASCII.
More recently, the correct use of the typographic apostrophe is becoming more common on the Web due to the wide adoption of the Unicode text encoding standard, higher-resolution displays, and advanced anti-aliasing of text in modern operating systems. Because typewriter apostrophes are now often automatically converted to typographic apostrophes by wordprocessing and desktop-publishing software (see below), the typographic apostrophe does often appear in documents produced by non-professionals.
XML (and hence XHTML) defines an codice_3 character entity reference for the ASCII typewriter apostrophe. No equivalent entity is defined in the HTML 4 standard, despite all the other predefined character entities from XML being defined in HTML. If it cannot be entered literally in HTML, a numeric character reference could be used instead, such as "&#x27;" or "&#39;".
Smart quotes.
To make typographic apostrophes easier to enter, word processing and publishing software often converts typewriter apostrophes to typographic apostrophes during text entry (at the same time converting opening and closing single and double quotes to their correct left-handed or right-handed forms). A similar facility may be offered on web servers after submitting text in a form field, e.g. on weblogs or free encyclopedias. This is known as the "smart quotes" feature; apostrophes and quotation marks that are not automatically altered by computer programs are known as "dumb quotes".
Such conversion is not always done in accordance with the standards for character sets and encodings. Additionally, many such software programs incorrectly convert a leading apostrophe to an opening quotation mark (e.g., in abbreviations of years: "‘29" rather than the correct "’29" for the years "1929" or "2029" (depending on context); or "‘twas" instead of "’twas" as the archaic abbreviation of "it was". Smart quote features also often fail to recognise situations when a prime rather than an apostrophe is needed; for example, incorrectly rendering the latitude 49° 53′ 08″ as 49° 53’ 08”.
In Microsoft Word it is possible to turn smart quotes off (in some versions, by navigating through "Tools", "AutoCorrect", "AutoFormat as you type", and then unchecking the appropriate option). Alternatively, typing Control-Z (for "Undo") immediately after entering the apostrophe will convert it back to a typewriter apostrophe. In Microsoft Word for Windows, holding down the Control key while typing two apostrophes will produce a single typographic apostrophe.
Programming.
Some programming languages, like Pascal, use the ASCII apostrophe to delimit string constants. In JavaScript (and ECMAScript, which is nearly identical), Perl, PHP and Python, and many other languages either the apostrophe or the double quote may be used, allowing string constants to contain the other character (but not to contain both without using an escape character).
The C programming language (and many related languages like C++ or Java) uses apostrophes to delimit a character constant. In these languages a character constant is a different object than a 1-letter string.
In Visual Basic (and earlier Microsoft BASIC dialects such as QuickBASIC) an apostrophe is used to denote the start of a comment.
