LeBron Raymone James (; born December 30, 1984), nicknamed "King James", is an American professional basketball player for the Miami Heat of the National Basketball Association (NBA). A small forward who has also played as a power forward, he has been an NBA champion, the NBA Finals MVP, a three-time NBA MVP, and the NBA Rookie of the Year. James is a nine-time NBA All-Star, and has been named to eight All-NBA teams and four All-Defensive teams. He is also the Cleveland Cavaliers' all-time leading scorer, and holds other franchise records for both the Cavaliers and the Heat. On January 16, 2013, he became the youngest player in NBA history to reach 20,000 career points, at 28 years and 17 days of age. 
James played high school basketball at St. Vincent – St. Mary High School in his hometown of Akron, Ohio. A three-time "Mr. Basketball of Ohio", he was highly promoted in the national media as a future NBA superstar. After graduating, he was selected with the first overall pick of the 2003 NBA Draft by the Cleveland Cavaliers. James led the Cavaliers to the 2007 NBA Finals, their first NBA Finals appearance in franchise history, but the team was swept by the San Antonio Spurs. In 2010, he left the Cavaliers for the Heat in a highly publicized free agency period. In his first year in Miami, the Heat reached the 2011 NBA Finals, but lost to the Dallas Mavericks. James won his first championship in 2012 when the Heat defeated the Oklahoma City Thunder. He was awarded the NBA Finals MVP Award. His career achievements and leadership role during the Heat's 2012 championship run have led a majority of basketball analysts, experts, and writers to consider him the best player in the NBA today.
Off the court, James has accumulated considerable wealth and fame as a result of numerous endorsement contracts. His public life has been the subject of much scrutiny, and he has been ranked as one of America's most disliked and influential athletes. He has also been featured in books, documentaries, and television commercials, and has hosted the ESPY Awards and "Saturday Night Live".
Early life.
Childhood and youth.
James was born on December 30, 1984 in Akron, Ohio, to a 16-year-old mother, Gloria Marie James. Growing up, life was often a struggle for James and his mother, who raised her son by herself. The two moved around frequently as Gloria was never able to land steady work, and her taste in men was often questionable, with one of them, Eddie Jackson, going to prison in 1990 for aggravated cocaine trafficking. Embarrassed by his home life, James didn't make friends easily at school and had all but dropped out by the fourth grade.
James used sports as an outlet to take out his frustrations, favoring basketball and football. In his first year of Pee-Wee Football, he formed a bond with his coach Frankie Walker, who arranged with Gloria for James to live with the Walkers to stabilize James' living environment. The structure of the Walker household worked wonders for James, who began attending school regularly again. After 18 months of living with the Walkers, Gloria took James back before financial problems arose and she returned him back to the Walkers. For the remainder of James' high school career, he could always call the Walkers' house home no matter where he lived. While James was with the Walkers, he became close friends with three boys: Sian Cotton, Dru Joyce III, and Willie McGee. Inseparable, they played AAU basketball together, reaching the 1999 AAU National Championship Tournament and dubbing themselves the "Fab Four". The group stirred local controversy when they chose to attend high school at St. Vincent-St. Mary, a largely white school, instead of their local public school. During their sophomore year, they added a final member to their group named Romeo Travis. Nicknamed the "Akron Fab Five", their friendship later became the subject of a documentary titled "More Than a Game".
High school career.
At St. Vincent–St. Mary, James starred as a two-sport athlete, playing basketball and football. A distinguished wide receiver, he was named first-team all-state in his sophomore year and led the Fighting Irish to the state semifinals in his junior year. His football career came to an end before his senior year when he broke his wrist during an AAU basketball game. Many sports analysts, football critics, and former and current players have speculated on whether he could have played in the NFL.
James was a starter for St. Vincent-St. Mary's varsity basketball team since his freshman year. During this year, he averaged 21 points and 6.2 rebounds per game, eventually leading the Irish to the Ohio High School Athletic Association (OHSAA) Division III state title. The next year, he upped his averages to 25.2 points and 7.2 rebounds per game, while also contributing 5.8 assists and 3.8 steals per game. The Irish finished the season 26–1 and repeated as state champions. For his outstanding play, James was named Ohio's Mr. Basketball and was selected to the "USA Today" All-USA First Team, becoming the first ever sophomore to do either.
James gained national attention during his junior year. Prior to the start of the season, he appeared in "SLAM Magazine" and was lauded as possibly "the best high school basketball player in America right now" by writer Ryan Jones. With averages of 29 points, 8.3 rebounds, 5.7 assists, and 3.3 steals per game, he was again named Ohio's Mr. Basketball and selected to the All-USA First Team. Additionally, he was named the 2001–02 boys' basketball Gatorade National Player of the Year. Regardless, St. Vincent-St. Mary did not defend its state championship from the year before, losing to Roger Bacon High School in the OHSAA Division II championship game. Following the loss, James seriously considered declaring for the 2002 NBA Draft, petitioning for an adjustment to the NBA's draft eligibility rules which required prospective players to have at least graduated from high school. Although the petition was unsuccessful, it only further raised his exposure. During this time, James used marijuana to help cope with stress resulting from the constant media attention he was receiving.
By the time James' senior year began, he had already appeared on the covers of "ESPN The Magazine" and "Sports Illustrated". As his following expanded, St. Vincent-St. Mary was forced to move their games and practices to James A. Rhodes Arena at the University of Akron. The Irish's regular season games were frequently attended by celebrities such as Shaquille O'Neal, with some being televised nationally on ESPN2 and regionally on pay-per-view. For the season, James averaged 31.6 points, 9.6 rebounds, 4.6 assists, and 3.4 steals per game. He was named Ohio's Mr. Basketball and selected to the All-USA First Team for an unprecedented third consecutive year. He participated in three year-end high school basketball all-star games – the EA Sports Roundball Classic, the Jordan Capital Classic, and the 2003 McDonald's All-American Game -, losing his NCAA eligibility and making it official he would enter the 2003 NBA Draft. James finished his high school basketball career with 2,657 points, 892 rebounds, and 523 assists. On January 31, 2012, he was honored as one of the 35 Greatest McDonald's All-Americans.
Despite his accomplishments, James' senior year was a tumultuous one. For his 18th birthday, he accepted a Hummer H2 from his mother Gloria, who secured a loan for the vehicle utilizing LeBron's future earning power as a professional athlete. This prompted an investigation by the OHSAA because under their guidelines, no amateur may accept any gift valued over $100 as a reward for athletic performance. Later in the season, James accepted two throwback jerseys worth $845 from an urban clothing store in exchange for his posing for pictures, officially violating OHSAA rules and resulting in him being stripped of his high school sports eligibility. James appealed the ruling and his penalty was eventually dropped to a two game suspension, allowing him to play the remainder of the season. The Irish were also forced to forfeit one of their wins, their only official loss that season.
NBA career.
Cleveland Cavaliers (2003–2010).
Rookie season.
James was selected by the Cleveland Cavaliers with the number one overall pick in the 2003 NBA Draft. In his first professional game he recorded 25 points, setting an NBA record for most points scored by a prep-to-pro player in his debut outing. In a late season match-up with the New Jersey Nets, he scored a season-high 41 points, becoming the youngest player in league history to score at least 40 points in a game at 19 years. James was eventually named the 2003–04 NBA Rookie of the Year, finishing with averages of 20.9 points, 5.9 assists, and 5.5 rebounds per game. He became the first Cavalier to receive the honor and joined Oscar Robertson and Michael Jordan as the only players in NBA history to average at least 20 points, 5 rebounds, and 5 assists per game in their rookie season (Tyreke Evans has since joined this group). The Cavaliers finished the season 35-47, failing to make the playoffs despite an 18-game improvement over the previous season.
2004–05 season.
James recorded his his first ever triple-double on January 19 of the 2004–05 season, becoming the youngest player in league history to record a triple-double at 20 years. His strong play earned him his first NBA All-Star Game selection, where he added 13 points, 8 rebounds, and 6 assists in a winning effort for the Eastern Conference. On March 20, James scored a career-high 56 points against the Toronto Raptors, setting Cleveland's new single game points record. With averages of 27.2 points, 7.4 rebounds, 7.2 assists, and 2.2 steals per game to finish the season, he became the youngest player in league history to be named to an All-NBA Team, being selected to the All-NBA Second Team. Despite a 30-20 record to start the year, Cleveland again failed to make the playoffs, finishing the year with a 42–40 record.
2005–06 season.
James averaged 31.4 points, 7.0 rebounds, and 6.6 assists per game during the 2005–06 season, becoming the youngest player in NBA history to average at least 30 points per game. At the 2006 NBA All-Star Game, he led the East to victory with a 29 point, 6 rebound, 2 assist performance, and became the youngest ever winner of the NBA All-Star Game Most Valuable Player Award at 21 years, 51 days. He was considered a strong candidate for the NBA Most Valuable Player Award but eventually finished second in the voting to Steve Nash; however, he was awarded co-MVP honors with Nash by The Sporting News.
Under James' leadership, the Cavaliers qualified for the playoffs for the first time since 1998, improving their record by 33 wins from three years prior. In his playoff debut, he recorded a triple-double with 32 points, 11 rebounds, and 11 assists in a winning effort versus the Washington Wizards. He joined Johnny McCarthy and Magic Johnson as the only players in NBA history to register a triple-double in their playoff debut. For the series, James averaged 35.7 points per game and Cleveland defeated the Wizards in six games. In the next round, the Cavaliers were ousted by the defending Eastern Conference champion Detroit Pistons. James' final playoff averages were 30.8 points, 8.1 rebounds, and 5.8 assists per game.
After the playoffs, James and the Cavaliers negotiated a three-year contract extension with a player option for a fourth year. The contract was worth $60 million and began at the start of the 2007–08 season. Although it was for fewer years and less money than the maximum he could sign, it allowed him the option of seeking a new contract worth more money as an unrestricted free agent following the 2010 season. He had discussed this with fellow members of his 2003 draft class Dwyane Wade and Chris Bosh, who also re-signed with their respective teams while allowing them to be unrestricted agents in 2010.
2006–07 season.
James was elected to his third consecutive All-Star Game in the 2006–07 season. For the year, he averaged 27.3 points, 6.7 rebounds, 6.0 assists, and 1.6 steals per game. The Cavaliers again finished the year with 50 wins and entered the playoffs as the Eastern Conference's second seed. In the first round, Cleveland defeated the Wizards for the second straight season, sweeping them in four games. For the series, James averaged 27.8 points, 7.5 assists, and 8.5 rebounds per game. In the second round, James averaged 25.0 points, 7.2 rebounds, and 8.6 assists per game, leading the Cavaliers past the Nets in six games. In the Eastern Conference Finals, Cleveland faced the Pistons in a rematch from the year before. In Game 5, James had one of the greatest playoff performances in league history. He managed a franchise record 48 points on 54.5 percent shooting to go with 9 rebounds and 7 assists, and scored 29 of the Cavaliers' last 30 points including the game-winning lay-up with two seconds left. After the game, play-by-play announcer Marv Albert called the performance "one of the greatest moments in postseason history" and color commentator Steve Kerr called it "Jordan-esque." Cleveland won the series to advance to the Finals versus San Antonio, losing in four games. For the postseason, James averaged 25.1 points, 8.0 assists, and 8.1 rebounds per game, although his Finals averages dropped to 22.0 points, 7.0 rebounds, and 6.8 assists per game.
2007–08 season.
During the 2007–08 season, James was selected to his fourth consecutive All-Star Game and won the All-Star Game MVP award for the second time behind a 27 point, 8 rebound, 9 assist, 2 block, and 2 steal performance. On February 27, he became the youngest player in NBA history to score 10,000 career points at 23 years, 59 days in a game against the Boston Celtics. On March 21, he moved past Brad Daugherty as the Cavaliers' all-time leading scorer in a game against the Raptors, doing so in over 100 less games than Daugherty. With seven triple-doubles to finish the year, James set a new personal and team record for triple-doubles in a season. 
Despite James' individual accomplishments, Cleveland's record fell from the year before to 45–37. Seeded fourth in the Eastern Conference entering the playoffs, the Cavaliers were matched up with the Wizards in the first round for the third consecutive season. In a pre-series interview, Washington guard DeShawn Stevenson stirred up controversy when he called James "overrated". In response, James said that he would not return the insult because it would be like "Jay-Z to a negative comment made by Soulja Boy." James later said that he meant no disrespect to Soulja Boy with his comment, and that his young son was a big fan of the rapper. In the series, Cleveland defeated the Wizards in six games before being eliminated in seven games by the Celtics in the next round. During the decisive seventh game in Boston, James scored 45 points and Paul Pierce scored 41 in a game the Associated Press described as a "shootout".
2008–09 season.
In the 2008–09 season, James finished second in Defensive Player of the Year voting and made his first All-Defensive Team behind 23 chase-down blocks and a career-high 93 total blocks. He also became the fourth player in NBA history to lead his team in all five major statistical categories (total points, rebounds, assists, steals, and blocks) in one season. Behind his play and the acquisition of All-Star Mo Williams, the Cavaliers went a franchise record 66–16 and fell one game short of matching the best home record in league history. With averages of 28.4 points, 7.6 rebounds, 7.2 assists, 1.7 steals, and a career-high 1.2 blocks per game, James became the first Cavalier to win the NBA MVP Award.
In the playoffs, Cleveland swept the Pistons in the first round. At the end of Game 4, Detroit's home crowd started an MVP chant for James, who registered 36 points, 13 rebounds, and 8 assists that night. In the next round, the Cavaliers swept the Atlanta Hawks. Cleveland entered the Conference Finals as the favorites against the Orlando Magic but lost Game 1 at home despite one of James' greatest games where he scored 49 points on 66 percent shooting. In Game 2, he hit a game-winner to tie the series at 1–1. The Cavaliers would lose the series in six games, and following the loss in Game 6, James immediately left the floor without shaking hands with his opponents. This caused a storm of controversy as many media members viewed the act as unsportsmanlike. James later told reporters: "It's hard for me to congratulate somebody after you just lose to them, I'm a winner. It's not being a poor sport or anything like that. If somebody beats you up, you're not going to congratulate them. ... I'm a competitor. That's what I do. It doesn't make sense for me to go over and shake somebody's hand."
2009–10 season.
To address their lack of an inside presence against Orlando, the Cavaliers traded for center Shaquille O'Neal before the 2009–10 season. To give James more scoring help, Cleveland also added All-Star Antawn Jamison to their roster at the trading deadline. During the season, James was selected to his sixth consecutive All-Star Game. On March 13, he became the youngest player in NBA history to score 15,000 career points at 25 years, 79 days during a game against the Chicago Bulls. At the end of the season, he was named NBA MVP for the second consecutive year with averages of 29.7 points, 7.3 rebounds, a career-high 8.6 assists, 1 block, and 1.6 steals per game on 50 percent shooting. The Cavaliers also finished the regular season with the league's best record for the second straight year.
In the playoffs, the Cavaliers beat the Chicago Bulls in the first round but fell to the Celtics in the second round. James was heavily criticized for not playing well, particularly in Game 5 of the series when he shot only 20 percent on 14 shots, scoring 15 points. At the conclusion of the game he walked off the court to a smattering of boos from Cleveland's home crowd, the team having just suffered their worst home playoff loss ever. The Cavaliers were officially eliminated in Game 6, with James recording 27 points, 19 rebounds, and 10 assists, but on just 38 percent shooting with 9 turnovers.
2010 free agency.
James became an unrestricted free agent at 12:01 am EST on July 1, 2010. During his free agency he was courted by several teams including the Bulls, Los Angeles Clippers, Miami Heat, Knicks, New Jersey Nets, and Cavaliers. On July 8, he announced on a live ESPN special titled "The Decision" that he would sign with the Heat. The telecast, broadcast from the Boys & Girls Club of Greenwich, Connecticut, raised $2.5 million for the charity and an additional $3.5 million from advertisement revenue that was donated to other various charities. Just days prior to the special, fellow free agents Bosh and Wade announced that they would also be joining Miami. James decided to join with Bosh and Wade in part so that he could shoulder less load offensively, thinking that his improved teammates would give him a better chance of winning a championship than had he stayed in Cleveland. Heat president Pat Riley played a major role in selling James on the idea of playing with Bosh and Wade.
James drew immense criticism from sports analysts, executives, fans, and current and former players for leaving the Cavaliers. "The Decision" itself was also scrutinized and viewed as unnecessary. Many thought the prolonged wait for James' choice was unprofessional as not even the teams courting him were aware of his decision until moments before the show. Upon learning that James would not be returning to Cleveland, Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert published an open letter to fans in which he aggressively denounced James' actions. Some fans of the team were so angry at James that they recorded videos of themselves burning his jersey. Former NBA players including Michael Jordan and Magic Johnson were also critical of James, condemning him for joining with Bosh and Wade in Miami and not trying to win a championship as "the guy". James drew further criticism in a September interview with CNN when he claimed that race might have been a factor in the fallout from "The Decision". As a result of his actions during the 2010 free agency period, James quickly gained a reputation as one of America's most disliked athletes, a radical change from years prior. The phrase "taking my talents to South Beach" became a punch line for critics.
Immediately following "The Decision", James claimed that there was nothing he would change about the handling of his free agency despite all the criticism. Since then, he has expressed remorse over his actions. During the 2010–11 season, he said he "probably would do it a little bit different ... But I’m happy with my decision." He declined to be more specific. James relented about the special before the 2011–12 season: "... if the shoe was on the other foot and I was a fan, and I was very passionate about one player, and he decided to leave, I would be upset too about the way he handled it."
Miami Heat (2010–present).
2010–11 season.
James officially became a member of the Heat on July 9, completing a sign-and-trade six-year contract with the team. With the move, he became only the third reigning MVP to change teams and the first since Moses Malone in 1982. Although his contract would have allowed him to earn the maximum salary under the collective bargaining agreement, he took less money in order for Miami to be able to afford Bosh and Wade as well as further roster support. That evening, the Heat threw a welcome party for their new "big three" at the American Airlines Arena, an event that took on a rock concert atmosphere. During the gathering, James predicted a dynasty for the Heat and alluded to multiple championships. Outside of Miami the spectacle was not well-received, furthering the negative public perception of James.
Throughout the 2010–11 season, James embraced the villain role bestowed upon him by the media. He later said that the negativity surrounding him as a result of his actions during the 2010 free agency period "basically turned me into somebody I wasn't ... You start to hear 'the villain,' now you have to be the villain, you know, and I started to buy into it. I started to play the game of basketball at a level, or at a mind state that I've never played at before ... meaning, angry. And that's mentally. That's not the way I play the game of basketball." In an early season victory versus the Minnesota Timberwolves, he registered a game-high 12 assists, the most ever by a Heat forward. One week later, he recorded a triple-double in a loss to the Utah Jazz, his first ever triple-double with the Heat. On December 2, he returned to Cleveland for the first time since departing as a free agent, scoring 38 points and leading Miami to a win while being booed every time he touched the ball. In a well-publicized visit to New York after rejecting their summer free agency bids, he had his second triple-double of the year with 32 points, 11 rebounds, and 10 assists in a win for Miami over the Knicks. On February 3, he registered a season-high 51 points to go along with 11 rebounds and 8 assists versus Orlando.
Entering the playoffs as the Eastern Conference's second seed, Miami defeated the Philadelphia 76ers in the first round and the Celtics in the second round. In the Conference Finals, Miami met the first-seeded Bulls, winning in five games. In the 2011 NBA Finals, Miami stumbled against the Dallas Mavericks, losing in six games despite holding a 2–1 series lead going into Game 4. James received the brunt of the criticism for the loss, averaging only 3 points in fourth quarters in the series. His scoring average of 17.8 points per game signified an 8.9-point drop from the regular season, the lowest such drop-off in league history.
2011–12 season.
Humbled by Miami's loss to Dallas, James spent the offseason attempting to improve himself as a basketball player and a person, and worked with Hakeem Olajuwon on his post game. The Heat opened the lockout-shortened 2011–12 season on a strong note, finishing January with a 16–5 record and matching their best start to a season in franchise history. In the 2012 All-Star Game, James tied Kevin Durant with a game-high 36 points and tied the All-Star Game record of six three-pointers made. At the conclusion of the season, James was named league MVP for the third time, finishing with averages of 27.1 points, 7.9 rebounds, 6.2 assists, and 1.9 steals per game on 53 percent shooting.
The Heat entered the playoffs with the second seed in the Eastern Conference. They defeated the Knicks in five games in the first round before falling behind 2–1 to Indiana in the second round. In Game 4, James turned in one of the best all-around performances of his career, registering 40 points, 18 rebounds, and 9 assists in a winning effort on the road. Miami eventually won the series in six games. In the Conference Finals, the Heat again faced the Celtics, winning the first two games before dropping the next three. Facing elimination, James lead Miami to victory by scoring 45 points in Game 6, making 19 of 26 shot attempts for a 73 percent shooting rate. He also contributed 15 rebounds and 5 assists, becoming the second player in league history to do so besides Wilt Chamberlain. The Heat won Game 7 to advance to the 2012 NBA Finals.
In the Finals, the Heat were matched up with the Oklahoma City Thunder. Despite holding a 13-point first half lead in Game 1, Miami lost the first game of the series. In Game 2, the Heat again built a double-digit lead, this time holding on and winning to tie the series at 1–1. Back in Miami, the Heat took Game 3 to go up 2–1. Game 4 proved to be a memorable one for James. With five minutes left in the game, he started experiencing leg cramps and was carried off the floor. He returned soon after and hit a three-pointer with 2:51 left to give Miami a three point lead they did not relinquish. In Game 5, James registered his only triple-double of the season with 26 points, 11 rebounds, and 13 assists as Miami defeated Oklahoma City for their second ever championship and James' first championship. James was unanimously voted the NBA Finals MVP with averages of 28.6 points, 10.2 rebounds, and 7.4 assists per game. His final playoff averages were 30.3 points, 9.7 rebounds, and 5.6 assists per game.
2012–13 season.
On January 16 of the 2012-13 season, James became the youngest player in NBA history to score 20,000 career points at 28 years, 17 days during a game against the Golden State Warriors. In February, he became the first player in league history to score at least 30 points and shoot at least 60 percent in six straight games.
International career.
In 2004, James was selected to the United States national team for the Olympic Games in Athens, Greece. The team finished the competition with a bronze medal, becoming the first USA basketball squad to return home without a gold medal since NBA professionals became eligible. Limited to 14.6 minutes per game, James averaged 5.8 points and 2.6 rebounds per game.
At the 2006 FIBA World Championship in Japan, James took on a greater role for Team USA, averaging 13.9 points, 4.8 rebounds, and 4.1 assists per game as co-captain. The squad finished the competition with an 8–1 record, again leaving a tournament with a bronze. Having failed to win the World Championship, Team USA were forced to compete at Americas Championships 2007 to qualify for the 2008 Olympics in Beijing, China. During the tournament's championship game against Argentina, James recorded 31 points, the most ever by an American in an Olympic qualifier, as Team USA captured gold medal honors, officially qualifying for the 2008 Olympics. For the tournament, he averaged 18.1 points, 4.7 assists, 3.6 rebounds, and 1.5 steals per game on a tournament-high 76 percent shooting and 62.2 percent three-point shooting percentage. At the Olympics, Team USA went unbeaten, winning their first gold medal since 2000. In the final game, James turned in 14 points, 6 rebounds, and 3 assists against Spain. It was later reported that he was originally at risk for not being included on the national team's roster due to his immaturity and "downright disrespectfulness".
James did not play at the 2010 FIBA World Championship because of a busy summer schedule, but rejoined Team USA for the 2012 Olympics in London, England. During the Games, he recorded the first triple-double in Olympic basketball history. Team USA went on to win their second straight gold medal, again defeating Spain in the final game. James contributed 19 points in the win, becoming the all-time leading scorer in U.S. men's basketball history. He also joined Michael Jordan as the only players to win an NBA MVP award, NBA championship, and Olympic gold medal in the same year.
Player profile.
James has started at the small forward and power forward positions, but can also play and guard the other three positions. With career averages of 27.6 points, 6.9 assists, and 7.2 rebounds per game, he is a versatile player who has been compared by some to Oscar Robertson, Magic Johnson, and Michael Jordan. He has earned All-NBA honors every season since his 2004–05 sophomore season and All-Defensive honors every season since 2008–09. With three MVP trophies, he is part of a select group of players to have won the award three times, including Jordan, Magic Johnson, Larry Bird, Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, Chamberlain, and Bill Russell.
Standing at six feet, eight inches tall and weighing in at 250 pounds, James has been called the best physical specimen in sports by some analysts. Due to his athletic ability, he is one of the best slashers and finishers in basketball, having led the league in completed traditional three point plays during various points in his career. His size also allows him to rebound the ball effectively, and he regularly ranks among the league leaders in rebounds for his position. Furthermore, he is an unusually gifted passer for his position, averaging 8.6 assists per game during the 2009–10 campaign and finishing the year ranked sixth overall in that category. Despite his talents, he has been criticized for not developing a reliable jump shot or post game.
James' clutch play has been the subject of much scrutiny throughout his career. He has been repeatedly criticized by the media for his play in pressure situations; specifically, for passing instead of shooting in the waning seconds of close games. Even teammate Chris Bosh has gone on record as stating that he would rather have Dwyane Wade take a last-second shot. On the other hand, a 2011 article by Henry Abbott revealed that James had a better shooting percentage with the game on the line than such notables as Ray Allen and Kobe Bryant. Additionally, a 2012 feature by ESPN ranked three of James' playoff performances as some of the greatest in NBA history.
Off the court.
Personal life.
James has two children with his high school sweetheart, Savannah Brinson. The first, LeBron James Jr., was born on October 6, 2004, and the second, Bryce Maximus James, on June 14, 2007. They currently reside in Coconut Grove, a Miami suburb, where James bought a three-story mansion overlooking Biscayne Bay for $9 million. James became engaged to Brinson on December 31, 2011, proposing to her at a party to celebrate New Year’s Eve and his 27th birthday.
Endorsements.
James has endorsement contracts with Nike, Sprite, Glacéau, Bubblicious, Upper Deck, McDonald's, State Farm, Dunkin' Brands, and Audemars Piguet. His initial contract with Nike was worth almost $90 million. In 2007, he acted in a series of Nike commercials called "The LeBrons". Two years later, he had his likeness voiced by Kenan Thompson in another series of Nike commercials titled "MVPuppets". In 2011, Fenway Sports Group became the sole global marketer of James' rights, and as part of the deal, he and his manager Maverick Carter were granted minority stakes in the English Premier League football club Liverpool F.C. As a result of his endorsement money and NBA salary, James has been listed as one of the world's highest-paid athletes.
Entertainment.
James, with comedian Jimmy Kimmel, co-hosted the 2007 ESPY Awards. In other comedic pursuits, he hosted the 33rd season premiere of "Saturday Night Live". The show's creator Lorne Michaels praised him for his versatility. In 2009, James was featured in the Lions Gate documentary "More Than a Game". He has also tried his hand at acting, appearing in a cameo role on the HBO series "Entourage".
Public image.
James' public life has been a subject of public scrutiny since high school, and in 2010 he was ranked by Forbes as the second most influential athlete behind Lance Armstrong. As a member of the Cavaliers, he was adored by local fans, with Sherwin-Williams displaying a giant Nike-produced banner of James on their world headquarters throughout his tenure with the team. Despite their affection for James, Cleveland fans and critics were frequently annoyed when he attended Cleveland Indians games against the New York Yankees dressed in a Yankees hat. Following his actions during the 2010 free agency period and, more specifically, "The Decision", he has been listed as one of the most disliked athletes.
A philanthropist, James is an active supporter of the Boys & Girls Club of America, Children's Defense Fund, and ONEXONE. He has also established his own charity foundation called the LeBron James Family Foundation, based out of Akron. Since 2005, the foundation has held an annual bike-a-thon in Akron to raise money for various causes.
In March 2008, James became the first black man to appear on the cover of "Vogue", posing with Gisele Bündchen. He was the third man to appear on the cover of "Vogue", after Richard Gere and George Clooney. Some sports bloggers and columnists considered the cover offensive, describing the demeanor of James and his holding Bündchen as a reference to classic imagery of the movie monster King Kong, a dark savage capturing his light-skinned love interest.
While James has largely avoided political issues, he drew criticism in 2007 when he declined to sign a petition started by his Cavaliers teammate Ira Newble regarding the Chinese government's alleged involvement in the ongoing conflict in the Darfur region of Sudan, stating that he did not know enough about the issue. A year later, James did talk publicly about the issue, saying, "At the end of the day we're talking about human rights. And people should understand that human rights and people's lives are in jeopardy. We're not talking about contracts here. We're not talking about money. We're talking about people's lives being lost and that means a lot more to me than some money or a contract." In June 2008, James donated $20,000 to a committee to elect Barack Obama. On October 29, 2008, James gathered almost 20,000 people at the Quicken Loans Arena for a viewing of Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama's 30-minute "American Stories, American Solutions" television advertisement. It was shown on a large screen above the stage, where Jay-Z later held a free concert.
