Joseph Eugene "Joey" Kovar (July 24, 1983 – August 17, 2012) was an American reality television star and bodybuilder who first appeared in the twentieth season of MTV's "The Real World", "", in 2008. In 2010, Kovar appeared as a patient on the VH1 reality show, "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew", for treatment of addictions to alcohol, cocaine, ecstasy, methamphetamines, and steroids.
Early life.
Kovar was a native of Evergreen Park, Illinois, where he continued to reside after appearing on "The Real World: Hollywood" and other shows. He battled addiction to both drugs and alcohol before appearing in television.
Career.
Kovar, a former personal trainer, was discovered at age 24 by a talent scout on a Chicago street. In 2008, Kovar was cast in the twentieth season of the long-running MTV series, "The Real World". Kovar believed he was cast for the "" due to his personality and openness about past partying and drug use. In a 2009 interview with the Chicago Tribune, Kovar elaborated, "We kind of have an 'I don't give a ' attitude. What you see is what you get...People want edgy. People want attitude. People want in-your-face, and that's what Chicagoans bring. The attitude we have is what's going to draw the ratings." Kovar became increasingly addicted to drugs and alcohol while filming "The Real World". He was asked to leave the show due to erratic behavior and substance abuse to pursue treatment.
Kovar next appeared in the third season of "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew", which was filmed in 2009 and premiered in January 2009. Other cast members for the season included Dennis Rodman, Mackenzie Phillips, and Heidi Fleiss. He was treated on the show for addictions to alcohol, cocaine, ecstasy, methamphetamines, and steroids. In an on-camera discussion about his addiction to cocaine with Dr. Drew Pinsky, the show's host and addiction medicine specialist, at the end of the season Kovar stated, "I want this, but at the same time, I'm not going to make any false ... promises...I'm not going to tell you. 'I'm going to be sober,' 'cause I don’t know."
Death.
Joey Kovar died of a suspected drug overdose on August 17, 2012, at the age of 29. He was discovered with blood coming out of his nose and ears at an apartment building in 9800 block of South Sayre Avenue in Chicago Ridge, Illinois. Kovar was pronounced dead at the scene shortly before 9 a.m. An initial autopsy proved inconclusive. The celebrity news website TMZ reported that Kovar had ingested a combination of alcohol, viagra and cocaine the night before his death. Kovar's family believed he had been sober for approximately six months while he pursued acting, but a later autopsy indicated that Kovar succumbed to "opiate intoxication".
He was survived by a 3-year-old son and 2 year-old daughter.
He became the third former "Real World" cast member to pass away, after Pedro Zamora and Frankie Abernathy, and was one of three cast members from Season 3 of "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew" to die, along with Mike Starr and Mindy McCready. 
