Dwayne Michael Carter, Jr. (born September 27, 1982), known by his stage name Lil Wayne (), is an American hip hop recording artist from New Orleans, Louisiana. In 1991, at the age of nine, Lil Wayne joined Cash Money Records as the youngest member of the label, and half of the duo, The B.G.'z, with fellow New Orleans-based rapper B.G.. In 1996, Lil Wayne joined Southern hip hop group Hot Boys, which also included rappers Juvenile, B.G., and Young Turk. Hot Boys debuted with "Get It How U Live!" that year. Lil Wayne gained most of his success with the group's major selling album "Guerrilla Warfare" (1999).
Lil Wayne's debut studio album, "Tha Block Is Hot" (1999), was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). His next albums, "Lights Out" (2000) and "500 Degreez" (2002), were certified gold. He reached higher popularity with "Tha Carter" (2004), which included the single "Go D.J.", also appearing on Destiny's Child's top ten single "Soldier" that year.
The album was followed by "Tha Carter II" (2005) and several mixtapes and collaborations throughout 2006 and 2007. "Tha Carter III" (2008) became Lil Wayne's most successful album to date, with first-week sales of over 1 million copies in the United States. It included the number-one single "Lollipop", as well as "A Milli" and "Got Money", and won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Album. 
Lil Wayne's debut rock album, "Rebirth" (2010), was certified gold despite a generally negative critical response. In March 2010, Lil Wayne began serving an 8-month prison sentence in New York after being convicted of criminal possession of a weapon stemming from an incident in July 2007. "I Am Not a Human Being" (2010) was released during his prison sentence. His ninth album and first since his release, "Tha Carter IV" (2011), sold 964,000 copies in its first week of availability in the U.S. It featured "6 Foot 7 Foot", "How to Love", and "She Will". On September 27, 2012, Lil Wayne passed Elvis Presley as the male with the most entries on the Billboard Hot 100 chart with 109 songs.
Early life.
Dwayne Michael Carter, Jr. was born on September 27, 1982, and grew up in the Hollygrove neighborhood of New Orleans, Louisiana. He was born when his mother, a cook, was 19 years old. His parents divorced when he was 2, and his father permanently abandoned the family. Carter enrolled in the gifted program of Lafayette Elementary School and in the drama club of Eleanor McMain Secondary School.
In a CBS interview with Katie Couric, Wayne described why he goes by the name of "Wayne" instead of his given name, Dwayne. Carter explained, "I dropped the D because I'm a junior and my father is living and he's not in my life and he's never been in my life. So I don't want to be Dwayne, I'd rather be Wayne". Couric asked Wayne if his father knew of this and Wayne replied with a smile, "He knows now".
He wrote his first rap song at age eight. In the summer of 1991, he met Bryan Williams, rapper and owner of Cash Money Records. Carter recorded freestyle raps on Williams's answering machine, leading him to mentor the young Carter and include him in Cash Money-distributed songs. He also recorded his first ever collaboration album "True Story" with rapper B.G.. At the time, Carter was 11, and B.G. was 14, and was billed as "The B.G.'z". When he was 12, he played the part of the Tin Man in his middle school drama club's production of "The Wiz". At age 13, he accidentally shot himself with a 9 mm handgun, and off-duty police officer Robert Hoobler drove him to the hospital. At McMain Magnet School, Carter was an honor student, but he dropped out at the age of 14 to focus on a musical career.
Career.
1996–99: Career beginnings and Hot Boys.
In 1996, Carter joined the Hot Boys along with rappers Juvenile, B.G., and Turk. At age 15, Carter was the youngest member at that time. Hot Boys' debut album "Get It How U Live!" was released the same year, followed in 1999 by the group's major-label debut "Guerrilla Warfare", which reached No. 1 on the "Billboard" magazine Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart and No. 5 on the "Billboard" 200. During their career, the Hot Boys had two charting singles, "We on Fire" from "Get It How U Live!" and "I Need a Hot Girl" from "Guerrilla Warfare". Carter was also featured on Juvenile's single "Back That Azz Up", which reached No. 18 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and No. 5 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks. "Let 'Em Burn", a compilation album of unreleased tracks recorded during 1999 and 2000, came out in 2003, several years after the group disbanded. It reached No. 3 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart and No. 14 on the "Billboard" 200.
1999–02: "Tha Block Is Hot", "Lights Out", and "500 Degreez".
Carter's debut solo album "Tha Block Is Hot" at age 17 featured significant contributions from the Hot Boys and was certified platinum, debuting at No. 3 on the Billboard album charts. The album earned him a 1999 "Source" magazine award nomination for "Best New Artist", and also became a Top Ten hit. The lead single was "Tha Block Is Hot". After the release of "Tha Block is Hot", Carter was featured on the single, "Bling Bling", with B.G., Juvenile, and Big Tymers. His verse was featured on the radio edition, and on the album version, only his hook was featured on the single.
His 2000 follow-up album "Lights Out" failed to attain the level of success achieved by his debut but was certified gold by RIAA. Critics pointed to the lack of coherent narratives in his verses as evidence that he had yet to mature to the level of his fellow Hot Boys. The lead single was "Get Off The Corner" which was noticed for an improvement in lyrical content and style, it also received a music video. The second single which received less attention was "Shine" featuring The "Hot Boys". Near the release of "Lights Out", Lil Wayne was featured on the single, "#1 Stunna" with Big Tymers and Juvenile, which rose to 24th place on the Hot Rap Tracks charts.
Lil Wayne's third album "500 Degreez", released in 2002, followed the format of his previous two, with significant contributions from the Hot Boys and Mannie Fresh. While certified Gold like its predecessor, it too failed to match the success of his debut. The title was a reference to the recently estranged Hot Boys member Juvenile's recording, "400 Degreez". The lead single was "Way Of Life" which like the album failed to match the success of his previous singles. After the release of "500 Degreez", he was featured in the single "Neva Get Enuf" by 3LW.
2003–06: "Tha Carter", "Tha Carter II", and "Like Father, Like Son".
In the summer of 2004, Wayne's album "Tha Carter" was released, marking what critics considered advancement in his rapping style and lyrical themes. In addition, the album's cover art featured the debut of Wayne's now-signature dreadlocks. "Tha Carter" gained Wayne significant recognition, selling 878,000 copies in the United States, while the single "Go DJ" became a Top 5 Hit on the R&B/Hip-Hop chart. After the release of "Tha Carter", Lil Wayne was featured in Destiny's Child's single "Soldier" with T.I., which peaked at No. 3 on the U.S. Hot 100 and the U.S. R&B Charts.
"Tha Carter II", the follow-up to the original "Tha Carter" album, was released in December 2005, this time without production by longtime Cash Money Records producer Mannie Fresh, who had since left the label. "Tha Carter II" sold more than 238,000 copies in its first week of release, debuting at No. 2 on the "Billboard" 200 albums chart, and went on to sell 2,000,000 copies world wide. The lead single, "Fireman," became a hit in the US, peaking at 32 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. Other singles included "Grown Man", "Hustler Muzik", and "Shooter" (featuring R&B singer Robin Thicke). Lil Wayne also appeared on a remix of Bobby Valentino's "Tell Me", which rose to No. 13 on the U.S. R&B Charts.
In 2005, Lil Wayne was named president of Cash Money, and in the same year he founded Young Money Entertainment as an imprint of Cash Money. However, as of late 2007, Lil Wayne reported that he has stepped down from the management of both labels and has handed management of Young Money over to Cortez Bryant.
In 2006, Lil Wayne collaborated with rapper Birdman for the album "Like Father, Like Son", whose first single "Stuntin' Like My Daddy", reached No. 21 on the Billboard Hot 100.
2006–08: Mixtapes and collaborations.
Instead of a follow-up solo album, Lil Wayne reached his audience through a plethora of mixtapes and guest appearances on a variety of pop and hip-hop singles. Of his many mixtapes, "Dedication 2" and "Da Drought 3" received the most media exposure and critical review. "Dedication 2", released in 2006, paired Lil Wayne with DJ Drama and contained the acclaimed socially conscious track "Georgia Bush," in which Lil Wayne critiqued former US president George W. Bush's response to the effects of Hurricane Katrina on the city of New Orleans. "Da Drought 3" was released the following year and was available for free legal download. It contained Lil Wayne rapping over a variety of beats from recent hits by other musicians. Numerous of features in prominent hip-hop magazines such as "XXL" and "Vibe" covered the mixtape. Christian Hoard of "Rolling Stone" magazine considered the mixtapes "Da Drought 3" and "The Drought Is Over 2 (The Carter 3 Sessions)" "among the best albums of 2007."
Despite no album release for two years, Lil Wayne appeared in numerous singles as a featured performer, including "Gimme That" by Chris Brown, "Make It Rain" by Fat Joe, "You" by Lloyd, and "We Takin' Over" by DJ Khaled (also featuring Akon, T.I., Rick Ross, Fat Joe, and Birdman), "Duffle Bag Boy" by Playaz Circle, "Sweetest Girl (Dollar Bill)" by Wyclef Jean (also featuring Akon), and the remix to "I'm So Hood" by DJ Khaled (also featuring T-Pain, Young Jeezy, Ludacris, Busta Rhymes, Big Boi, Fat Joe, Birdman, and Rick Ross). All these singles charted within the top 20 spots on the "Billboard" Hot 100, Hot Rap Tracks, and Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs charts. On Birdman's 2007 album "5 * Stunna", Lil Wayne appeared on the singles "100 Million" and "I Run This" among several other tracks. Wayne also appeared on tracks from albums "Getback" by Little Brother, "American Gangster" by Jay-Z, and "Graduation" by Kanye West and "Insomniac" by Enrique Iglesias. "Make it Rain", a Scott Storch production that peaked at number 13 on the Hot 100 and number two on the Hot Rap Tracks chart, was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for 2008.
"Vibe" magazine ranked a list of 77 of Lil Wayne's songs from 2007 and ranked his verse in DJ Khaled's "We Takin Over" as his best of 2007, with "Dough Is What I Got" (a freestyle over the beat of Jay-Z's "Show Me What You Got") from "Da Drought 3" the second song. At the end of 2007, an MTV poll selected Lil Wayne as "Hottest MC in the Game", "The New Yorker" magazine ranked him "Rapper of the Year", and "GQ" magazine named him "Workaholic of the Year". In 2008 he was named "Best MC" by "Rolling Stone". Another article, built around Lil Wayne's 2007 mixtape work, cites his creative practice as an example of post performance creative practice.
2008–10: "Tha Carter III", "We Are Young Money", and "Rebirth".
In 2007, Lil Wayne stated that he would reunite with Hot Boys, with plans to release an album after B.G.'s solo album "Too Hood to Be Hollywood" was completed. "Tha Carter III" was originally scheduled to be released in 2007, though it was delayed after several recordings were leaked and distributed through mixtapes, including "The Drought Is Over Pt. 2" and "The Drought Is Over Pt. 4". Lil Wayne initially planned to release "The Leak", a separate album with leaked songs and four additional tracks, on December 18, 2007, with "Tha Carter III" delayed to March 18, 2008. Instead, "The Leak" became an EP with five songs and was released digitally on December 25, 2007. "Tha Carter III" was released on June 10, 2008, with first-week sales of over 1 million copies, the first to do so since 50 Cent's "The Massacre" (2005). The first single "Lollipop", featuring Static Major, became the rapper's most successful song at the time, topping the Billboard Hot 100 and becoming his first top 10 single as a solo artist and his first number one on the chart. The third single "Got Money", featuring T-Pain, peaked at number 13 on the Billboard 100. The album went on to win four Grammy Awards, including best rap album and best rap song, which he won for "Lollipop". On July 14, 2008, the Recording Industry Association of America certified "Tha Carter III" two times platinum. In October 2008, Lil Wayne announced plans to MTV News to re-release the album with new tracks, including a duet with Ludacris and remixes of "A Milli".
Lil Wayne also appeared on R&B singles "Girls Around the World" by Lloyd, "Love In This Club, Part II" by Usher, "Official Girl" by Cassie, "I'm So Paid" by Akon, "Turnin' Me On" by Keri Hilson, and "Can't Believe It" by T-Pain; rap singles "My Life" by The Game, "Shawty Say" by David Banner, "Swagga Like Us" by T.I., "Cutty Buddy" by Mike Jones, All My Life (In the Ghetto) by Jay Rock and the remix to "Certified" by Glasses Malone; and pop single "Let It Rock" by new Cash Money artist Kevin Rudolf. 
In 2008, Lil Wayne performed at the Voodoo Experience in October in New Orleans, which was described by Jonathan Cohen of "Billboard" as his biggest hometown headlining set of his career. He also performed at the Virgin Mobile Music Fest with Kanye West, where they performed the remix of "Lollipop" and lip-synced to Whitney Houston's "I Will Always Love You". Lil Wayne also performed at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards with Kid Rock ("All Summer Long"), Leona Lewis ("DontGetIt (Misunderstood)") and T-Pain ("Got Money") and performed "Lollipop" and "Got Money" on the season premiere of "Saturday Night Live". He later performed at the homecoming rally at Vanderbilt University and the 2008 BET Hip Hop Awards, where he received 12 nominations. He won eight awards at the BET Hip Hop Awards, one of which included the "MVP" title. After M.I.A. dropped out of performing on the I Am Music Tour due to her pregnancy, Jay-Z performed "Mr. Carter" with Lil Wayne at select shows.
Following "Tha Carter III"'s achievement of selling over 3 million copies, becoming 2008's best-selling record, Wayne re-signed with Cash Money Records for a multi-album deal.
On November 11, 2008, Wayne became the first hip-hop act to perform at the Country Music Association Awards, playing "All Summer Long" alongside Kid Rock, in which Wayne inaudibly strummed guitar strings alongside the guitarist in Kid Rock's band. Shortly after, Wayne was nominated for eight Grammys – the most for any artist nominated that year. He was then named the first MTV Man of the Year at the end of 2008. He won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for "A Milli", Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for his appearance in T.I.'s single "Swagga Like Us", and Best Rap Song for "Lollipop". "Tha Carter III" won the award for Best Rap Album. MTV News listed Lil Wayne number two on their 2009 list of the Hottest MCs In The Game.
On January 6, 2009, Lil Wayne was a guest debater against Skip Bayless on the "1st & 10" segment of "ESPN First Take". On February 10, 2009, he appeared on ESPN's Around the Horn and beat out veterans Woody Paige, Jay Mariotti and fellow New Orleanian Michael Smith to win that show's episode. Prior to the 2009 Grammy Awards, Wayne was featured in an interview with Katie Couric. On February 7, 2009, he presented the Top Ten List on CBS's "Late Show with David Letterman". On April 24, 2009, he appeared on "The View", discussing his GED and addictions. In September 2009, Wayne was profiled in an episode of VH1's "Behind the Music" and was a presenter of the 2009 MTV Movie Awards. In film, Wayne produced and composed music for and starred in the direct-to-video film "Hurricane Season". A documentary of Lil Wayne titled "The Carter" was released at the Sundance Film Festival.
On December 23, 2009, Wayne released a collaboration album with Young Money, "We Are Young Money", with its lead single being "Every Girl". The second single was "BedRock", featuring Lloyd, with the third being "Roger That". On May 24, 2010, the album was certified gold by the RIAA with over 500,000 copies sold. Wayne is featured on the song, "Revolver", with Madonna for her greatest hits album, "Celebration" (2009). He was also featured on a Weezer song, "Can't Stop Partying", on "Raditude" (2009). In late 2008, Wayne announced plans to reissue "Tha Carter III" with leftover recordings, and was to be titled "Rebirth". Originally scheduled to be released on April 7, 2009 before being delayed several times, "Rebirth" instead became his debut rock album, released on April 7, 2009. To support its release and that of "We Are Young Money", he was featured on the cover of "Rolling Stone" and headlined the 'Young Money Presents: America's Most Wanted Music Festival', a United States and Canada–only concert tour which began on July 29, 2009. "Prom Queen", the first official single, debuted on January 27, 2009 immediately after a live Internet broadcast on Ustream of his concert in San Diego. It peaked at number 15 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 charts. On December 3, 2009, the second single, "On Fire", produced by Cool & Dre "On Fire" peaked at number 33 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 charts. "Drop the World", which features Eminem, was the third single from the album.
2010–11: "I Am Not a Human Being" and "Tha Carter IV".
In an interview on MTV's Mixtape Monday, Wayne asserted the possibility of "Tha Carter IV", later announcing that it would be released in 2009 before the holiday season. Birdman had previously stated that "Tha Carter IV" would be packaged with "Rebirth" as a double disc album. However, Wayne denied this idea saying that ""Tha Carter IV" deserves "Tha Carter IV"", adding that "We Are Young Money" may be packaged with "Rebirth". However, both albums were released separately.
Originally thought to be an EP, Lil Wayne released his tenth album, "I Am Not a Human Being", on his 28th birthday, September 27, 2010. The album has sold over 953,000 copies in the U.S. and has spawned successful single "Right Above It", which peaked at No. 6 on the Billboard Hot 100. "Tha Carter IV" was later delayed into 2011, after Lil Wayne began recording from scratch after his release from prison. He described his first song sine his release as "a 2010 version of "A Milli" on steroids." The album's lead single, "6 Foot 7 Foot" featuring Cory Gunz, was released on December 15, 2010 and made available for digital download on iTunes on December 16, 2010. The song is produced by Bangladesh, who also produced "A Milli". On March 8, 2011, Lil Wayne released another song, "We Back Soon", produced by StreetRunner, though it was not included on the official track listing of "Tha Carter IV". The second single, "John", was released on March 24, 2011, which features Rick Ross and is produced by Polow Da Don. The album's artwork was unveiled on April 20, 2011. The album was originally scheduled to be released on May 16, 2011, but Mack Maine had confirmed its delay to June 21. On May 26, 2011, the third single, "How to Love", was released. A song called "Dear Anne "(Stan Part 2)"" was released in June. Lil Wayne said the song was a throwaway track from "Tha Carter III" and was originally supposed to be on "Tha Carter IV", but decided not to put it on there because of its age. Lil Wayne said that he liked the beat, but not the lyrics, and was thinking about revamping the song.
In July 2011, Lil Wayne confirmed in an interview with MTV that "Tha Carter IV" was finished, and was released on August 29, 2011. For preparation for "Tha Carter IV", Lil Wayne released a mixtape, "Sorry 4 the Wait", with all the beats coming from other artist's songa, similar to his "No Ceilings" mixtape. "Tha Carter IV" debuted at No. 1 on the Billboard 200, with first-week sales of 964,000 copies, making it Lil Wayne's third chart topping album of his career. On January 8, 2012, According to Nielsen SoundScan was elected the seventh artist (second male artist) all-time best-selling tracks digital with 36,788,000 million to the end of 2011.
2012–present: "I Am Not A Human Being II.
On the evening of October 25, 2012, Lil Wayne's private jet made an emergency landing in Texas after he suffered what was originally described as "seizure-like symptoms" during flight, later identified as a severe migraine, and was treated at a local hospital.
In October 2011, it was reported that Lil Wayne was working on sequels to "I Am Not a Human Being" and "Rebirth". Birdman later announced that "I Am Not a Human Being II" would be released before the summer of 2012 and that he and Lil Wayne had finished recording "Like Father, Like Son 2". "I Am Not A Human Being II" was later delayed to February 19, 2013, with a tour to follow its release. Three singles have been released from the album with "My Homies Still", "Love Me" and "No Worries". After "I Am Not a Human Being II" Waynes next albums will be "We Are Young Money Vol. 2" with Young Money and "I Can't Feel My Face" with Juelz Santana which are both already being worked on.
On November 22, 2012 he announced that "Tha Carter V" would be his final album.
Future projects.
Lil Wayne has announced several possible upcoming projects, including a collaboration album entitled "I Can't Feel My Face" with rapper Juelz Santana that has been in production for several years. And also working on Tionne "T-Boz" Watkins' album "Still Cool" in late 2011. He has discussed a possible R&B album titled "Luv Sawngz", for which he will heavily rely on a vocoder. He has also talked with singer Lloyd about doing a collaboration album in the future. On June 19, 2008, Lil Wayne and T-Pain formed a duo called T-Wayne and planned to release an album. According to an interview with Drake in the December 2011 issue of XXL, plans for an upcoming album with Lil Wayne have been scrapped for the time being because of the Jay-Z and Kanye West collaboration "Watch the Throne". It was announced by Mack Maine that Lil Wayne and Juelz Santana have gone back to working on their collaboration album "I Can't Feel My Face" which had been delayed for a few years due to "label politics".
Retirement.
On March 29, 2011, in an interview with Hot 97's Angie Martinez, Lil Wayne announced that he would retire at age 35; saying "I have four kids," and that "I would feel selfish still going to the studio when it's such a vital point in their lives." He said in November 2012 that "Tha Carter V" will be his last album as he wanted to go into other interests.
Philanthropy.
On February 19, 2008, Lil Wayne and Cortez Bryant revisited their alma mater McMain Secondary School to get students to design an invitation to the gala introducing Lil Wayne's nonprofit One Family Foundation. The website Change.org states: "The mission of One Family Foundation, Inc. is to empower urban youth by engaging them in opportunities to cultivate their talents and skills, educating them to become productive and economically self-sufficient, and motivating them to dream beyond their circumstances."
Personal life.
Lil Wayne has four children. His first child, daughter Reginae, was born when he was 15, to his high school sweetheart Antonia "Toya" Carter (née Johnson). They married on Valentine's Day 2004 and divorced in 2006. Internet rumours started circulating in August 2008 that Wayne's daughter had died in a car crash, which however he quickly cleared up as false saying "Please allow me to dispel any rumors or speculations and report that my daughter is alive, healthy and surrounded by family who care and love her dearly. The rumors are completely false and unfounded; neither Reginae nor any other member of my family has been involved in any car accident." His second child, Dwayne III, was born on October 22, 2008 at Christ Hospital in Cincinnati. His third child, Cameron Carter, was born to actress Lauren London on September 9, 2009. His fourth child, Neal, was born on November 30, 2009 to singer Nivea. He also got rapper Trina pregnant but she suffered a miscarriage. 
In an interview with "Blender" magazine, Lil Wayne revealed one of his favorite bands from childhood to be rock group Nirvana, and cites them as a major influence in his music.
Wayne got his first tattoo at age 14 of his dad's name and his second was "Cash Money" across his stomach. His tattoos have grown to include a Jay-Z verse on his leg, "I Am Music" on his forehead and teardrops on his cheeks among many others. His most recent one is "Baked" on his forehead stylized as the Baker Skateboards logo.
Sports interests.
On September 24, 2008, Lil Wayne published his first blog for ESPN in their issue, "ESPN The Magazine". Wayne revealed he was a fan of tennis, the Green Bay Packers, the Boston Bruins, the Los Angeles Lakers and the Boston Red Sox. To commemorate the Packers' making it to Super Bowl XLV, he spoofed Wiz Khalifa's hit song "Black and Yellow" (which were the colors of the Packers' opponents, the Pittsburgh Steelers) in a song titled "Green and Yellow". Wayne has continued writing for ESPN, notably reporting at the ESPN Super Bowl party.
Lil Wayne made his debut on ESPN's daily sports round table show "Around The Horn" on February 10, 2009.
At E3 2011, Lil Wayne, along with Young Money member Drake, appeared on the trailer of "FIFA 12". 
Religion and higher education.
Lil Wayne is a Christian and reads the Bible regularly. While playing in Newark Symphony Hall, Lil Wayne professed his belief "in God and His son, Jesus." During his 2011 tour in Australia with Eminem, before beginning his bracket he proclaimed his belief in God. He identifies as a Roman Catholic.
After earning his GED, Wayne enrolled at the University of Houston in January 2005. He dropped out in the same year due to his conflicting schedule. He also revealed on "The View" that he switched to the University of Phoenix and majored in psychology taking online courses. An article in "Urb" magazine in March 2007 asserted that Wayne had been earning high grades at Houston.
Public references by Barack Obama.
Lil Wayne has been referenced in public speeches by President Barack Obama on at least two occasions, in mixed contexts. Speaking to a largely African-American audience during a general election campaign town hall speech in Georgia, then-U.S. Senator Obama exhorted children to stay in school and achieve their dreams through education and perseverance instead of hoping for shortcuts to fame and riches, stating: "You are probably not that good a rapper. Maybe you are the next Lil Wayne, but probably not, in which case you need to stay in school."
Legal issues.
Arrests and incarceration.
On July 22, 2007, Lil Wayne was arrested in New York City following a performance at the Beacon Theatre; the New York City Police Department discovered Lil Wayne and another man smoking marijuana near a tour bus. After taking Lil Wayne into custody, police discovered a .40 caliber pistol on his person. The gun, which was registered to his manager, was in a bag located near the rapper. He was charged with criminal possession of a weapon and marijuana. On October 22, 2009, Lil Wayne pleaded guilty to attempted criminal possession of a weapon. He was due for sentencing in February 2010 and was expected to receive a one-year county jail sentence, but on February 9, 2010, Lil Wayne's attorney announced that the sentencing was delayed until March 2 due to dental surgery, which was performed on February 16. The surgery included eight root canals, the replacement of several tooth implants, as well as the addition of a few new implants and work on his remaining original teeth. On March 2, 2010, sentencing was postponed again when the courthouse reported a fire in the basement. On March 8, 2010, Lil Wayne was sentenced to a year in prison, which he served in Rikers Island. His lawyer said the rapper expected to be held in protective custody, separated from other prisoners. In May 2010 Wayne was found by Rikers Island correctional staff to be in possession of contraband (an MP3 player, charger, and headphones). In April 2010, Lil Wayne's friends created a website called Weezy Thanx You, which publishes letters written by Wayne in prison. In the first letter, titled "Gone 'til November", the rapper described his daily routine, saying he works out a lot, and reads the Bible every day. Wayne was released from Rikers Island prison facility on November 4, 2010 after serving eight months of his year-long sentence.
Following a performance at Qwest Arena in Boise, Idaho, Lil Wayne was arrested October 5, 2007 on felony fugitive charges after Georgia authorities accused the rapper of possessing a controlled substance. The incident was later described as a "mix-up" and the fugitive charges were dropped.
On January 23, 2008, Lil Wayne was arrested alongside two others. His tour bus was stopped by Border Patrol agents near Yuma, Arizona. A K-9 Unit recovered of marijuana, almost of cocaine, of ecstasy, and $22,000 in cash. Lil Wayne was charged with four felonies: possession of narcotic drug for sale, possession of dangerous drugs, misconduct involving weapons and possession of drug paraphernalia. He was granted permission to travel outside of the state and remain out of custody on the $10,185 bond he posted. On May 6, 2008, Wayne returned to court in Arizona to plead not guilty to the charges. A bench warrant was issued on March 17, 2010 when Lil Wayne did not show for a final trial management conference. However, the rapper was already in prison, serving a year-long sentence in Rikers on weapons charges. On June 22, 2010 Wayne pleaded guilty to the charges. As part of the plea deal he may serve 36 months of probation. On June 30, 2010, he was sentenced to 3 years probation.
On December 18, 2009, Wayne and 11 others were detained at the Falfurrias, Texas border patrol checkpoint after an unknown amount of marijuana was found on two of his tour buses.
Lawsuits.
On July 24, 2008, Abkco Music Inc filed a lawsuit against Lil Wayne for copyright infringement and unfair competition, specifically referring to "Tha Carter III"'s track "Playing with Fire". In the lawsuit, Abkco claims that the song was obviously derived from The Rolling Stones' "Play with Fire", to which Abkco owns the rights. Subsequently, "Playing with Fire" was removed from the tracklist of "Tha Carter III" on all online music stores and replaced with the David Banner produced track, "Pussy Monster".
In February 2009, production company RMF Productions filed a $1.3 million lawsuit against Wayne, following a $100,000 advance payment for three shows, all of which were cancelled by the artist.
On October 2009, Lil Wayne, Birdman, Cash Money Records, and various music distribution outlets were sued for copyright infringement by Thomas Marasciullo, who claims his voice was used without permission. The rappers asked him to record some "Italian-styled spoken word recordings" in 2006. The lyrics were allegedly used on "Respect" and other tracks from the rappers' collaboration album "Like Father, Like Son" and Birdman's "5 * Stunna".
In March 2011, producer Deezle (Darius Harrison) sued Wayne and his parent labels Cash Money Records over unpaid royalties from "Tha Carter III". 
In May 2011, producer Bangladesh also filed a lawsuit against Weezy & Co. over unpaid royalties as well. 
In early June 2011, another producer named David Kirkwood filed a lawsuit against Young Money Entertainment and Cash Money Records on claims that the labels have failed to pay him over $1.5 million in royalties and production services for his work on the album, also including his songwriting on "Love Me or Hate Me", a bonus song featured only on the deluxe edition of the album. 
Also in June 2011, Dallas producers Play-N-Skillz filed a lawsuit against him claiming Wayne owes them at least $1 million in unpaid royalties for "Got Money" from his album "Tha Carter III". The single has sold over 2 million copies since being released.
In July 2011, Done Deal Enterprises, a production company based in Georgia, filed suit against Wayne, Universal Music Group, Cash Money Records and Young Money Entertainment, claiming copyright infringement. The lawsuit alleges Wayne stole the song "BedRock", featured on the compilation album "We Are Young Money", and seeks damages of $15 million.
In November 2012, Lil Wayne was ordered by a judge to pay producer Quincy Jones III $2.2 million after losing a copyright battle over one of his songs. Wayne had sued Jones over a documentary he says used his music without authorization, but was chastised by the judge after he did not appear in court due to his on flight seizures and instead the judge and jury were shown his deposition tape which showed "irresponsible behavior." This included him talking down, insulting and passively threatening the defendants lawyer.
Controversy.
Young Buck.
Young Buck released a song featuring Tony Yayo called "Off Parole" which insulted Lil Wayne. Young Buck said that Lil Wayne could not be angry, because Young Buck spoke the truth. Young Buck also said "You think you got a problem with Juve and B.G.; you'll have a true problem with me", referring to the Cash Money-Juvenile/B.G feud.
One of the reasons 50 Cent stated he was dismissing Young Buck was what he called "inconsistent behavior" which included appearing on stage with Lil Wayne, then seemingly dissing him on records with G-Unit. After he was dismissed, Young Buck appeared in the music video "My Life" by The Game, which featured Lil Wayne in the vocals.
As of 2009 Buck and Wayne have squashed their beef and also linked up to record a track "Up's and Down's" for Young Buck's "Back On My Buck Shit" mixtape.
Pusha T.
Tension between Wayne and American rapper, Pusha T, had been going on for years, beginning soon after Clipse and Birdman worked on "What Happened to That Boy", the latter's 2002 single. In 2006, Wayne felt the Clipse song "Mr. Me Too" was directed at him which caused more tension between the two. In 2012 after much speculation that Pusha T was subliminally dissing Canadian rapper and Wayne's Young Money signee Drake in several songs, the speculation heightened after the release of Pusha T's "Exodus 23:1" song. Lil Wayne quickly responded on online social networking service Twitter and later released a diss track titled "Goulish". In the first verse Wayne raps "Fuck Pusha T and anybody that love him / His head up his ass, I'mma have to head-butt him". Pusha T has called Wayne's diss track "horrible" and said he felt it didn't deserve a response. Both men have downplayed the feud, with Wayne saying he's over it. However in late November, Pusha T dissed Wayne and Birdman on a new Ludacris song titled "Tell Me What They Mad For" from his "Ludaversal" (2013) album.
Jay-Z.
In early 2011, when Jay-Z & Kanye West's single "H•A•M" was released, Jay-Z took shots at Lil Wayne's mentor Birdman, saying "Really, you got Baby money" and "ain't got my lady's money!". On August 24, 2011, a song called "It's Good" by Lil Wayne (featuring Drake and Jadakiss) was leaked online and included Lil Wayne responding "Talkin’ ‘bout baby money? I gotcha baby money. Kidnap your bitch, get that, How much you love your lady? money". Rapper Jadakiss later absolved himself of involvement in any brewing beef on his official Twitter feed.
Discography.
Extended plays
