The ninth season of the American television medical drama "Grey's Anatomy" began airing in the United States on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) on September 27, 2012, and will consist of 24 episodes.
Cast.
Casting.
In May 2012, it was announced that six original cast mates, Ellen Pompeo, Patrick Dempsey, Sandra Oh, Chandra Wilson, Justin Chambers, and James Pickens, Jr. had renewed their contracts for another two seasons, as Meredith Grey, Derek Shepherd, Cristina Yang, Miranda Bailey, Alex Karev and Richard Webber respectively. In July 2012, it was announced that cast member Eric Dane would not be returning to "Grey's Anatomy" as a series regular, and would leave after two episodes to give his character a proper ending. It was also announced that cast members, Kim Raver and Chyler Leigh would not be returning at all because of budget cuts. Other series regulars, Sara Ramirez, Kevin McKidd, Jessica Capshaw, Sarah Drew, and Jesse Williams all returned to the series as regulars, though Capshaw would not have a major role in the first few episodes because of her maternity leave.
In August 2012, it was announced that Camilla Luddington, Gaius Charles, and Tina Majorino had been cast as Jo Wilson, Shane Ross, and Heather Brooks, respectively; these characters would be the new interns of Seattle Grace-Mercy West. TVGuide later reported that even with all of the recurring cast being added to "Grey's Anatomy" for the new season that "True Blood" star Camilla Luddington is the only actress with an option to become a series regular. In September 2012, it was announced that Jerrika Hinton and Tessa Ferrer had been cast as new interns Stephanie Edwards and Leah Murphy, respectively. In August 2012, it was announced that Debbie Allen would reprise her role as Catherine Avery at sometime in series, and she is set to direct the third episode. In September 2012, it was announced that Steven Culp would be cast as, a new doctor at a new hospital, and would be known as Dr. Parker. In September 2012, it was announced that William Daniels, former "Boy Meets World" star, and Jason George would reprise their roles as Dr. Craig Thomas, and Ben Warren respectively. In September 2012, "TVLine" reported that "Bones's" Andrew Leeds had been cast in a potentially recurring role for the ninth season. In December 2012, Wetpaint reported that Constance Zimmer had been cast in a recurring role as Dr. Cahill and would appear in at least four episodes.
In November 2012 it was announced that Neve Campbell, known for her role in Scream, would be cast as one of Derek's sisters. It was not until late November that her role was revealed as Liz Shepherd, a therapist. In November 2012, it was announced that in 2013, someone would die on "Grey's Anatomy". "TVGuide" then reported that Loretta Devine, who is known as Adele Webber, would be reprising her role for two episodes, and that she would be the one to die. In November 2012, TVLine reported that "Nip/Tuck" alum Roma Maffia was cast in a recurring role as a member of the hospital board. In December 2012, TVLine and Wetpaint reported that "Ringer" and "Switched at Birth" star, Justin Bruening,was cast as a paramedic known as Matt. In January 2013, it was announced that Gaius Charles, Tina Majorino, Jerrika Hinton and Tessa Ferrer were all given the option to become series regulars if "Grey's Anatomy" were to be renewed. Sarah Chalke is set to guest star in an episode in the spring, as TVLine reported in January 2013.
Development.
"Grey's Anatomy" was renewed by ABC on May 10, 2012. In June 2012, ABC set the premiere date of "Grey's Anatomy" to September 27, 2012, and it would remain in the Thursday at 9:00pm timeslot that it has had since the third season. In October 2012 it was reported that this season would have the same episode count as season eight, meaning it would have a total of 24 episodes.
Plots.
The season follows the story of surgical interns, residents and their competent mentors, as they experience the difficulties of the competitive careers they have chosen. It is set in the surgical wing of the fictional Seattle Grace-Mercy West Hospital, located in Seattle, Washington. A major story line of the season is the characters adapting to change, as all of the fifth-year surgical residents have turned into surgical attendings, and are now teaching interns, and operating on their own surgeries. A major part of the first part of the season, is the death of Lexie Grey and Mark Sloan as they both died from their injuries from the plane crash in the eighth season's finale. 
The beginning of the season deals with the aftermath of the plane crash, and how Arizona and Callie adjust to Arizona only having one leg, and their daughter, Sofia, losing her father. In the aftermath of the plane crash, Derek must deal with not being able to use his hand again until his sister, Liz, agrees to donate a nerve to him. Derek and Meredith also deal with Meredith finding out she is pregnant. All of the plane crash victims, Arizona, Cristina, Meredith, and Derek pursue a lawsuit against the hospital, only for Owen to find that the case might be thrown out because of his marriage to Cristina and asks a divorce. A story line for Cristina is that she goes off to another hospital after the plane crash, and eventually comes back when her mentor/best friend died from a heart attack.
Reception.
"Grey's Anatomy's" ninth season opened up to 11.73 million viewers with a 4.4/12 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The viewership for the episode was an 11 percent increase from the previous season premiere, which was viewed by a total of 10.38 million people. The rating was a 7 percent increase from the previous season premiere, which received a 4.1/10 Nielsen rating/share in the 18–49 demographic. The Nielsen score additionally registered the show as the week's highest-rated drama in the 18–49 demographic. As of December 2012 "Going, Going, Gone" has served as the season's most viewed episode. "Run, Baby, Run" so far is the season and series' least viewed episode, with 8.17 million viewers and a 2.9/8 Neilsen rating/share in the 18-49 demographic.
Episodes.
The number in the "No. in series" column refers to the episode's number within the overall series, whereas the number in the "No. in season" column refers to the episode's number within this particular season. "U.S. viewers in millions" refers to the number of Americans in millions who watched the episodes live.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
DVD release.
On October 29, 2012 TV Shows on DVD revealed that ABC Studios had started working on "Grey's Anatomy: The Complete Ninth Season".
