The Following is an American television drama series starring Kevin Bacon and created by Kevin Williamson. It premiered January 21, 2013 on Fox. The series is produced by Outerbanks Entertainment and Warner Bros. Television. It also stars James Purefoy and Natalie Zea. The first season will consist of 15 episodes.
Premise.
The series follows a former FBI agent who finds himself in the middle of a network of serial killers, when a diabolical serial killer uses his charisma and the Internet to create the network. In "Entertainment Weekly", features TV writer Melissa Maerz wrote in a preview article, "Purefoy plays Joe Carroll, a former college professor who taught the works of Poe and killed young women in the gothic hero's honor—until he got caught. Since then he's been spending hours on a computer in the prison library, building a social network of copycat killers who hang on his every command. When the series begins, he's just escaped from death row with help from those followers, and the FBI calls in former agent Ryan Hardy (Bacon)—who brought down Joe the first time—to consult on the case".
Production.
Conception.
Kevin Williamson pitched "The Following" to Fox, because it was "home of his all-time favorite show, "24"". Comparing Hardy with Jack Bauer, he told interviewer Maerz, "Sometimes I lie awake at night and cry for Jack Bauer! Clearly, there's some of Jack in Ryan. Ryan will die saving the moment. He carries the weight of every victim on his shoulders".
Williamson knew he wanted to produce a show that would be gory; he knew it would also be controversial. Marisa Guthrie of "The Hollywood Reporter" interviewed Fox Broadcasting Chief Operating Officer Joe Earley about the subject material; Earley answered, "We definitely feel pressure to bring in a big, broad audience with something we are telling people is very intense. This show is such a fantastic, thrilling edge-of-your-seat ride".
Writing.
To slip gory scenes past the Standards and Practices department at Fox Broadcasting, Williamson explained, "There are tricks... Okay, in the same episode there's an actor cutting someone in the jugular, and you're harping on the sex scene? So I sent a little email to Entertainment chairman Kevin Reilly, and within 15 minutes the broadcast-and-standards people were like, It's okay".
Casting.
Williamson wanted to cast a tough guy with a boyish side. "I told my agent, 'I want to get someone like Kevin Bacon.' And he said, 'What about Kevin Bacon?'" As it happened, Bacon had spent four years trying to find a television program he would like to do. Bacon told Maerz, "I had been looking for quite some time, even trying to develop stuff for myself. One thing that's consistent about the shows I'm drawn to is that they're life-or-death situations". Jeananne Goossen was cast in the role of FBI agent Jennifer Mason in the pilot, but the role was reworked and in subsequent episodes of the series her character was replaced by Special Agent Debra Parker, played by Annie Parisse.
Reception.
Ratings.
Including other digital sources, the episode was watched by a total of 20.34 million viewers.
Critical reception.
"The Following" was given 62% on Metacritic based on 32 reviews, indicating "generally favorable" reviews.
"USA Today"s Robert Bianco rated the show highly, calling it "one of the most violent, and certainly the most frightening, series ever made by a commercial broadcast network," adding "some plot twists seem implausible at best, others are overdone or gratuitous. But some implausibility comes with the horror/suspense genre, and there's no question Williamson has mastered it — just as there's no question that the match of wills between the wounded [Kevin Bacon and malevolent Purefoy is exceedingly well played."
Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" stated: "The weakest part of "The Following" is the idea that Carroll was a college professor who held his classes spellbound with lectures about Thoreau, Emerson, and, most crucially, Edgar Allan Poe." He added: "The drama's strongest elements override this flaw. Both Bacon and Purefoy are so intensely earnest, "The Following" quickly supersedes its patent "Silence of the Lambs" setup. The moments that focus on Carroll's criminal cult give the series its real power, and the modern-day variations on Charlie Manson's kill-crazy crew are genuinely spooky."
The "Wall Street Journal's" Nancy Dewolf Smith considers the series "both better and worse than those movies where a procession of young people get killed so reliably and gorily that the audience laughs after it screams," adding, "There is some suspense here, even if it is mainly because the violence when it comes is so swift and sickening. But the show still feels slack. Is it a case of a serial-killer cliché too far?"
Hank Stuever of "The Washington Post" called the series "a trite, gratuitously violent exercise in still more stylishly imagined American horror stories." He added, "It is filled with melodramatic sleuthing that you've seen over and over."
Alessandra Stanley of "The New York Times" said the series was "hard to turn off and even harder to watch" and that "precisely because it is so bleak and relentlessly scary, "The Following" offers a more salutary depiction of violence than do series that use humor to mitigate horror — and thereby trivialize it."
