Oz the Great and Powerful is an upcoming 2013 American fantasy adventure film directed by Sam Raimi. The film is inspired by L. Frank Baum's 1900 novel "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz", and is set before the 1939 film "The Wizard of Oz". The film stars James Franco as Oscar Diggs, otherwise known as the Wizard of Oz. It also stars Mila Kunis as Theodora, Michelle Williams as Glinda, and Rachel Weisz as Evanora. The film is produced by Joe Roth and co-producers Grant Curtis and Joshua Donen, and will be released by Walt Disney Pictures in traditional 2D, as well as in the Disney Digital 3D, RealD 3D and IMAX 3D formats.
Cast.
As per official site unless otherwise noted
Production.
History.
After the successful release of "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" in 1937, Walt Disney planned to produce an animated film based on the first of L. Frank Baum's "Oz" books. Roy Disney, chairman of the Walt Disney Studios, was informed by Baum's estate that they had sold the film rights to the first book to Samuel Goldwyn, who re-sold it to Louis B. Mayer in 1938. The project was developed by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer into the well-known musical adaptation starring Judy Garland, Ray Bolger, Bert Larh, Jack Haley and Margaret Hamilton, released the following year.
In 1954, when the film rights to Baum's remaining thirteen "Oz" books were made available, Walt Disney Productions acquired them for use in Walt Disney's television series, "Disneyland" and the live-action film, "Rainbow Road to Oz", which was abandoned and never completed. Disney's history with the "Oz" series continued with the 1985 "Return to Oz" which was presented as an unofficial sequel to, or variant of, the 1939 film "The Wizard of Oz". It performed poorly, both critically and commercially.
Development.
Before Sam Raimi signed on to direct the film, directors Sam Mendes and Adam Shankman were also reported to be top candidates. In June 2011, Danny Elfman was chosen to compose the score for "Oz the Great and Powerful", even though Elfman and Raimi had had a falling-out over "Spider-Man 2" (2004) and Elfman declared that they would never again work together.
The script was written by Mitchell Kapner and David Lindsay-Abaire, with Joe Roth serving as a producer. Director Raimi said Kapner used information about the Wizard from L. Frank Baum's books, but the film will also "nod lovingly" to the 1939 classic film. Disney wanted to reduce the film's production budget to be approximately $200 million.
In April 2010, Robert Downey, Jr. was in talks with producers for the part of Oz, but by that January he was no longer involved and the studio was in discussions with Johnny Depp, who had appeared in Disney's "Pirates of the Caribbean" franchise and "Alice in Wonderland". By the end of February 2011, James Franco was in final negotiations to star in the film, marking the the first time that Franco and Raimi have worked together following the conclusion of the "Spider-Man" trilogy.
Casting calls were put out for local actors in Michigan.
Filming.
Principal photography for "Oz the Great and Powerful" began July 25, 2011, at Raleigh Michigan Studios (afterward renamed the Motown Motion Picture Studios) in Pontiac, Michigan, employing 3D cameras.
Raimi opted to use practical sets in conjunction with computer-generated imagery during filming. Physical sets were constructed so the actors could have a visual reference, as opposed to using green screen technology for every scene. Chroma key compositing was only used for background pieces. Zack Braff and Joey King were on set, recording their dialogue simultaneously with the other actors, whenever their CG characters were present in a scene. Puppetry was employed for a physical version of the China Girl to serve as a visual key-point for actors to manipulate.
Because Warner Bros. (via Turner Entertainment) owns the rights to iconic elements of 1939 MGM film, including the ruby slippers worn by Judy Garland, Disney was unable to use them nor any character likenesses from that movie. This extended to the green of the Wicked Witch's skin, for which Disney used what its legal department considered a sufficiently different shade called theostein. The studio could not, however, use the signature chin mole of Margaret Hamilton's portrayal of the Wicked Witch of the West.
Music.
Composer Danny Elfman noted that the film's score was accessibly quick to produce, with a majority of the music being written in six weeks. Regarding the tonal quality of the score, Elfman stated; "We’re going to take an approach that’s old school but not self-consciously old-fashioned. Let the melodrama be melodrama, let everything be what it is. I also think there’s the advantage that I’m able to write narratively, and when I’m able to write narratively I can also move quicker because that’s my natural instincts, I can tell a story in the music."
American singer-songwriter Mariah Carey recorded a promotional single called "Almost Home" written by Carey, Simone Porter, Justin Gray, Lindsey Ray, Tor Erik Hermansen, and Mikkel Eriksen (a.k.a. Stargate) for the soundtrack of the film. The single was released on February 19 by Island Records.
Soundtrack.
The original soundtrack to "Oz the Great and Powerful" will be released by Walt Disney Records on March 5, 2013.
Release.
In May 2011, before filming began, distributor Walt Disney Pictures gave it a March 8, 2013 North American theatrical release date.
The film had its world premiere at the El Capitan Theater in Hollywood on February 14, 2013.. "Oz the Great and Powerful" will also be available in 11.1 surround sound by Barco .
