Elementary is an American crime drama series that premiered on CBS on September 27, 2012. It presents a contemporary update of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's character Sherlock Holmes set in the contemporary United States. It stars Jonny Lee Miller as Sherlock Holmes and Lucy Liu as Dr. Joan Watson. Holmes is a former consultant to Scotland Yard, and also an addict. He travels to New York City to check into a rehabilitation center and stays on in Brooklyn with Watson, who becomes his sober companion.
On October 23, 2012 CBS picked up "Elementary" for a full season. On November 15, 2012 CBS ordered two additional episodes to its current season, bringing the total number of episodes to 24.
Cast and characters.
Casting.
Liu was cast by February 2012. That July, she said that Watson is not "someone who's on the sideline; she's his sober companion, she's engaged in "him", not the mystery, [...] From that point on you get to see how that blossoms out. The foot-in-the-bucket and that kind of Watson happens because in entertainment, there's got to be a sidekick. In this case, that's not the direction we're going in. Ask me in six episodes and if I have a foot in a bucket then we'll have a discussion."
Development.
Relationship to BBC "Sherlock".
"Sherlock", a contemporary reworking of the Sherlock Holmes story, began screening in England just over two years before "Elementary" premiered in the United States. The British show has since sold to more than 180 territories. In January 2012 "Sherlock" producer Sue Vertue told newspaper "The Independent" "we understand that CBS are doing their own version of an updated Sherlock Holmes. It's interesting, as they approached us a while back about remaking our show. At the time, they made great assurances about their integrity, so we have to assume that their modernised Sherlock Holmes doesn't resemble ours in any way, as that would be extremely worrying."
The following month Vertue said that "We have been in touch with CBS and informed them that we will be looking at their finished pilot very closely for any infringement of our rights." CBS made a statement on the issue: "Our project is a contemporary take on Sherlock Holmes that will be based on Holmes, Watson and other characters in the public domain, as well as original characters. We are, of course, respectful of all copyright laws and will not infringe on any stories or works that may still be protected."
Reception.
The pilot episode received positive reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Metacritic gave it a score of 73% based on 29, indicating "generally favorable reviews."
Broadcast.
"Elementary" premiered in Canada on September 27, 2012 on the Global Television Network. In Russia and CIS, the series are broadcast on Channel One Russia, starting from October 14. . It began airing in the United Kingdom on October 23, 2012 on Sky Living. In Australia, Network Ten began airing the show on February 3, 2013. The series was set to air in New Zealand on Prime (New Zealand) from February 2013.
On February 3, 2013, "Elementary" was broadcast after the Super Bowl The episode drew 20.8 million viewers despite running out of prime time in the Eastern time zone as a result of a game delay.
