Beautiful Creatures is an American young adult novel written by authors Kami Garcia and Margaret Stohl, and the first book in the "Caster Chronicles" series. The book was published on December 1, 2009 by Little, Brown, and Company. (In the UK, "Beautiful Creatures" is published by Penguin Books.) On January 3, 2013, a new edition of the novel was published, featuring images from the movie on the cover.
Plot.
Set in fictional Gatlin, South Carolina, the novel is told by protagonist Ethan Wate, who lives with his writer father and housekeeper Amma who is “more like [Ethan’s] grandmother.” The story begins on the first day of Ethan’s sophomore year when he wakes up from a recurring dream he has been having about a girl he does not know. That morning he finds a “creepy—almost hypnotic,” song called "Sixteen Moons" on his iPod and also notices the smell of rosemary and lemon. At school Ethan finds out there is a new girl this year, which is surprising because Gatlin “hadn’t had a new girl in school since the 3rd grade;” the new girl is “old man Ravenwood’s niece,” Lena. Macon Melchizedek Ravenwood is the town shut-in, and is often compared to the character Boo Radley from "To Kill A Mockingbird." Ethan later hears Lena playing "Sixteen Moons" on her viola.
When Ethan drives home, he almost runs over Lena, who is standing on the road in the middle of the storm looking for someone to help with her broken down car. When Ethan notices that she smells like lemon and rosemary, he realizes that Lena is the girl from his dreams. He soon learns that Lena is a “Caster,” a person who can use magic, and that on her sixteenth birthday she will be claimed for either Light or Dark. Ethan tries to find a way to save Lena from going Dark and solve the mystery of how he is connected to Lena. At the same time, Lena is trying to handle the whole town turning against her: “We don’t take kindly to strangers Gatlin.” Lena and Ethan discover that they are connected through years of Gatlin and Caster history.
Reception.
Kirkus Reviews writes that "Ethan’s wry narrative voice will resonate with readers of John Green as well as the hordes of supernatural-romance fans looking for the next book to sink their teeth into". Booklist also positively reviewed the book, stating "there’s plenty teens will like: romance, magic, hauntings, and the promise of more to come." The School Library Journal praised "Beautiful Creatures"'s "detailed descriptions" and "satisfying conclusion", writing that it would appeal to fans of True Blood. Publishers Weekly criticized the book's "protracted climax" but wrote that "Beautiful Creatures" had a "compelling and dimensional mythology". Despite its use of magic, the book is praised for its “authentic” characters and world. Linda Perez of the Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy states “Stohl writes clearly and lyrically,” “the world they’ve created... is so believable that readers will find themselves unwittingly believing in magic. According to Ilene Cooper of Booklist "the 600 pages could have been cut to make a tight, better story" 
Accolades.
The series was named one of MTV News's "series to watch" in 2010.
Adaptations.
Film.
Alcon Entertainment, with 3 Arts Entertainment and Belle Pictures, produced a 2013 movie version for Warner Bros., adapted and directed by Richard LaGravenese, starring Alden Ehrenreich and Alice Englert as Ethan Wate and Lena Duchannes, and Jeremy Irons, Viola Davis, Emma Thompson and Emmy Rossum in supporting roles.
"Beautiful Creatures: The Official Illustrated Movie Companion" by Mark Cotta Vaz, was published in the UK by Penguin Books on January 3, 2013.
The film came out on February 14, 2013--Valentine's Day.
Comic book.
Yen Press announced in 2012 it was adapting "Beautiful Creatures" into manga format, with artist Cassandra Jean.
Sequels.
"Beautiful Creatures" was signed by Little, Brown, and Company for a four-book series, the "Caster Chronicles," with the followup books titled "Beautiful Darkness," "Beautiful Chaos," and "Beautiful Redemption."
