The fourth season of the Fox musical comedy-drama television series Glee was commissioned on April 9, 2012. It premiered on September 13, 2012 and is produced by 20th Century Fox Television, Ryan Murphy Television and Brad Falchuk Teley-Vision with executive producers Dante Di Loreto and series co-creators Ryan Murphy, Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan.
The series features the New Directions glee club at the fictional William McKinley High School in the town of Lima, Ohio. The fourth season continues in Lima with a new generation of students but will also follow some of the McKinley graduates from the third season, notably to the fictional New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts (NYADA) in New York City as they deal with sex, relationships, bulimia, gender identity, dyslexia, infidelity and other social issues. As of the season premiere, fourteen main cast members are retaining that status from the third season: glee club director Will Schuester (Matthew Morrison), cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester (Jane Lynch), glee club members Artie Abrams (Kevin McHale), Blaine Anderson (Darren Criss), Tina Cohen-Chang (Jenna Ushkowitz), and Brittany Pierce (Heather Morris), and graduates Rachel Berry (Lea Michele), Mike Chang (Harry Shum, Jr.), Finn Hudson (Cory Monteith), Kurt Hummel (Chris Colfer), Mercedes Jones (Amber Riley), Santana Lopez (Naya Rivera) and Noah "Puck" Puckerman (Mark Salling). Previously recurring character Sam Evans (Chord Overstreet), a glee club member, has been promoted to the main cast in the fourth season. 
Dianna Agron, who plays Quinn Fabray, is appearing less frequently in the season than in previous ones, as are some of the other graduates. Agron and Jayma Mays, who continues to appear as guidance counselor Emma Pillsbury, are being credited as guest stars this season rather than as series regulars.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
Production.
Development.
The fourth Series will continue to be set at McKinley High in Ohio and follow several of the just-graduated characters to New York, and will be set at a performing arts school (NYADA) there. The Ohio portion of the show will feature a number of new characters.
Co-creator Ryan Murphy has confirmed that all regular cast members from the third season will be returning to the show for its fourth season, though "it doesn't mean everyone will be doing 22 episodes".
Fox announced on May 14, 2012, that "Glee" would be moving to Thursday nights at 9 pm ET for the fourth season. Episodes will be airing after that evening's 8 pm ET music competition "results" shows—"‪The X Factor‬" in the fall and "American Idol" in midseason. The season premiered on September 13, 2012 with the second episode of the season serving as the show's second Britney Spears tribute, featuring eight of her songs.
In the UK, "Glee" airs as part of Sky 1 Sundays at 8pm and broadcast began on January 6, 2013. 
Some changes have been made to the show's writing staff. Marti Noxon has announced that she would no longer be a writer or consulting producer on the show, and co-executive producer and writer Ali Adler has stated that she will be scaling back her work on "Glee" to focus on her new NBC comedy "The New Normal", which she co-created with Murphy.
On July 14, 2012, Glee attended the San Diego Comic-Con in California. Co-creator Brad Falchuk revealed that Damian McGinty (Rory) will not be returning this Fall, but stated he could return in the Spring. Falchuk announced that Vanessa Lengies (Sugar) and Samuel Larsen (Joe) would be returning. Falchuk also has aspirations to bring back Alex Newell (Wade) at some point during season four. Other season details include: Sue will already have had her baby when season four commences, episodes will alternate between Ohio and New York, much like McKinley High and Dalton Academy in Season 2, Kurt (Chris Colfer) will remain in Ohio, at least for the first episode, and help Will (Matthew Morrison) repopulate the Glee club, while Rachel (Lea Michele) at NYADA will be singing a Barbra Streisand song in the first episode. The second episode will be another Britney Spears tribute. Brad Falchuk also revealed that Will (Matthew Morrison) and Emma (Jayma Mays) will still be engaged when the season begins, he went on to state there will be many new faces during the season, also commenting that Rachel will have a roommate and new friends in New York. Season four will also feature a teaming up of Coach Roz (NeNe Leakes) and Sue (Jane Lynch) to take down Principal Figgins (Iqbal Theba).
On July 31, 2012, executive producer Murphy revealed on his Twitter account that the first group number of the season would be a cover of Adele's "Chasing Pavements". Murphy also tweeted that there would be an episode titled "The Break-Up" and a two-part Thanksgiving episode in which the Sectionals competition will take place. Murphy has also stated that the show will be doing another Christmas episode this season.
Executive producer Falchuk has stated that season four will not revolve around relationships as much as past seasons, commenting, "Relationships in general will be less of a focus this year, I personally think a lot of these characters are more interesting not in relationships. And I think with a lot of them we will be exploring that. Whether they break up or not, we’re really focused on giving them more individual stories."
Cast.
Two actresses are appearing in multi-episode guest-starring arcs as part of the New York sequences: Sarah Jessica Parker as Isabelle Wright (first reported as Isabelle Klempt), and Kate Hudson as Cassandra July. Parker's character is a mentor to Kurt, and Hudson's character is Rachel's dance teacher at NYADA; Hudson will be appearing in six episodes during the fall.
Chord Overstreet (Sam Evans), who had been an often recurring guest in the second and third seasons, has been promoted to a series regular in the new season. Several new recurring characters were added for the new season. Dean Geyer as Brody Weston, a handsome junior at Rachel's new school, Jacob Artist as McKinley freshman Jake Puckerman, Puck's (Mark Salling) younger half brother, Becca Tobin as Kitty, a cheerleader, and Melissa Benoist as Marley Rose. Marley's mother Millie is played by Trisha Rae Stahl.
"The Glee Project" winner Blake Jenner will have a recurring role for at least seven episodes, starting with the fifth episode; he will be playing Ryder Lynn, a new McKinley student, who joins New Directions with Finn's aid. Jenner has commented that he would enjoy playing a character like Finn.
Actress Whoopi Goldberg is reprising her season three role of Carmen Tibideaux. She will be recurring throughout the season. Other recurring guests who have returned include Vanessa Lengies as Sugar Motta, Samuel Larsen as Joe Hart and Alex Newell as Wade "Unique" Adams. Lauren Potter as cheerleader Becky Jackson has also returned, and filmed scenes on August 22, 2012. Damian McGinty (Rory Flanagan) is not a part of the regular cast, but he made a special appearance in "Glee, Actually" as Artie's guardian angel in a dream sequence. From the cast of recurring adult characters, Dot-Marie Jones as Coach Beiste, Iqbal Theba as Principal Figgins and NeNe Leakes as Coach Roz Washington are all set to return, though Leakes had not yet done so in the fourteen episodes to 14 February. Jessalyn Gilsig, like McGinty, made a special appearance in "Glee, Actually" in Artie's dream sequence, reprising her role as Terri Schuester. Grant Gustin is returning as Dalton Academy Warbler Sebastian Smythe, and the group's new leader, Hunter, is played by Nolan Gerard Funk. Ashley Fink is also returning for a guest appearance in "Sadie Hawkins" reprising her role as Lauren Zizes after being absent for most of Season 3 and the first 10 episodes of Season 4. Co-creator Ryan Murphy has stated that American Idol season 11 runner-up Jessica Sanchez would be appearing later in the season in a role yet to be determined.
Filming.
Season four of Glee began filming on Tuesday, July 24, 2012. A substantial amount of exterior shots depicting New York City will be shot on location in that city. Studio recording for the season began earlier, by July 19, 2012, with Jenna Ushkowitz and Heather Morris recording on that day.
