Alia Bhatt (born 15 March 1993) is an Indian actress and model who appears in Bollywood films. Born into a family where her parents, Mahesh Bhatt and Soni Razdan, and elder sister Pooja Bhatt were actors and filmmakers, Bhatt made her acting debut at the age of nineteen with Karan Johar's "Student Of The Year" (2012), which was a moderate box-office commercial success.
Personal life.
Alia was born in Mumbai to Bollywood personalities Mahesh Bhatt and Soni Razdan. Her father Mahesh Bhatt is a director, producer, and screenwriter while her mother Soni Razdan is a film actress and director. She has one sister Shaheen Bhatt, a half sister Pooja Bhatt, and a half brother Rahul Bhatt. Actor Emraan Hashmi and director Mohit Suri are her cousins and producer Mukesh Bhatt is her uncle. Alia has completed high-school from Jamnabai Narsee School IB in May 2011. 
Career.
Bhatt's first movie role was as a child artist when with "Sangharsh" (1999), starring Akshay Kumar and Preity Zinta where she played the younger Zinta.
In 2012, Bhatt made her debut in Karan Johar's "Student Of The Year" along with Sidharth Malhotra and Varun Dhawan. 
Critical reviews.
Her performance were appreciated with film critic Taran Adarsh from Bollywood Hungama stating, "Alia's role is reminiscent of Kareena Kapoor in "Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham" . Stylish, classy, born with a silver spoon, she's someone who loves to flaunt not just her clothes and bags, but also her riches. Extremely photogenic , Alia makes a super-confident debut. In fact, all three, Siddharth, Varun and Alia, are here to stay!". film critic Rajeev Masand from CNN-IBN wrote, "Alia Bhatt is cute as the clueless Shanaya, if a little raw". film critic Komal Nahta commented, " Alia Bhatt ends up with a very dumb-blonde role who has to do standard ramp poses for the camera but she performs ably". Raedita Tandan from Filmfare wrote, "Among the performances, Sidharth, Varun and Alia do their best not to seem like newcomers and they emerge triumphant. And Alia definitely has what it takes to be a star. The three make confident debuts". film critic Anupama Chopra form Hindustan Times commented, "The leading lady, Shanaya, played by Alia Bhatt, carries Hermes bags. She's like Poo from "Kabhi Khushi Kabhie Gham" but without the killer attitude. Shanaya is substituting her lack of family ties with designer labels. The boys are also given simplistic backstories to explain why they are the way there are".
