"New Girl" is an American television sitcom that premiered on Fox on September 20, 2011. Zooey Deschanel stars as Jessica "Jess" Day, a well-liked, bubbly, and adorable woman in her late 20s who is trying to get over her surprise breakup with her boyfriend. She finds a new place to stay when she moves in with three single guys: Nick (Jake Johnson), a bartender; Schmidt (Max Greenfield), a professional and modern-day Casanova; and Winston (Lamorne Morris), a former professional athlete who achieved modest success abroad and is adjusting to life back in the US.
Episodes.
Season 2 (2012–13).
On April 9, 2012, Fox renewed "New Girl" for a second season, due to start airing on September 25, 2012. Parker Posey guest starred as a "shot girl" at a party thrown by Schmidt in the season premiere episode "Re-Launch"; Leslie Mann was originally cast in the role, but pulled out due to a scheduling conflict. Raymond J. Barry guest starred as "Old Nick" — an older drunk man who frequents Nick’s bar, claiming to be Nick — from the future. Niecy Nash, David Walton and Eric Winter all signed on as guest stars for the second season. However, Walton was the only actor out of three that appeared in the series, he appears in a recurring role as Jess' love interest, Sam, first appearing in the episode "Katie". Rachael Harris reprised her role as Jess' boss, Tanya Lamontagne in episode "Re-Launch". Maria Thayer guest starred as Amelia in the Halloween episode, a woman from Nick's college days. Carla Gugino guest starred in a three-episode stint as Schmidt's new boss, Emma. Jamie Lee Curtis and Rob Reiner guest starred as Jess' parents in the Thanksgiving episode. Rob Riggle also guest starred as Schmidt's cousin in the Thanksgiving episode. Olivia Munn guest starred in a multi-episode arc as Angie, a love interest for Nick. Brenda Song will appear in a recurring role as Daisy, a love interest for Winston. Brooklyn Decker also guest starred in Song's introductory episode, appearing as Holly. Nate Corddry also guest starred in an episode.
