Joshua David "Josh" Duhamel ( ; born November 14, 1972) is an American actor and former fashion model. He first achieved acting success in 1999 as Leo du Pres on ABC's "All My Children" and later as the chief of security, Danny McCoy, on NBC's "Las Vegas". He then began appearing in films, most prominently playing one of the protagonists, Captain/Major/Lieutenant Colonel William Lennox, in the box office hit "Transformers" as well as its sequels, ' and '. He starred in "Life as We Know It" with Katherine Heigl. He recently starred in Nicholas Sparks's "Safe Haven" with Julianne Hough. 
Early life.
Duhamel was born in Minot, North Dakota. His mother, Bonnie L. Kemper, is a physical education teacher, and his father, Larry Duhamel, is an advertising salesman. He is of French-Canadian, Irish, English, German, and Norwegian ancestry. Duhamel was raised Catholic.
His parents divorced during his youth. Although he remains close to both, he grew up with his mother and his three younger sisters, Ashlee, Mckenzee, and Kassidy. Duhamel attended Minot State University and played as the back-up quarterback for the university's football team. He planned to attend dental school, but dropped out one-and-a-half credits shy of his undergraduate degree.
Career.
Duhamel has stated, "After college, I followed an ex-girlfriend to northern California, did a bunch of odd jobs." Duhamel had won the title of Male Model of the Year in an International Modeling and Talent Association (IMTA) competition in 1997 (the runner-up was actor Ashton Kutcher).
Duhamel began his acting career as an extra in the music videos for Donna Summer's song, "I Will Go With You (Con te partirò)" in 1998 and Christina Aguilera's song, "Genie in A Bottle" in 1999. Josh trained with Scott Sedita Acting Studios. Later that year, he won the role of Leo du Pres on the ABC soap opera "All My Children". His work on the show, especially his character's pairing with Greenlee Smythe (portrayed by actor Rebecca Budig), garnered critical acclaim. In 2000, he posed fully nude for Greg Gorman's "As I See It" photography book.
In 2003, he earned a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for the Special Fan Award for America's Favorite Couple in 2002, shared with Budig, and a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Leo du Pres. Duhamel left "All My Children" in 2002 to pursue other acting opportunities. In 2003, Duhamel landed a prime time role on the NBC show "Las Vegas", playing the head of security as Danny McCoy for the Montecito Casino. He succeeded James Caan as head of the casino after Caan departed the series at the end of the fourth season. The series ended in 2008.
Duhamel made his big-screen acting debut in 2004's "Win a Date with Tad Hamilton!" and continued on to star in the thriller "Turistas" (2006). After watching an episode of "Las Vegas" in which Duhamel's character had just returned from the war in Iraq, Steven Spielberg handpicked him for the role of Captain William Lennox in 2007's summer blockbuster film "Transformers" (a film for which Spielberg was the executive producer). Duhamel reprised the role for the sequel, ', released in June 2009, and again in ', released in June 2011.
Duhamel was the official pace car driver for the 2009 Indianapolis 500 driving the 2010 Chevrolet Camaro Pace Car. In 2010, he played the lead role in the movie "When in Rome" as Nick Beamon.
On January 23, 2013, Duhamel was named the host of the 2013 Kids' Choice Awards, which will be broadcasted live from Los Angeles on March 23, 2013.
Duhamel and his co-star from "Safe Haven", Julianne Hough, performed a "Safe Haven"-themed showcase appearance via video on "The Price is Right" with Drew Carey.
Personal life.
Duhamel met and began dating singer Stacy Ann "Fergie" Ferguson in September 2004. Ferguson appeared on Duhamel's show "Las Vegas" with her band (The Black Eyed Peas) in an episode titled "Montecito Lancers" (which aired on November 1, 2004). The couple wed on January 10, 2009, in a Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church Estate Vineyards in Malibu, California. On January 10, 2010, the couple renewed their wedding vows. They are currently expecting their first child together, which Fergie confirmed via Twitter on Monday, February 18, 2013. 
Duhamel and Ferguson reside in Brentwood, California. Both Duhamel and Fergie are Catholic, and attend church. In 2005 he became the co-owner of 10 North Main, a restaurant in Minot, North Dakota, which features dishes such as elk and pheasant.
