Twilight is a series of four vampire-themed fantasy romance novels by American author Stephenie Meyer. It charts a period in the life of Isabella "Bella" Swan, a teenage girl who moves to Forks, Washington, and falls in love with a 104-year-old vampire named Edward Cullen. The series is told primarily from Bella's point of view, with the epilogue of "Eclipse" and Part II of "Breaking Dawn" being told from the viewpoint of character Jacob Black, a werewolf. The unpublished "Midnight Sun" is a retelling of the first book, "Twilight", from Edward Cullen's point of view. The novella "The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner", which tells the story of a newborn vampire who appeared in "Eclipse", was published on June 5, 2010 as a hardcover book and on June 7 as a free online ebook. "", a definitive encyclopedic reference with nearly 100 full colour illustrations, was released in bookstores on April 12, 2011.
Since the release of the first novel, "Twilight", in 2005, the books have gained immense popularity and commercial success around the world. The series is most popular among young adults; the four books have won multiple awards, most notably the 2008 British Book Award for "Children's Book of the Year" for "Breaking Dawn", while the series as a whole won the 2009 Kids' Choice Award for Favorite Book.
As of October 2010, the series has sold over 116 million copies worldwide with translations into at least 38 different languages around the globe. The four "Twilight" books have consecutively set records as the biggest selling novels of 2008 on the "USA Today" Best-Selling Books list and have spent over 235 weeks on the "New York Times" Best Seller list for Children's Series Books.
The books have been made into "The Twilight Saga" series of motion pictures by Summit Entertainment. The film adaptations of the first three books were released in 2008, 2009, and 2010 respectively. The fourth book is adapted into two full-length films — the first film being released in November 2011, and the second film in November 2012.
Plot overview.
"Twilight".
Bella Swan moves from Phoenix, Arizona to live with her father in Forks, Washington to allow her mother to travel with her new husband, a minor league baseball player. After moving to Forks, Bella finds herself involuntarily drawn to a mysterious, handsome boy, Edward Cullen. She eventually learns that he is a member of a vampire family who drinks animal blood rather than human blood. Edward and Bella fall in love, while James, a sadistic vampire from another coven, is drawn to hunt down Bella. Edward and the other Cullens defend Bella. She escapes to Phoenix, Arizona, where she is tricked into confronting James, who tries to kill her. She is seriously wounded, but Edward rescues her and they return to Forks, having killed James.
"New Moon".
Edward and his family leave Forks because he believes he is endangering Bella's life. Bella goes into a depression until she develops a strong friendship with Jacob Black, whom she discovers can shape-shift into a wolf. Jacob and the other wolves in his tribe must protect her from Victoria, a vampire seeking to avenge the death of her mate James. Due to a misunderstanding, Edward believes Bella is dead. Edward decides to commit suicide in Volterra, Italy, but is stopped by Bella, who is accompanied by Edward's sister, Alice. They meet with the Volturi, a powerful vampire coven, and are released only on the condition that Bella be turned into a vampire in the near future. Bella and Edward are reunited, and she and the Cullens return to Forks.
"Eclipse".
Victoria has created an army of "newborn" vampires to battle the Cullen family and murder Bella for revenge. Meanwhile, Bella is compelled to choose between her relationship with Edward and her friendship with Jacob. Edward's vampire family and Jacob's werewolf pack join forces to successfully destroy Victoria and her vampire army. In the end, Bella chooses Edward's love over Jacob's friendship and agrees to marry him.
"Breaking Dawn".
Bella and Edward are married, but their honeymoon is cut short when Bella discovers that she is pregnant. Her pregnancy progresses rapidly, severely weakening her. She nearly dies giving birth to her and Edward's half-vampire-half-human daughter, Renesmee. Edward injects Bella with his venom to save her life and turns her into a vampire. A vampire from another coven sees Renesmee and mistakes her for an "immortal child". She informs the Volturi, as the existence of such beings violates vampire law. The Cullens gather vampire witnesses who can verify that Renesmee is not an immortal child. After an intense confrontation, the Cullens and their witnesses convince the Volturi that the child poses no danger to vampires or their secret, and they are left in peace by the Volturi.
Setting.
The story is set primarily in the town of Forks, Washington, where Bella and her father, Charlie Swan, live. Other cities in Washington briefly appear in the series or are mentioned, such as Port Angeles, Olympia, Seattle and La Push. Some events in "Twilight" take place in Phoenix, Arizona, where Bella was raised. Volterra, Italy, is featured in "New Moon", when Edward travels there to commit suicide and Bella rushes to save him. Jacksonville, Florida, is mentioned first in "Twilight" and second in "Eclipse", when Edward and Bella visit Bella's mother, who has moved there with her new husband. Seattle, Washington, is featured in "Breaking Dawn" when Jacob tries to escape his love for Bella, and when Bella tries to locate a man named J. Jenks. It is also the location of a series of murders committed by newborn vampires in "Eclipse". In "Breaking Dawn", Bella and Edward spend their honeymoon on a fictional "Isle Esme", purportedly off the coast of Brazil.
Structure and genre.
The "Twilight" series falls under the genre of young adult, fantasy, and romance, though Meyer categorized her first book, "Twilight", as "suspense romance horror comedy". However, she states that she considers her books as "romance more than anything else". The series explores the unorthodox romance between human Bella and vampire Edward, as well as the love triangle between Bella, Edward, and Jacob, a werewolf. The books avoid delving into provocative sex, drugs, and harsh swearing because, according to Meyer, "I don't think teens need to read about gratuitous sex."
The books are written in first-person narrative, primarily through Bella's eyes with the epilogue of the third book and a part of the fourth book being from Jacob's point of view. When asked about the structure of the novel, Meyer described her difficulty to pinpoint the premise of the novels to any specific category: </ref>
The books are based on the vampire myth, but "Twilight" vampires differ in a number of particulars from the general vampire lore. For instance, "Twilight" vampires have strong piercing teeth rather than fangs; they glitter in sunlight rather than burn; and they can drink animal as well as human blood. Meyer comments that her vampire mythology differs from that of other authors because she wasn't informed about the canon vampires, saying, </ref>
Inspiration and themes.
According to the author, her books are "about life, not death" and "love, not lust". Each book in the series was inspired by and loosely based on a different literary classic: "Twilight" on Jane Austen's "Pride and Prejudice", "New Moon" on Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet", "Eclipse" on Emily Brontë's "Wuthering Heights", and "Breaking Dawn" on a second Shakespeare play, "A Midsummer Night's Dream". Meyer also states that Orson Scott Card and L. M. Montgomery's "Anne of Green Gables" series are a big influence on her writing.
Other major themes of the series include choice and free will. Meyer says that the books are centered around Bella's choice to choose her life on her own, and the Cullens' choices to abstain from killing rather than follow their temptations: "I really think that's the underlying metaphor of my vampires. It doesn't matter where you're stuck in life or what you think you have to do; you can always choose something else. There's always a different path."
Meyer, a Mormon, acknowledges that her faith has influenced her work. In particular, she says that her characters "tend to think more about where they came from, and where they are going, than might be typical." Meyer also steers her work from subjects such as sex, despite the romantic nature of the novels. Meyer says that she does not consciously intend her novels to be Mormon-influenced, or to promote the virtues of sexual abstinence and spiritual purity, but admits that her writing is shaped by her values, saying, "I don't think my books are going to be really graphic or dark, because of who I am. There's always going to be a lot of light in my stories."
Origins and publishing history.
Stephenie Meyer says that the idea for "Twilight" came to her in a dream on June 2, 2003. The dream was about a human girl, and a vampire who was in love with her but thirsted for her blood. Based on this dream, Meyer wrote the transcript of what is now chapter 13 of the book. Despite having very little writing experience, in a matter of three months she had transformed that dream into a completed novel. After writing and editing the novel, she signed a three-book deal with Little, Brown and Company for $750,000, an unusually high amount for a first time author. Megan Tingley, the editor who signed Meyer, says that halfway through the reading manuscript she realized that she had a future bestseller in her hands. The book was released in 2005.
Following the success of "Twilight", Meyer expanded the story into a series with three more books: "New Moon" (2006), "Eclipse" (2007), and "Breaking Dawn" (2008). In its first week after publication, the first sequel, "New Moon", debuted at #5 on the "New York Times" Best Seller List for Children's Chapter Books, and in its second week rose to the #1 position, where it remained for the next eleven weeks. In total, it spent over 50 weeks on the list. After the release of "Eclipse", the first three "Twilight" books spent a combined 143 weeks on the "New York Times" Best Seller List. The fourth installment of the "Twilight" series, "Breaking Dawn", was released with an initial print run of 3.7 million copies. Over 1.3 million copies were sold on the first day alone, setting a record in first-day sales performance for the Hachette Book Group USA. Upon the completion of the fourth entry in the series, Meyer indicated that "Breaking Dawn" would be the final novel to be told from Bella Swan's perspective. In 2008 and 2009, the four books of the series claimed the top four spots on "USA Today"'s year-end bestseller list, making Meyer the first author to ever achieve this feat. The series then won the 2009 Kids' Choice Award for Favorite Book, where it competed against the "Harry Potter" series.
Other books.
Meyer originally planned to write a companion book to "Twilight" called "Midnight Sun", which would be the story of "Twilight" told from Edward Cullen's point-of-view. She stated that "Twilight" was the only book that she planned to rewrite from Edward's perspective. However, a rough draft of "Midnight Sun's" first twelve chapters was leaked on the internet. Meyer has since put these twelve chapters on her website so that her fans could read them for free, but has put the project on hold indefinitely due to her feelings about the situation. She stated, </ref> Though she has no current plans to do so, Meyer has also stated that if she were to continue writing in the same universe she would write from the perspective of either Leah Clearwater or Bella and Edward's daughter, Renesmee Cullen.
On March 16, 2010 Yen Press released "Twilight: The Graphic Novel, Vol. 1", by artist Young Kim based on the first book in the series. In February 2011, the graphic novel won the 2010 Gem Awards Best Manga of the Year. The sequel, "Twilight: The Graphic Novel, Vol. 2" was released on October 11, 2011 and followed "Volume 1" in topping "The New York Times Best Seller list" for Hardcover Graphic Books in its first week. On March 30, 2010, Meyer revealed on her official website that she will be releasing a new novella in the series, "The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner", which tells the story of a newborn vampire who appeared in "Eclipse", on June 5, 2010. An electronic version of the book was made available free from her web site, as well as in bookstores.
On October 5, 2010, Little, Brown and Company announced that "", a definitive encyclopedic reference for the saga including character profiles, outtakes, a conversation with Meyer, genealogical charts, maps and extensive cross-references with nearly 100 full color illustrations, was to be released on April 12, 2011, after many publication delays since 2008. It debuted at #1 on "The New York Times Best Seller list", where it stayed for three consecutive weeks, and at #4 on the USA Today Best Seller list.
Reception.
The response to "Twilight" has been mixed. While the books have become immensely popular, they have also generated much controversy.
Positive reception.
Most of the reviews, however, have focused on "Twilight's" popularity, rather than actually praising it for literary standards. The "Seattle Post-Intelligencer" called the book a "hot new teen novel", "Entertainment Weekly" called Meyer "the world's most popular vampire novelist since Anne Rice", "The New York Times" described "Twilight" as a "literary phenomenon", and Matt Arado of "Daily Herald" noted that the "Twilight" books have become the "hottest publishing phenomenon since a certain bespectacled wizard cast his spell on the world." The large and diverse online fan community of the series are often noted, sometimes even being called "cult-like". Despite this, the series is often considered to have a wider appeal; Crystal Mack of "Daily Herald" said, "While teenage girls are the main audience, young boys and adults of both genders have also been swept up in the phenomenon."
The author and the series' popularity are often compared with J. K. Rowling and "Harry Potter". Describing the fan following of the books, the "Phoenix New Times" wrote, "Meyer's fandom is reminiscent of "Harry Potter" mania." "The Daily Telegraph" described "Twilight" as the "spiritual successor to "Harry Potter"". Rebekah Bradford of "The Post and Courier" stated that the series has a "huge crossover appeal much like the "Harry Potter" books before them." According to the "Daily Telegraph", "Stephenie Meyer, in particular, has achieved incredible success across all the English-speaking nations and Europe and many will say that her "Twilight" series has filled the hole left by "Harry Potter"." Meyer has responded to such comparisons, saying, "It's terribly flattering to be compared to her, but there's never going to be another J. K. Rowling; that's a phenomenon that's not gonna happen again", however noting that "you can compare my fans to her fans more easily me to her. I do think that we both have people who are just really really enthusiastic, and will come miles to see you and be involved, and everybody really cares about our characters."
Economically, the town of Forks, Washington, the setting for the "Twilight" series, has improved due to tourism from fans of the books. Forks is visited by an average of 8,000 tourists per month, and has been described as a "mecca for Twilighters". In response to plans for the aging Forks High School to be renovated, "Twilight" fans have teamed up with Infinite Jewelry Co. and the West Olympic Peninsula Betterment Association to collect donations in an attempt to save the brick appearance or the building altogether.
Criticism.
The series has garnered much controversy, both over its literary substance and over the type of relationship portrayed in the books. 
Many have derided the series as poor writing. While comparing Stephenie Meyer to JK Rowling, Stephen King said, "the real difference J. K. Rowling and Meyer is that Jo Rowling is a terrific writer, and Stephenie Meyer can't write worth a darn. She's not very good." However, King understood the appeal of the series, adding, "People are attracted by the stories, by the pace and in the case of Stephenie Meyer, it's very clear that she's writing to a whole generation of girls and opening up kind of a safe joining of love and sex in those books. It's exciting and it's thrilling and it's not particularly threatening because it's not overtly sexual." 
Laura Miller of Salon.com wrote that "the characters, such as they are, are stripped down to a minimum, lacking the texture and idiosyncrasies of actual people", and said that ""Twilight" would be a lot more persuasive as an argument that an 'amazing heart' counts for more than appearances if it didn't harp so incessantly on Edward's superficial splendors." 
Elizabeth Hand of "The Washington Post" wrote, "Meyer's prose seldom rises above the serviceable, and the plotting is leaden." The article, featured on the Yahoo! website Shine, also criticized the books and the author's final word on the series was, "Good books deal with themes of longing and loneliness, sexual passion and human frailty, alienation and fear just as the Twilight books do. But they do so by engaging us with complexities of feeling and subtleties of character, expressed in language that rises above banal mediocrity. Their reward is something more than just an escape into banal mediocrity. We deserve something better to get hooked on."
The books have also been widely critiqued as promoting, normalizing, and idealizing an emotionally and physically abusive relationship. Sci-fi website i09 noted that Bella and Edward's relationship meets all fifteen criteria set by the National Domestic Violence Hotline for being in an abusive relationship. L. Lee Butler of Young Adult Library Services Association commented how he was unusually hesitant to stock the "Twilight" books in his library because he felt the books were "robbing girls of agency and normalizing stalking and abusive behavior." Many female-oriented and feminist media outlets, like Jezebel, The Frisky, and Salon.com have decried "Twilight" as promoting an anti-woman message. "Bitch" magazine stated the novels "had created a new, popular genre of "abstinence porn", concluding that, "In reality, the abstinence message—wrapped in the genre of abstinence porn—objectifies Bella in the same ways that 'real' porn might. The "Twilight" books conflate Bella losing her virginity with the loss of other things, including her sense of self and her very life. Such a high-stakes treatment of abstinence reinforces the idea that Bella is powerless, an object, a fact that is highlighted when we get to the sex scenes in "Breaking Dawn"." "Ms." declared that "Twilight" promotes a physically abusive relationship and an anti-abortion message. 
Many entertainment and media outlets have made similar comments on the abusive nature of Bella and Edward's relationship, including "Entertainment Weekly", "Movieline", and Mediabistro.com.
Meyer has dismissed such criticisms, arguing both that the books center around Bella's choice, which she perceives as the foundation of modern feminism, and that Bella's damsel in distress persona is due only to her humanity. Meyer also added, "Just because doesn't do kung fu and she cooks for her father doesn't make her worthy of that criticism". Shannon Simcox of "The Daily Collegian" has similarly dismissed the criticism surrounding Bella, commenting, "While Bella plays the perfect damsel in distress that gets herself into sticky situations, she is also very in control of herself. She chose to move to Forks and be in a new place; she constantly faces a bunch of people who want to suck the life right out of her, and she is constantly pleading to become a vampire, too, so she can take care of herself and Edward."
Legal controversy.
In December 2010, professional singer Matthew Smith, known as Matt Heart, sued Summit Entertainment in the case "Smith v. Summit Entertainment LLC". Smith's song "Eternal Knight" was posted on several websites accompanied by cover art which Summit claimed used its "Twilight" typeface mark. Smith won four of the seven causes of action, including his right to continue distribution of his copyrighted song, under the terms that he remove any reference to "Twilight" or the "Twilight Saga".
Book challenges.
The "Twilight" series made the number five spot on the American Library Association's (ALA) Top Ten List of the Most Frequently Challenged Books of 2009, for being "Sexually Explicit", "Unsuited to Age Group", and having a "Religious Viewpoint".
Film adaptations.
A screenplay for "Twilight" was written by Melissa Rosenberg and has been adapted into a film by Summit Entertainment. The film was directed by Catherine Hardwicke, with Kristen Stewart and Robert Pattinson in the leading roles of Isabella Swan and Edward Cullen, respectively. The movie was released in the United States on November 21, 2008. "Twilight: The Complete Illustrated Movie Companion", written by Mark Cotta Vaz, was released October 28.
On November 22, 2008, following the box office success of "Twilight", Summit Entertainment confirmed a sequel, called "", based on the second book in the series, "New Moon". The film was released on November 20, 2009. "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" was released on DVD and Blu-ray on March 20, 2010 through midnight release parties. That same day, Summit Entertainment released "Twilight in Forks", a documentary about the primary setting of the "Twilight" series, Forks, Washington. Topics Entertainment released its own documentary about Forks and the "Twilight" series on March 16, called "Forks: Bitten by Twilight".
The third installment in the series, ', was released on June 30, 2010. The fourth installment, ' was released November 18th, 2011, And the fifth and last installment, "" was released November 16, 2012.
Conventions.
While the "Twilight" series has been a visible presence in many conventions such as ComicCon, there have also been many conventions whose main focus has been on the "Twilight" series (books and films). Some notable conventions have been Twicon and a series of "Official Twilight Conventions" that are being held by Creation Entertainment.
