Cloud Atlas is a 2012 German drama and science fiction film written, produced and directed by Lana and Andy Wachowski and Tom Tykwer. Adapted from the 2004 novel by David Mitchell, the film features multiple plotlines set across six different eras. During four years of development the project met difficulties securing financial support; it was eventually produced with a $102 million budget provided by independent sources, making "Cloud Atlas" one of the most expensive independent films of all time. Production began in September 2011 at Studio Babelsberg in Potsdam-Babelsberg, Germany.
The film premiered on September 9, 2012, at the 37th Toronto International Film Festival and was released on October 26, 2012 in conventional and IMAX cinemas.
"Cloud Atlas" polarized critics, and has subsequently been included on various Best Film and Worst Film lists. The film was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score for Tykwer (who co-scored the film), Johnny Klimek and Reinhold Heil.
Plot.
The film consists of six interrelated and interwoven stories that take the viewer from the South Pacific in the 19th century to a distant, post-apocalyptic future. Unlike the original novel, the film is structured, according to novelist David Mitchell, "as a sort of pointillist mosaic: We stay in each of the six worlds just long enough for the hook to be sunk in, and from then on the film darts from world to world at the speed of a plate-spinner, revisiting each narrative for long enough to propel it forward."
A seventh time period, several decades after the Hawaiian one, is featured in the film's prologue and epilogue. In the prologue, a lone, elderly Zachry delivers a monologue, and his location is not revealed. In the epilogue, Zachry is revealed to have been telling these stories to his numerous grandchildren on one of earth's colonies, one with two moons, revealing that they were successfully able to send a message to the colonies and were rescued. Meronym emerges from their home and they embrace.
Production.
Development.
The film is based on the 2004 novel "Cloud Atlas" by David Mitchell. Filmmaker Tom Tykwer revealed in January 2009 his intent to adapt the novel and said he was working on a screenplay with the Wachowskis, who optioned the novel. By June 2010, Tykwer had asked actors Natalie Portman, Tom Hanks, Halle Berry, James McAvoy, and Ian McKellen to star in "Cloud Atlas". By April 2011, the Wachowskis joined Tykwer in co-directing the film. In the following May, with Hanks and Berry confirmed in their roles, Hugo Weaving, Ben Whishaw, Susan Sarandon, and Jim Broadbent also joined the cast. Actor Hugh Grant joined the cast days before the start of filming.
"Cloud Atlas" was financed by the German production companies A Company, ARD Degeto Film and X Filme. In May 2011 "Variety" reported that the film had a production budget of . The filmmakers also secured approximately $20 million from the German government, including () from the German Federal Film Fund (DFFF), () development funding and () from Medienboard Berlin-Brandenburg, a German funder, as part of their plans to film at Studio Babelsberg later in 2011. The project also received () financial support from Filmstiftung NRW, () from Mitteldeutsche Medienförderung / UE-Fonds (the biggest proportion of the budget), and () from FFF Bayern, another German organization. The Wachowskis contributed approximately $1 million to the project out of their own finances. The budget was updated to .
The directors stated that due to lack of finance, the film was almost abandoned several times. However they specified how the crew was enthusiastic and determined: "They flew—even though their agents called them and said, 'They don’t have the money, the money’s not closed'". They specifically praised Tom Hanks' enthusiasm: "Warner Bros. calls and, through our agent, says they’ve looked at the math and decided that they don’t like this deal. They’re pulling all of the money away, rescinding the offer. I was shaking. I heard, 'Are you saying the movie is dead?' They were like, 'Yes, the movie is dead.' [...] At the end of the meeting, Tom says, 'Let’s do it. I’m in. When do we start?' [...] Tom said this unabashed, enthusiastic 'Yes!' which put our heart back together. We walked away thinking, this movie is dead but somehow, it’s alive and we’re going to make it." "Every single time, Tom Hanks was the first who said, 'I’m getting on the plane.' And then once he said he was getting on the plane, basically everyone said, 'Well, Tom’s on the plane, we’re on the plane.' And so everyone flew Berlin to begin the film. It was like this giant leap of faith. From all over the globe."
Principal photography.
Some German journalists have called "Cloud Atlas" "the first attempt at a German blockbuster" (although the 1984 fantasy "The Neverending Story" was written about in similar terms before its release). Tykwer and the Wachowskis filmed parallel to each other using separate camera crews. The Wachowskis directed the 19th-century story and the two set in the future, while Tykwer directed the stories set in the 1930s, the 1970s, and 2012. Warner Bros. Pictures representatives have argued they are happy with the film's 164-minute running time, after previously stating that it should not exceed 150 minutes.
Filming began at Studio Babelsberg in Potsdam-Babelsberg, Germany, on , 2011. Other locations include Düsseldorf, in and near Edinburgh and Glasgow Scotland (including the 'San Francisco street' scenes), and the Mediterranean island of Majorca, Spain. The scenes shot on Majorca were filmed in the World Heritage site of the Serra de Tramuntana mountains. Scenes were shot at Sa Calobra and near Formentor, amongst others. Port de Sóller provides the setting for the scene when the boat is mooring. Scenes filmed in Scotland also feature the recently built Clackmannanshire Bridge near Alloa and Glasgow.
Music.
The original orchestral soundtrack was composed by co-director Tom Tykwer and his longtime collaborators, Reinhold Heil and Johnny Klimek. The trio have worked together for years as Pale 3, having composed music for several films directed by Tykwer, most notably "Run Lola Run", "The Princess and the Warrior", "", and "The International", and contributed music to the Wachowskis' "The Matrix Revolutions". Work on the score for "Cloud Atlas" began months before shooting commenced on the film. The orchestra was recorded in Leipzig, Germany with the MDR Radio Symphony Orchestra and the Leipzig Radio Chorus.
The soundtrack has received praise from critics. Film Music Magazine critic Daniel Schweiger described the soundtrack as "a singular piece of multi-themed astonishment... Yet instead of defining one sound for every era, Klimek, Heil and Tykwer seamlessly merge their motifs across the ages to give "Cloud Atlas" its rhythms, blending orchestra, pulsating electronics, choruses and a soaring salute to John Adams in an astonishing, captivating score that eventually becomes all things for all personages..." Erin Willard of ScifiMafia described the soundtrack as "cinematic, symphonic, and simply, utterly, exquisitely beautiful... in the wrong hands the opening theme, which is picked up periodically throughout the entire soundtrack, could easily have become cloying or twee or sappy, but happily this hazard was avoided entirely." Jon Broxton of Movie Music UK wrote, "Scores like "Cloud Atlas", which have an important and identifiable structure that relates directly to concepts in the film, intelligent and sophisticated application of thematic elements, and no small amount of beauty, harmony and excitement in the music itself, reaffirm your faith in what film music can be when it’s done right." Daniel Schweiger selected the score as one of the best soundtracks of 2012, writing that ""Cloud Atlas" is an immense sum total of not only the human experience, but of mankind’s capacity for musical self-realization itself, all as embodied in a theme for the ages." The film's soundtrack was nominated for a 2013 Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score.
The film contains approximately two hours of original music. WaterTower Music released the soundtrack album via digital download on October 23, 2012 and the physical CD on November 6, 2012.
Release.
The film premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival, whereupon it received a 10-minute standing ovation.
"Cloud Atlas" was released on October 26, 2012 in the United States. Warner Bros. distributed the film in the United States and Canada, and Focus Features International handled sales and distribution for other territories. The movie was released in cinemas in China on 31st January 2013, but in a reduced form with 39 minutes missing including removal of nudity, a sexual scene, and numerous conversations.
Marketing.
A six-minute trailer for "Cloud Atlas", accompanied by a short introduction by the three directors describing the ideas behind the creation of the film, was released on , 2012. A shorter official trailer was released on September 7, 2012. The six-minute trailer includes three pieces of music. The opening piano music is the main theme of the soundtrack ("Prelude: The Atlas March/The Cloud Atlas Sextet") by composing trio Tom Tykwer, Johnny Klimek and Reinhold Heil, followed by an instrumental version of the song "Sonera" from Thomas J. Bergersen's album "Illusions". The song in the last part is "Outro" from M83's album "Hurry Up, We're Dreaming".
Home media.
The film will be released on May 14, 2013, on home media (Blu-ray, DVD and UV Digital Copy).
Reception.
Critical response.
The film has had polarized reaction from critics, who debated its length and editing of the interwoven stories, but praised other aspects of the film such as its cinematography, music, visual style, special effects and ensemble cast.
The film premiered on September 9, 2012, at the 37th Toronto International Film Festival, where it received a 10 minute standing ovation. Review aggregator Metacritic collected the top 10 lists of various critics and Cloud Atlas was placed at number 25. 
Critical response to the film has been mixed to positive. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 66% of critics have given "Cloud Atlas" a "Fresh" rating based on 225 reviews, with an average of 6.6/10. The site's consensus from the collected reviews was "Its sprawling, ambitious blend of thought-provoking narrative and eye-catching visuals will prove too unwieldy for some, but the sheer size and scope of "Cloud Atlas" are all but impossible to ignore". The film currently holds a Metacritic score of 55 out of 100, based on 43 reviews, indicating 'mixed to average' reviews.
Film critic Roger Ebert praised the film for being "one of the most ambitious films ever made", awarding the film four out of four stars. He wrote "Even as I was watching "Cloud Atlas" the first time, I knew I would need to see it again. Now that I've seen it the second time, I know I'd like to see it a third time ... I think you will want to see this daring and visionary film ... I was never, ever bored by "Cloud Atlas". On my second viewing, I gave up any attempt to work out the logical connections between the segments, stories and characters." He later listed the film among his best of the year.
"Variety" described it as "an intense three-hour mental workout rewarded with a big emotional payoff. ... One's attention must be engaged at all times as the mosaic triggers an infinite range of potentially profound personal responses." James Rocchi of "MSN Movies" stated "It is so full of passion and heart and empathy that it feels completely unlike any other modern film in its range either measured through scope of budget or sweep of action." "The Daily Beast" called "Cloud Atlas" "one of the year’s most important movies". Michael Cieply of "The New York Times" commented on the film "You will have to decide for yourself whether it works. It’s that kind of picture. ... Is this the stuff of Oscars? Who knows? Is it a force to be reckoned with in the coming months? Absolutely." 
"Slant Magazine"s Calum Marsh called "Cloud Atlas" a "unique and totally unparalleled disaster" and commented " badness is fundamental, an essential aspect of the concept and its execution that I suspect is impossible to remedy or rectify". "The Guardian" stated "At 163 minutes, "Cloud Atlas" carries all the marks of a giant folly, and those unfamiliar with the book will be baffled" and awarded the film 2 out of 5 stars. Nick Pickerton, who reviewed the film for "The Village Voice" said "There is a great deal of humbug about art and love in "Cloud Atlas", but it is decidedly unlovable, and if you want to learn something about feeling, you're at the wrong movie." "Village Voice" and "Time Magazine" both named "Cloud Atlas" the worst film of 2012.
Immediately after the film's release, the advocacy group Media Action Network for Asian Americans (MANAA) criticized the film for the use of what is sometimes labelled 'yellowface' makeup to allow non-Asian actors to portray certain Asian characters in the neo-Seoul sequences.
Reaction from the directors.
On October 25 (after the premiere at Toronto), Andy Wachowski stated about critics "As soon as they encounter a piece of art they don’t fully understand the first time going through it, they think it’s the fault of the movie or the work of art. They think, 'It’s a mess [ ...] This doesn’t make any sense.' And they reject it, just out of an almost knee-jerk response to some ambiguity or some gulf between what they expect they should be able to understand, and what they understand."
In the same interview, Lana Wachowski stated "People will try to will "Cloud Atlas" to be rejected. They will call it messy, or complicated, or undecided whether it’s trying to say something New Agey-profound or not. And we’re wrestling with the same things that Dickens and Hugo and David Mitchell and Herman Melville were wrestling with. We’re wrestling with those same ideas, and we’re just trying to do it in a more exciting context than conventionally you are allowed to. [...] We don’t want to say, 'We are making this to mean this.' What we find is that the most interesting art is open to a spectrum of interpretation."
Accolades.
The film was pre-nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects, but was eventually not nominated.
