In statistics and probability theory, standard deviation (represented by the symbol sigma, σ) shows how much variation or "dispersion" exists from the average (mean, or expected value). A low standard deviation indicates that the data points tend to be very close to the mean; high standard deviation indicates that the data points are spread out over a large range of values.
The standard deviation of a random variable, statistical population, data set, or probability distribution is the square root of its variance. It is algebraically simpler though practically less robust than the average absolute deviation.
A useful property of standard deviation is that, unlike variance, it is expressed in the same units as the data. Note, however, that for measurements with percentage as unit, the standard deviation will have percentage points as unit.
In addition to expressing the variability of a population, standard deviation is commonly used to measure confidence in statistical conclusions. For example, the margin of error in polling data is determined by calculating the expected standard deviation in the results if the same poll were to be conducted multiple times. The reported margin of error is typically about twice the standard deviation ­– the radius of a 95 percent confidence interval. In science, researchers commonly report the standard deviation of experimental data, and only effects that fall far outside the range of standard deviation are considered statistically significant – normal random error or variation in the measurements is in this way distinguished from causal variation. Standard deviation is also important in finance, where the standard deviation on the rate of return on an investment is a measure of the volatility of the investment.
When only a sample of data from a population is available, the population standard deviation can be estimated by a modified quantity called the sample standard deviation.
Basic examples.
Here the operator "E" denotes the average or expected value of "X". Then the standard deviation of "X" is the quantity
That is, the standard deviation "σ" (sigma) is the square root of the variance of "X", i.e. it is the square root of the average value of ("X" − "μ")2.
The standard deviation of a (univariate) probability distribution is the same as that of a random variable having that distribution. Not all random variables have a standard deviation, since these expected values need not exist. For example, the standard deviation of a random variable that follows a Cauchy distribution is undefined because its expected value "μ" is undefined.
Discrete random variable.
In the case where "X" takes random values from a finite data set "x"1, "x"2, ..., "xN", with each value having the same probability, the standard deviation is
or, using summation notation,
If, instead of having equal probabilities, the values have different probabilities, let "x"1 have probability "p"1, "x"2 have probability "p"2, ..., "x""N" have probability "p"N. In this case, the standard deviation will be
Continuous random variable.
The standard deviation of a continuous real-valued random variable "X" with probability density function "p"("x") is
and where the integrals are definite integrals taken for "x" ranging over the set of possible values of the random variable "X".
In the case of a parametric family of distributions, the standard deviation can be expressed in terms of the parameters. For example, in the case of the log-normal distribution with parameters "μ" and "σ"2, the standard deviation is [(exp("σ"2) − 1)exp(2"μ" + "σ"2)]1/2.
Estimation.
Where "N" − 1 equals the number of degrees of freedom in the vector of residuals, formula_12. This estimator is unbiased for the variance "σ"2 of the underlying population, if that variance exists and the sample values are drawn independently with replacement.
Confidence interval of a sampled standard deviation.
The standard deviation we obtain by sampling a distribution is itself not absolutely accurate. This is especially true if the number of samples is very low. This effect can be described by the confidence interval or CI.
For example, for N=2 the 95% CI of the SD is from 0.45*SD to 31.9*SD. In other words the standard deviation of the distribution in 95% of the cases can be up to a factor of 31 larger or up to a factor 2 smaller. For N=10 the interval is 0.69*SD to 1.83*SD, the actual SD can still be almost a factor 2 higher than the sampled SD. For N=100 this is down to 0.88*SD to 1.16*SD. So to be sure the sampled SD is close to the actual SD we need to sample a large number of points.
Identities and mathematical properties.
where formula_17 and formula_18 stand for variance and covariance, respectively.
For a finite population with equal probabilities at all points, we have
This means that the standard deviation is equal to the square root of (the average of the squares less the square of the average).
See computational formula for the variance for proof, and for an analogous result for the sample standard deviation.
Interpretation and application.
A large standard deviation indicates that the data points are far from the mean and a small standard deviation indicates that they are clustered closely around the mean.
For example, each of the three populations {0, 0, 14, 14}, {0, 6, 8, 14} and {6, 6, 8, 8} has a mean of 7. Their standard deviations are 7, 5, and 1, respectively. The third population has a much smaller standard deviation than the other two because its values are all close to 7. It will have the same units as the data points themselves. If, for instance, the data set {0, 6, 8, 14} represents the ages of a population of four siblings in years, the standard deviation is 5 years. As another example, the population {1000, 1006, 1008, 1014} may represent the distances traveled by four athletes, measured in meters. It has a mean of 1007 meters, and a standard deviation of 5 meters.
Standard deviation may serve as a measure of uncertainty. In physical science, for example, the reported standard deviation of a group of repeated measurements gives the precision of those measurements. When deciding whether measurements agree with a theoretical prediction, the standard deviation of those measurements is of crucial importance: if the mean of the measurements is too far away from the prediction (with the distance measured in standard deviations), then the theory being tested probably needs to be revised. This makes sense since they fall outside the range of values that could reasonably be expected to occur, if the prediction were correct and the standard deviation appropriately quantified. See prediction interval.
While the standard deviation does measure how far typical values tend to be from the mean, other measures are available. An example is the mean absolute deviation, which might be considered a more direct measure of average distance, compared to the root mean square distance inherent in the standard deviation.
Application examples.
The practical value of understanding the standard deviation of a set of values is in appreciating how much variation there is from the average (mean).
Climate.
As a simple example, consider the average daily maximum temperatures for two cities, one inland and one on the coast. It is helpful to understand that the range of daily maximum temperatures for cities near the coast is smaller than for cities inland. Thus, while these two cities may each have the same average maximum temperature, the standard deviation of the daily maximum temperature for the coastal city will be less than that of the inland city as, on any particular day, the actual maximum temperature is more likely to be farther from the average maximum temperature for the inland city than for the coastal one.
Particle physics.
Particle physics uses a standard of "5 sigma" for the declaration of a discovery. At five-sigma there is only one chance in nearly two million that a random fluctuation would yield the result. This level of certainty prompted the announcement that a particle consistent with the Higgs boson has been discovered in two independent experiments at CERN.
Sports.
Another way of seeing it is to consider sports teams. In any set of categories, there will be teams that rate highly at some things and poorly at others. Chances are, the teams that lead in the standings will not show such disparity but will perform well in most categories. The lower the standard deviation of their ratings in each category, the more balanced and consistent they will tend to be. Teams with a higher standard deviation, however, will be more unpredictable. For example, a team that is consistently bad in most categories will have a low standard deviation. A team that is consistently good in most categories will also have a low standard deviation. However, a team with a high standard deviation might be the type of team that scores a lot (strong offense) but also concedes a lot (weak defense), or, vice versa, that might have a poor offense but compensates by being difficult to score on.
Trying to predict which teams, on any given day, will win, may include looking at the standard deviations of the various team "stats" ratings, in which anomalies can match strengths vs. weaknesses to attempt to understand what factors may prevail as stronger indicators of eventual scoring outcomes.
In racing, a driver is timed on successive laps. A driver with a low standard deviation of lap times is more consistent than a driver with a higher standard deviation. This information can be used to help understand where opportunities might be found to reduce lap times.
Finance.
In finance, standard deviation is often used as a measure of the risk associated with price-fluctuations of a given asset (stocks, bonds, property, etc.), or the risk of a portfolio of assets (actively managed mutual funds, index mutual funds, or ETFs). Risk is an important factor in determining how to efficiently manage a portfolio of investments because it determines the variation in returns on the asset and/or portfolio and gives investors a mathematical basis for investment decisions (known as mean-variance optimization). The fundamental concept of risk is that as it increases, the expected return on an investment should increase as well, an increase known as the risk premium. In other words, investors should expect a higher return on an investment when that investment carries a higher level of risk or uncertainty. When evaluating investments, investors should estimate both the expected return and the uncertainty of future returns. Standard deviation provides a quantified estimate of the uncertainty of future returns.
For example, let's assume an investor had to choose between two stocks. Stock A over the past 20 years had an average return of 10 percent, with a standard deviation of 20 percentage points (pp) and Stock B, over the same period, had average returns of 12 percent but a higher standard deviation of 30 pp. On the basis of risk and return, an investor may decide that Stock A is the safer choice, because Stock B's additional two percentage points of return is not worth the additional 10 pp standard deviation (greater risk or uncertainty of the expected return). Stock B is likely to fall short of the initial investment (but also to exceed the initial investment) more often than Stock A under the same circumstances, and is estimated to return only two percent more on average. In this example, Stock A is expected to earn about 10 percent, plus or minus 20 pp (a range of 30 percent to −10 percent), about two-thirds of the future year returns. When considering more extreme possible returns or outcomes in future, an investor should expect results of as much as 10 percent plus or minus 60 pp, or a range from 70 percent to −50 percent, which includes outcomes for three standard deviations from the average return (about 99.7 percent of probable returns).
Calculating the average (or arithmetic mean) of the return of a security over a given period will generate the expected return of the asset. For each period, subtracting the expected return from the actual return results in the difference from the mean. Squaring the difference in each period and taking the average gives the overall variance of the return of the asset. The larger the variance, the greater risk the security carries. Finding the square root of this variance will give the standard deviation of the investment tool in question.
Population standard deviation is used to set the width of Bollinger Bands, a widely adopted technical analysis tool. For example, the upper Bollinger Band is given as The most commonly used value for "n" is 2; there is about a five percent chance of going outside, assuming a normal distribution of returns.
Unfortunately, financial time series are known to be non-stationary series, whereas the statistical calculations above, such as standard deviation, apply only to stationary series. Whatever apparent "predictive powers" or "forecasting ability" that may appear when applied as above is illusory. To apply the above statistical tools to non-stationary series, the series first must be transformed to a stationary series, enabling use of statistical tools that now have a valid basis from which to work.
Geometric interpretation.
whose coordinates are the mean of the values we started out with. A little algebra shows that the distance between "P" and "M" (which is the same as the orthogonal distance between "P" and the line "L") is equal to the standard deviation of the vector "x"1, "x"2, "x"3, multiplied by the square root of the number of dimensions of the vector (3 in this case.)
Chebyshev's inequality.
An observation is rarely more than a few standard deviations away from the mean. Chebyshev's inequality ensures that, for all distributions for which the standard deviation is defined, the amount of data within a number of standard deviations of the mean is at least as much as given in the following table.
Rules for normally distributed data.
where "μ" is the expected value of the random variables, "σ" equals their distribution's standard deviation divided by "n"1/2, and "n" is the number of random variables. The standard deviation therefore is simply a scaling variable that adjusts how broad the curve will be, though it also appears in the normalizing constant.
where formula_25 is the error function. If a data distribution is approximately normal then about 68 percent of the data values are within one standard deviation of the mean (mathematically, μ ± σ, where μ is the arithmetic mean), about 95 percent are within two standard deviations (μ ± 2σ), and about 99.7 percent lie within three standard deviations (μ ± 3σ). This is known as the "68-95-99.7 rule", or "the empirical rule".
Relationship between standard deviation and mean.
Variability can also be measured by the coefficient of variation, which is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. It is a dimensionless number.
Standard deviation of the mean.
Often, we want some information about the precision of the mean we obtained. We can obtain this by determining the standard deviation of the sampled mean.
hence
Rapid calculation methods.
Note that "s"0 raises "x" to the zero power, and since "x"0 is always 1, "s"0 evaluates to "N".
Similarly for sample standard deviation,
In a computer implementation, as the three "s""j" sums become large, we need to consider round-off error, arithmetic overflow, and arithmetic underflow. The method below calculates the running sums method with reduced rounding errors. This is a "one pass" algorithm for calculating variance of "n" samples without the need to store prior data during the calculation. Applying this method to a time series will result in successive values of standard deviation corresponding to "n" data points as "n" grows larger with each new sample, rather than a constant-width sliding window calculation.
where A is the mean value.
Weighted calculation.
And the standard deviation equations remain unchanged. Note that "s"0 is now the sum of the weights and not the number of samples "N".
The incremental method with reduced rounding errors can also be applied, with some additional complexity.
In the final division,
and
where n is the total number of elements, and n' is the number of elements with non-zero weights.
The above formulas become equal to the simpler formulas given above if weights are taken as equal to one.
History.
The term "standard deviation" was first used in writing by Karl Pearson in 1894, following his use of it in lectures. This was as a replacement for earlier alternative names for the same idea: for example, Gauss used "mean error". It may be worth noting in passing that the mean error is mathematically distinct from the standard deviation.
