Anne Jacqueline Hathaway (born November 12, 1982) is an American actress. After several stage roles, she appeared in the 1999 television series "Get Real". She came to prominence after playing Mia Thermopolis in the Disney film "The Princess Diaries" (2001) and in its 2004 . Since then, Hathaway has starred in dramatic films such as "Havoc" and "Brokeback Mountain", in 2005. She has also starred in "The Devil Wears Prada" (2006) with Meryl Streep and in "Becoming Jane" (2007) as Jane Austen.
In 2008, she won several awards for her performance in "Rachel Getting Married" and received an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress. In 2010, she starred in the box office hits "Valentine's Day", Tim Burton's "Alice in Wonderland", and "Love and Other Drugs" and won an Emmy Award for her voice-over performance on "The Simpsons". In 2011, she had a voice role in the animated film "Rio", and starred in Lone Scherfig's adaptation of "One Day". In 2012, she portrayed Selina Kyle in Christopher Nolan's "The Dark Knight Rises" and Fantine in Tom Hooper's "Les Misérables". For the latter, she won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress - Motion Picture, a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role, and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role. "People" magazine named her one of its breakthrough stars of 2001, and she appeared on its list of the world's 50 Most Beautiful People in 2006.
Early life.
Anne Hathaway was born November 12, 1982 in Brooklyn, New York. Her father, Gerald Thomas Hathaway, is a lawyer, and her mother, Kathleen Ann "Kate" (née McCauley), is an actress who inspired Hathaway to follow in her footsteps. Hathaway's mother played Fantine in the first U.S. tour of "Les Misérables". When she was six years old, the family moved to Millburn, New Jersey, which is where she grew up. Hathaway has an older brother, Michael, and a younger brother, Thomas. She is of mostly Irish and French ancestry, with distant Native American and German roots.
Hathaway was raised Catholic with what she considered "really strong values", and has stated she wanted to be a nun during her childhood. However, she decided against it at the age of 15, after learning her brother, Michael, was gay. She has stated: "I realised my older brother was gay, and I couldn't support a religion that didn't support my brother. Now I call myself a nondenominational Christian, because I haven't found the religion for me." In 2009, Hathaway stated that her religious beliefs are "a work in progress".
Hathaway attended Brooklyn Heights Montessori School and Wyoming Elementary School in Millburn. Hathaway graduated from Millburn High School, where she participated in many school plays; her high school performance as Winnifred in "Once Upon a Mattress" gained her a Paper Mill Playhouse Rising Star Award nomination for Best Performance by a High School Actress. During this time, Hathaway was in plays including "Jane Eyre" and "Gigi" at New Jersey's Paper Mill Playhouse. She spent several semesters studying as an English major and Women's Studies minor at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York before transferring to New York University's Gallatin School of Individualized Study, referring to her college enrollment as one of her best decisions, because she enjoyed being with others who were trying to "grow up". She also studied at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts. Hathaway was the first teenager admitted into The Barrow Group Theater Company's acting program.
A soprano, Hathaway performed in 1998 and 1999 with the All-Eastern U.S. High School Honors Chorus at Carnegie Hall and has performed in plays at Seton Hall Preparatory School in West Orange, New Jersey. Three days after her 1999 performance at Carnegie Hall, she was cast in the short-lived Fox television series "Get Real" at the age of 16.
Hathaway is a trained stage actress and has stated that she prefers performing on stage to film roles. Her acting style has been compared to those of Judy Garland and Audrey Hepburn. She cites Garland as one of her favorite actresses and Meryl Streep as her idol.
Career.
2001–04: Career development.
Hathaway's first role in a motion picture was opposite Christopher Gorham in Walt Disney's drama film "The Other Side of Heaven" (2001), inspired by John H. Groberg's memoir "In the Eye of the Storm". Before production of the film, she was cast alongside Julie Andrews in the lead role of Mia Thermopolis in another Disney production, the comedy film "The Princess Diaries", based on Meg Cabot's 2000 novel of the same name and directed by Garry Marshall. Hathaway auditioned for the role of a princess-to-be during a flight layover on the way to New Zealand and was cast on the strength of this one audition. She won the role over 500 other girls. Released prior to "The Other Side of Heaven" in hopes that its success would increase interest in "Heaven", "The Princess Diaries" became a major commercial success, grossing US$165 million worldwide. Many critics praised Hathaway's performance, with a BBC critic noting that "Hathaway shines in the title role and generates great chemistry." Also released in 2001, "The Other Side of Heaven", directed by Mitch Davis, met with mostly negative reviews, but it performed well for a religion-themed film.
In February 2002, Hathaway starred in the City Center Encores! concert production of "Carnival!" in her New York City stage debut, receiving positive reviews for her portrayal of Lili. Also in 2002, Hathaway began voicing the audio book releases of "The Princess Diaries" and has since voiced the first three books of the series. She also provided the voice of the character Haru in the English version of Hiroyuki Morita's "The Cat Returns."
Hathaway continued to appear in family-oriented films over the next three years, subsequently becoming known in mainstream media as a children's role model. In 2002, she appeared in Douglas McGrath's comedy-drama "Nicholas Nickleby", opposite Charlie Hunnam and Jamie Bell, which opened to positive reviews. The "Deseret News" said that the cast was "Oscar-worthy". Despite critical acclaim, the film never entered wide release and failed at the North American box office, totaling less than $4 million in ticket sales. Hathaway's next film role was as the titular character in the rom-com fantasy film "Ella Enchanted" (2004), a loose adaption of Gail Carson Levine's 1997 novel of the same name, which opened to mostly indifferent reviews. Hathaway sang two songs in the film as well as three on the soundtrack, including a duet with singer Jesse McCartney.
In 2003, Hathaway dropped out of her role in Joel Schumacher's "The Phantom of the Opera" (2004), because the production schedule of the film overlapped with "The Princess Diaries 2: Royal Engagement," which she was contractually obligated to make. Disney began production on "The Princess Diaries 2" in early 2004, and it was released in August of that year. The film opened to negative reviews, but made $95.1 million against a $40 million budget.
2005–07: Career transition.
Hathaway began appearing in dramatic roles after "The Princess Diaries 2". She said that "anybody who was a role model for children needs a reprieve", although she noted that "it's lovely to think that my audience is growing up with me". She voiced Red Puckett in the animated comedy "Hoodwinked!" (2005), based on the "Little Red Riding Hood" folktale, which received mixed reviews by critics. Hathaway replaced Red's original voice artist Tara Strong, and sang the song "Great Big World". That same year, Hathaway starred in Barbara Kopple's drama film "Havoc", in which she played a spoiled socialite, appearing nude in some of its scenes. Although the content of the film was different from her previous films, Hathaway denied that her role was an attempt to be seen as a more mature actress, citing her belief that doing nudity in certain movies is merely a part of what her chosen form of art demands of her; and because of that belief she does not consider appearing nude in appropriate films to be morally objectionable.
After "Havoc," Hathaway was cast alongside Heath Ledger and Jake Gyllenhaal in Ang Lee's drama "Brokeback Mountain" (2005). While "Havoc" was not released in theaters in the United States because of its weak critical reception, "Brokeback Mountain" won rave reviews and received several Academy Award nominations. Hathaway would later assert that the content of "Brokeback Mountain" was more important than its award count and that making the film made her more aware of the kind of stories she wanted to tell as an actress.
In 2006, Hathaway appeared in David Frankel's comedy "The Devil Wears Prada," in which she starred as an assistant to a powerful fashion magazine editor portrayed by Meryl Streep, whom Hathaway described as being "just divine". Hathaway said that working on the film made her respect the fashion industry a great deal more than she had previously, though she claimed that her personal style is something she "still can't get right". In an interview with "Us Weekly", Hathaway discussed the weight loss regimen she and co-star Emily Blunt followed for the film, she stated, "I basically stuck with fruit, vegetables and fish slim down. I wouldn't recommend that. Emily Blunt and I would clutch at each other and cry because we were so hungry."
Hathaway was cast in the 2007 comedy "Knocked Up", but dropped out before filming began and was replaced by Katherine Heigl. Writer/director Judd Apatow stated in a May 2007 issue of "The New York Times Magazine" that this happened because "she didn't want to allow us to use real footage of a woman giving birth to create the illusion that she is giving birth". In an August 2008 interview with "Marie Claire", Hathaway commented that she "didn't believe that it was necessary to the story".
Hathaway was in the 2007 drama "Becoming Jane," in which she portrayed English writer Jane Austen. Tim Burton considered Hathaway for the part of Johanna Barker in his 2007 film "," but the role went to Jayne Wisener, a then-unknown actress, reportedly because Burton decided he wanted an unknown, younger actress for the part.
2008–10: Continued success.
In January 2008, Hathaway joined beauty giant Lancôme as the face of their fragrance Magnifique, and in October of that year, Hathaway hosted the NBC late-night sketch comedy "Saturday Night Live". Her first film of the year was a modern adaptation of the 1960s Mel Brooks television series "Get Smart," in which she starred opposite Steve Carell, and Alan Arkin, portraying Agent 99. Directed by Peter Segal, the film was a hit at the box office, prompting talk of a sequel. She also made a cameo appearance in the tie-in film "." Also in 2008, she premiered the drama "Passengers," alongside Patrick Wilson, as well as the drama "Rachel Getting Married," opposite Debra Winger. "Rachel Getting Married" premiered at the 2008 Venice and Toronto Film Festivals and garnered her widespread critical acclaim for her performance as Kym, including nominations for both an Academy Award and a Golden Globe. Hathaway said that the film appealed to her because of its real depiction of relationships and because of the strong emotional connection she felt with her character.
Hathaway appeared in the comedy "Bride Wars", released in 2009, which she described as being "hideously commercial – gloriously so". In addition to providing her voice for episodes of "The Simpsons", which garnered her an Emmy Award in 2010 for outstanding voice-over performance, and "Family Guy" in 2010, Hathaway also appeared as Viola in the New York Shakespeare Festival's summer 2009 production of "Twelfth Night" at the Delacorte Theater in New York City's Central Park, opposite Audra McDonald as Olivia, Raul Esparza as Duke Orsino, and Julie White as Maria. In the same year, Hathaway was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
In 2010, Hathaway played the White Queen in Tim Burton's adaptation of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland" and "Through the Looking-Glass" alongside Helena Bonham Carter and Johnny Depp. She summed up her character with a caption on a magnet of Happy Bunny holding a knife; "Cute but psycho. Things even out." Hathaway described her interpretation of the White Queen as "a punk-rock vegan pacifist", with inspiration drawn from Debbie Harry, Greta Garbo, and the artwork of Dan Flavin.
Other projects included the romantic comedy "The Fiancé", an adaptation of the Julie Buxbaum novel "The Opposite of Love", the Garry Marshall-directed ensemble comedy "Valentine's Day", and an adaptation of Gerald Clarke's biography "Get Happy: The Life of Judy Garland," in which she will play the title role on the stage and screen.
It was reported on December 8, 2009 that Hathaway was up for the role of Felicia Hardy in Sam Raimi's "Spider-Man 4". Hardy would not have transformed into the Black Cat, as in the comics; instead, Raimi's Felicia was expected to become a brand-new superpowered figure called the Vulturess.
On January 5, 2010, it was reported that "Spider-Man 4" would be rewritten and Hathaway would not appear in the film, as she was "too expensive". On November 29, 2010, it was announced that Hathaway and James Franco would host the 83rd Academy Awards.
Together with actor Denzel Washington, Hathaway hosted the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway on December 11, 2010. In 2010, she was named one of the sexiest stars of 2010 by "Entertainment Weekly".
2011–present.
In 2011, Hathaway voiced the character Jewel in the animated film "Rio", from 20th Century Fox and Blue Sky Studios, alongside Jim Sturgess and starred in the romance "One Day". 
In 2012, Hathaway played Selina Kyle in "The Dark Knight Rises".
In October 2011, it was confirmed that Hathaway would play Fantine in the Tom Hooper film "Les Misérables", which was based on the musical of the same name. Her mother had played the role in the stage show's first national U.S. tour.
Footage of Hathaway singing "I Dreamed a Dream", a song from "Les Misérables", was shown at CinemaCon on April 26, 2012. Hooper described Hathaway's singing as "raw" and "real". For the role, Hathaway lost a substantial amount of weight and cut her hair short into a pixie cut, stating that the lengths she goes for her roles do not "feel like sacrifices. Getting to transform is one of the best parts of ." For her performance, Hathaway received critical acclaim and was nominated for many awards, including the Academy Award, Golden Globe, Screen Actors Guild Award and BAFTA Award for best supporting actress. She went on to win all the aforementioned awards which culminated on February 24, 2013 when she won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, for her role in "Les Misérables". 
In January 2013, Hathaway's rendition of "I Dreamed a Dream" reached number 69 on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart. This marks her first appearance on any Billboard music chart.
Personal life.
Relationships.
In 2004, Hathaway began a romantic relationship with Italian real estate developer Raffaello Follieri, during which she participated in the development of the charitable Follieri Foundation, as a donor and as a member of its board of directors until 2007. The Manhattan-based foundation, established in 2003, focused on efforts such as providing vaccinations for children in Third World countries. In June 2008, it was investigated by the IRS, for failure to file required nonprofit information forms. Citing concern that this investigation and other legal issues in which Follieri was involved could hurt her acting career, Hathaway ended their relationship in mid-June, 2008.
Follieri was arrested on June 24, 2008, on charges of defrauding investors out of millions of dollars in a scheme in which Follieri posed as the Vatican's point man on real-estate investing. It was reported that the FBI confiscated Hathaway's private journals from Follieri's New York City apartment as part of their ongoing investigation into Follieri's activities; however, Hathaway was not charged with any crime. On October 23, 2008, after earlier pleading guilty, Follieri was sentenced to four and a half years in prison.
In November 2008, Hathaway began dating actor Adam Shulman. The couple became engaged in November 2011 and were married on September 29, 2012, in Big Sur, California in an interfaith Jewish and Roman Catholic service.
Charity work and other interests.
Hathaway is involved with charities, including The Creative Coalition, The Step Up Women's Network, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, The Human Rights Campaign, and The Lollipop Theatre Network. In 2008, she was honored at "Elle" magazine's "Women in Hollywood" tribute, and has also been honored for her work with Step Up Women's Network. In early 2007, Hathaway spoke of her experiences with depression during her teenage years, saying that she eventually overcame the disorder without medication.
In 2008, on "Late Show with David Letterman", Hathaway said she had once again stopped smoking. The actress, who had begun smoking "heavily" while filming "Rachel Getting Married", had "quit for a while", but had started again in the wake of her stressful summer and the end of her relationship with Raffaello Follieri. She credited quitting smoking for the subsequent decline in her stress level, and declared her return to being vegetarian. She later became a vegan in early 2012. Hathaway is a LGBT rights activist and has donated money to organizations that support same-sex marriage.
Discography.
Charted songs
Guest appearances
