The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution outlaws slavery and involuntary servitude, except as punishment for a crime. It was passed by the Senate on April 8, 1864, by the House on January 31, 1865, and adopted on December 6, 1865. On December 18, Secretary of State William H. Seward proclaimed it to have been adopted. It was the first of the three Reconstruction Amendments adopted after the American Civil War.
President Lincoln and other Republicans were concerned that the Emancipation Proclamation, which in 1863 declared the freedom of slaves in ten Confederate states then in rebellion, would be seen as a temporary war measure, since it was based solely on Lincoln's war powers. The Proclamation did not free any slaves in the border states nor did it abolish slavery. Because of this, Lincoln and other supporters believed that an amendment to the Constitution was needed.
History.
When the Thirteenth Amendment was proposed, there had been no new amendments adopted in more than 60 years.
During the secession crisis, but prior to the outbreak of the Civil War, the majority of slavery-related bills had protected slavery. The United States had officially ceased slave importation in 1807 after the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves and the British Slave Trade Act 1807. It had intervened militarily against the Atlantic slave trade and had made few proposals to abolish domestic slavery, and only a small number to abolish the domestic slave trade. Representative John Quincy Adams had made such a proposal in 1839, but there were no new proposals until December 14, 1863, when a bill to support an amendment to abolish slavery throughout the entire United States was introduced by Representative James Mitchell Ashley (Republican, Ohio). This was soon followed by a similar proposal made by Representative James F. Wilson (Republican, Iowa).
Eventually the Congress and the public began to take notice, and a number of additional legislative proposals were brought forward. On January 11, 1864, Senator John B. Henderson of Missouri submitted a joint resolution for a constitutional amendment abolishing slavery. The abolition of slavery had historically been associated with Republicans, but Henderson was one of the War Democrats. The Senate Judiciary Committee, chaired by Lyman Trumbull (Republican, Illinois), became involved in merging different proposals for an amendment. On February 8 of that year, another Republican, Senator Charles Sumner (Radical Republican, Massachusetts), submitted a constitutional amendment to abolish slavery as well as guarantee equality. As the number of proposals and the extent of their scope began to grow, the Senate Judiciary Committee presented the Senate with an amendment proposal that combined the drafts of Ashley, Wilson and Henderson.
The Senate passed the amendment on April 8, 1864, by a vote of 38 to 6. However, just over two months later on June 15, the House failed to get the necessary two-thirds vote for passage, with 93 in favor and 65 against. Representative Ashley was instrumental in its eventual passage. An ardent Free Soiler before becoming a Republican, he was the House floor manager and persuaded a number of Democrats to support it. President Lincoln took an active role in working for its passage through the House by ensuring the amendment was added to the Republican Party platform for the 1864 presidential election and using his powers adroitly. Finally, after seven months of debate and promises of patronage, the House narrowly reached the two-thirds majority needed to pass the bill on January 31, 1865, by a vote of 119 to 56. The Thirteenth Amendment's archival copy bears an apparent Presidential signature, under the usual ones of the Speaker of the House and the President of the Senate, after the words "Approved February 1, 1865".
Ratification.
The amendment was sent to the state legislatures. The Northern states quickly ratified it. President Lincoln was assassinated by John Wilkes Booth in April 1865 and Andrew Johnson succeeded Lincoln. President Johnson strongly recommended that the ex-Confederate states ratify the amendment (and also repeal their ordinances of secession).
On December 18, 1865, Secretary of State William H. Seward proclaimed the amendment to have been adopted as of December 6, 1865, when Georgia's ratification brought the total number of ratifying states to 27, of the then 36 states in the union. Florida ratified it on December 28, 1865; New Jersey in 1866; Texas in 1870; Delaware in 1901; and Kentucky in 1976. Mississippi, whose legislature voted in 1995 to do so, belatedly notified the Office of the Federal Register in February 2013 of that legislative action, completing the legal process for the state.
Effects.
The Thirteenth Amendment completed the abolition of slavery in the United States, which had begun with President Abraham Lincoln issuing the Emancipation Proclamation in 1863.
Shortly after the amendment's adoption, selective enforcement of certain laws, such as laws against vagrancy, resulted in blacks continuing to be subjected to involuntary servitude in some cases, particularly in the South. See also Black Codes. 
Southern states hired out prisoners to private companies and interests as convict lease labor to pay off court fees for such offenses. As these states made the lessees responsible for the prisoners' food, clothing and housing, these states did not build any prisons until late in the nineteenth century. Law enforcement and businessmen colluded to entrap freedmen and convict them, so they could gain revenues from convict lease labor.
The Thirteenth Amendment is the first of the Reconstruction Amendments. It was followed by the Fourteenth Amendment (civil rights in the states) in 1868, and the Fifteenth Amendment (which bans racial voting restrictions) in 1870.
Interpretation.
Involuntary servitude.
In "Selective Draft Law Cases", , the Supreme Court ruled that the military draft was not "involuntary servitude".
No offenses against the Thirteenth Amendment have been prosecuted since 1947.
The "Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000", P.L. 106-386, updated the federal anti-slavery statutes to include victims who are enslaved through psychological coercion, even if there was no physical coercion.
U.S. Courts of Appeals, in "Immediato v. Rye Neck School District", "Herndon v. Chapel Hill", and "Steirer v. Bethlehem School District", have ruled that the use of community service as a high school graduation requirement did not violate the Thirteenth Amendment.
Enforcement (Section 2).
Threat of legal consequences.
Victims of human trafficking and other conditions of forced labor are commonly coerced by threat of legal actions to their detriment. Victims of forced labor and trafficking are protected by Title 18 of the U.S. Code.
Proposal and ratification.
Mississippi's 1995 ratification was not formally filed with the Archivist of the United States for unknown reasons. The ratification was forwarded to the Office of the Federal Register on January 30, 2013, and on February 7, 2013, the director of the Register certified that he had received the ratification and that it was official.
Earlier proposed Thirteenth Amendments.
Two amendments proposed by the Congress would have become the Thirteenth Amendment; neither was ratified by the states.
