"The Vampire Diaries" is an American supernatural-fantasy horror television series. The series is based on a book series of the same name by L.J. Smith, and was developed for television by Kevin Williamson and Julie Plec. "The Vampire Diaries" premiered on The CW on September 10, 2009 and was renewed for a second season that premiered on September 9, 2010. The first season was released on both DVD and Blu-ray formats in the United States and Canada on August 31, 2010.
"The Vampire Diaries" follows the life of Elena Gilbert (Nina Dobrev), who falls for a handsome century-old vampire named Stefan Salvatore (Paul Wesley). Their lives grow more and more complicated as Stefan's vicious older vampire brother Damon Salvatore (Ian Somerhalder) returns to town with a vendetta against his brother. However, Damon quickly becomes not only their greatest ally in their fight against evil, but he and Elena also seem to share an instant attraction, which she fights because of her love for Stefan. The series is set in the fictional town of Mystic Falls, Virginia, a small town charged with extremely powerful supernatural history. Other storylines revolve around the other inhabitants of the town, most notably Elena's younger drug-addicted brother Jeremy (Steven R. McQueen), Elena's best friend Bonnie Bennett (Kat Graham), who discovers that she is a powerful witch, and their kind but insecure and at times slightly simple-minded friend Caroline Forbes (Candice Accola). The Vampire Diaries has been renewed for a 5th season.
, 81 episodes of "The Vampire Diaries" have aired.
Series overview.
<onlyinclude>
List of episodes.
Season 5 (2013).
On February 11, 2013, "The Vampire Diaries" was renewed for a fifth season, expected to begin Fall 2013.
Nielsen rankings.
The following is a table for the seasonal rankings, based on average total estimated viewers per episode, of "The Vampire Diaries" on The CW. "Rank" refers to how "The Vampire Diaries" rated compared to the other television series which aired during primetime hours. 
Home release.
Season 1 was released on DVD in Regions 1, 2 and 4 and on Blu-ray in Regions A and B. Both United States versions include commentary by cast and crew members on selected episodes, deleted scenes, behind-the-scenes featurettes, webisodes, and a downloadable audiobook of L.J. Smith's "The Vampire Diaries: The Awakening". 
Season 2 was released on DVD in Regions 1, 2 and 4 and on Blu-ray in Regions A and B. It includes commentary on 'Masquerade' by Kevin Williamson and Julie Plec as well as behind-the-scenes featurettes and a gag reel.
