The Perks of Being a Wallflower is a coming-of-age epistolary novel written by American novelist Stephen Chbosky. It was published on February 1, 1999 by MTV. The story is narrated by a teenager who goes by the alias of "Charlie"; he describes various scenes in his life by writing a series of letters to an anonymous person, whom he does not know personally. The book was made into a film in 2012, starring Logan Lerman, Ezra Miller and Emma Watson, directed by the author.
The story deals with the melodrama and decadent behavior of adolescence.
The story takes place in a suburb of Pittsburgh during the early 1990s, Charlie's freshman year in a high school. Charlie is the eponymous wallflower of the novel. He is an unconventional thinker, and as the story begins he is shy and unpopular. 
The novel has garnered a cult following. 
Plot summary.
"Charlie" is the alias of the adolescent narrator of the novel, who is about to begin his first year of high school. The novel is presented through letters that Charlie writes to an anonymous person about whom he has heard the girls at school talk fondly. Charlie begins his freshman year apprehensive as a result of the death of his only good friend Michael. Michael committed suicide several months before while they were still in middle school. He does not feel that he can lean on his parents or older siblings for support, because they never truly understood him. He also explains that the only relative that he ever felt close to was his Aunt Helen, but she was killed in a car accident on his seventh birthday.
Charlie soon befriends two seniors, Sam and her step-brother Patrick. He soon develops strong feelings for Sam, but believes that he has no chance being with her. The two introduce him to many new experiences and a group of upperclassmen friends. Charlie writes about situations he gets into with his new friends including going to parties, driving through his town's tunnel and feeling "infinite," seeing and performing in "Rocky Horror Picture Show," going on his first date, and trying various drugs. After one party where Charlie took LSD, the police find him passed out lying in the snow somewhere. In the hospital talking to the police and his parents, it is shown that Charlie often has visions, showing that he is not mentally well.
Charlie's English teacher, Bill, also plays a significant role in his life. After giving him a 'B' grade on his book report essay, Bill begins giving him books to read outside of class and encourages him to write essays. He then critiques them to help Charlie develop better diction and syntax, which is reflected in his letter writing.
Despite his feelings for Sam, Charlie briefly dates Mary Elizabeth, another girl in their clique. She takes him to their school's Sadie Hawkins and then they go on a couple of dates. At first, Charlie does not mind how one-sided their conversations are. But after Mary Elizabeth buys him a book of poems, he senses a change in pace that he does not like. In a game of Truth or Dare? at a party, Charlie is dared to kiss the prettiest girl in the room. He kisses Sam which officially ends the relationship between him and Mary Elizabeth. Patrick then decides it would be best if Charlie stays away until things calmed down and says he will give Charlie a call once it is okay to come back. 
Sam also starts a relationship with a guy named Craig, who is "cut and hunky." Charlie does not like the way he treats her, explaining that if Craig took a good picture of Sam he would think that it was good because of the way he took it, instead of the fact that Sam was in the picture. Following her relationship with Charlie, Mary Elizabeth dates a friend of Craig's named Peter, who Mary Elizabeth says better complements her. Sam and Craig then break up; Charlie finds out from Peter that Craig had been cheating on her with many girls.
In addition, Charlie writes about Patrick's relationship with Brad, the quarterback of the football team, who is secretly gay. One day, Brad's dad catches Patrick and Brad having sex in the basement, and Brad's dad beats Brad up in front of Patrick. Brad comes to school with bruises and completely ignores Patrick. After being tripped by one of Brad's buddies, Patrick decides to confront Brad in front of everyone. As Brad continues to ignore him, Patrick says something out of anger while walking away. Brad then proceeds to yell at Patrick, calling him a "faggot," in front of the whole cafeteria, leading to a physical fight during school lunch. Brad's friends gang up on Patrick and begin to beat him up. Charlie then comes to Patrick's rescue and fights Brad's friends. Two of Brad's friends stand up to stop fighting as they watch Charlie, while the other two lay on the ground severely hurt. Charlie helps Patrick up and warns Brad's friends that if they ever hurt Patrick again, he will blind them.
Another relationship discussed is his older sister's, who is dating a boy who goes unnamed. Charlie witnesses the boy hitting her, which Charlie is especially sensitive to as his Aunt Helen had become "insane" after being abused. The sister first assures Charlie that her boyfriend won't hit her again. She breaks up with him after she announced to him that she was pregnant. The only other person that she tells of her pregnancy is Charlie. He goes with her to get an abortion. Later in the book, she begins dating a boy named Errik
Charlie grows a lot during the story and learns how to "participate in life" as advised by Bill. As time goes on, he realizes as the end of school approaches that all of his friends and his sister will all be leaving for college. Sam gets accepted off the waiting list into Penn State. Before Sam leaves for the Summer, Charlie and Sam begin to have a sexual encounter. However, Charlie stops because he suddenly feels very strange, and he does not know why. After waking up the next day, he realizes that his Aunt Helen had molested him when he was younger. His mind cannot handle this, and he is hospitalized. He is eventually let out of the hospital, and says that he will be okay. When Patrick and Sam take Charlie through the tunnel again, this time with Charlie standing in the truck bed, he learns that he can go on with life without being scared, because he is more than a wallflower. Charlie changes the way he looks at himself through the book, leading to a much more confident person.
Charlie's lists.
Literature.
In the novel, Charlie's teacher, Bill, assigns him various books to read. Charlie describes them all as his favorites.
The book also references a book of poems by E. E. Cummings, "The Mayor of Castro Street" by Randy Shilts, a book by Anne Rice, and an autobiography of a woman who was a character in Reds, most likely Emma Goldman.
The poem "A Person/A Paper/A Promise" by Dr. Earl Reum is also mentioned.
Television.
Television star Mary Tyler Moore is also mentioned without mentioning any of her specific TV shows.
Music.
Other music groups and artists are mentioned without reference to a specific song, including Village People, Blondie, Jim Morrison, John Lennon, The Slits, and Billie Holiday.
Film adaptation.
The production company Mr. Mudd developed the film adaptation of the novel, and Summit Entertainment distributed the film. Mr. Mudd's producers, John Malkovich, Lianne Halfon, and Russell Smith, hired the novel's author, Stephen Chbosky, to write an adapted screenplay and to direct the film. It was shot in Peters Township, Pennsylvania. The production starred Logan Lerman (Charlie), Nina Dobrev (Candace), Ezra Miller (Patrick), and Emma Watson (Sam). The film was nominated for the 2012 Independent Spirit Awards for Best First Feature. 
