Amok is the debut album by the band Atoms for Peace, released on February 25, 2013. The album features Radiohead singer Thom Yorke (vocals, guitar, keyboards and programming), Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea (bass), longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich (production and programming), Joey Waronker of Beck and R.E.M. (drums) and Mauro Refosco (percussion).
Background and recording.
Atoms for Peace formed in 2009 to perform songs from Thom Yorke's 2006 album "The Eraser". After the tour ended in 2010, the band spent three days jamming and recording original material in a Los Angeles studio. Describing his role in the sessions as "conducting", Yorke would show the band electronic music he had created and they would recreate it with live instruments. He said: "The music I do on my laptop is so angular. When you get people to play like that, it's so peculiar. Most of it, technically speaking, they can play. But there were times when we used the electronic sounds, because it was more brittle, more exciting ... One of the things we were most excited about was ending up with a record where you weren't quite sure where the human starts and the machine ends." Yorke and producer Nigel Godrich edited and arranged the recordings from the sessions over the course of two years.
Release.
The first single, "Default", was released as a download on September 10, 2012. 
On February 18, the album was made available via streaming from the official Atoms for Peace website.
Reception.
"Amok" has a score of 75 out of 100 on review aggregate site Metacritic, indicating "generally favourable reviews". Awarding the album 3 out of 5 stars, Alexis Petridis of "The Guardian" said: "As a technical exercise, "Amok" is hugely impressive ... its sound is rich and deep, full of intriguing shifts and contrasts. But there are times when it feels the painstaking process used to create it may have assumed a greater importance than the business of actually writing songs ... Still, when "Amok" works, the results are spectacular." Awarding the album 2.8 out of 5.0, Sputnikmusic found that though the album "rarely escapes sounding like a solo record from the Radiohead frontman ... it's quite likely that the average listener might find something to enjoy within the dense, layered folds of "Amok"." Comparing the album to Yorke's work with Radiohead, Slant Magazine awarded the album 3 and a half stars out of 5, writing: "With such richly diverse membership, it's disappointing that Atoms for Peace is so highly derivative of Yorke and Godrich's recent work ... the result is essentially a collection of agile, minimalist rock songs with a handful of interesting but ultimately superficial electronica flourishes."
