Race 2 is a 2013 Bollywood action thriller film directed by Abbas-Mustan and produced under the Tips Music Films banner. It is the sequel to the 2008 film, "Race", and stars an ensemble cast that includes Anil Kapoor and Saif Ali Khan reprising their roles as Robert D'Costa and Ranveer Singh from the previous film while Deepika Padukone, John Abraham, Jacqueline Fernandez and Ameesha Patel and are new additions to the cast. Bipasha Basu reprised her role of Sonia in a cameo appearance. Made on a budget of ,"Race 2" was released on 26 January 2013, and opened with high positive response at the box office. Race 2 was declared "Super Hit" in overseas and in India by Box Office India.
Plot.
To take the revenge of his beloved wife Sonia Singh(Bipasha Basu), Ranveer Singh (Saif Ali Khan), cons Vikram Thapar (Rajesh Khattar) so badly that he is divested of the five casinos that he owns in Istanbul. Ranveer’s next target is Armaan Malik (John Abraham) who was the next responsible behind Sonia's death, and he asks Robert D’costa alias RD (Anil Kapoor) and his comic assistant Cherry(Ameesha Patel) to introduce him to Armaan, promising him a commission from the profits he and Armaan would make in a fail-safe scheme he has in mind.
Ranveer charms Armaan as well as his step-sister, Elena (Deepika Padukone), who is a 50% partner with Armaan in all his profits. Soon, he establishes contact with Armaan Malik’s girlfriend, Omeesha (Jacqueline Fernandes), under the belief that she is the sister of Sonia. He tells Omeesha of his plan to destroy Armaan, like he had finished Vikram Thapar, as they both had been instrumental in killing his girlfriend and her sister, Sonia. On her part, Tania also pledges her support to Ranveer. It turns out that Armaan and Omeesha had conned Ranveer into believing that she was Sonia’s sister so that they could know what was in his mind.
Unaware of this, Ranveer agrees to steal the Shroud of Turin from the museum in Italy and sell it to Armaan at a discounted price. Armaan agrees to pay the hefty price with the intention of laying his hands on the shroud and manipulating matters in such a way that he’d also get his money back. Armaan strikes a deal with Godfather Anza (Aditya Pancholi), an underworld don, for the money to pay Ranveer.
Is Ranveer successful in stealing the shroud from the high-security museum? Does Armaan pay him the huge sum of money? Does Ranveer give him the coveted shroud of Turin? What is RD and Cherry’s role in this mission? Whose side is Elena on? Is Omeesha loyal to Armaan?
Production.
Saif Ali Khan plays a lead role in film.
After the success of "Race" (2008), Ramesh Taurani registered "Race 2" as a title and Abbas-Mustan said that they would go ahead with a sequel "if we get a script in place which is even better than the original." The screenplay was written by Shiraz Ahmed who also wrote "Race". Saif Ali Khan and Anil Kapoor were the first to sign on to the film in November 2009 and were reported to be the only returning cast members from the first film. In June 2010, John Abraham was signed on to play the antagonist and Kareena Kapoor and Priyanka Chopra were approached to co-star opposite Khan and Abraham respectively. However, Kapoor turned down the role as she didn't want her pairing with Khan to get repetitive and Chopra opted out due to scheduling conflicts and was subsequently replaced by Padukone. It was also rumoured that Asin had been shortlisted to star alongside Khan. In December 2010, Sonakshi Sinha was cast as a replacement for Kapoor. Chitrangda Singh was approached for a role opposite Anil Kapoor in May 2011 but eventually dropped out for unspecified reasons. Ameesha Patel and Mallika Sherawat were considered for that same role but it ultimately went to Patel. 
The film's shooting was set to begin on 5 October 2011 but was postponed to accommodate Deepika Padukone's dates causing scheduling conflicts with Sonakshi Sinha. Sinha's dates conflicted with her filming schedule for "Dabangg 2" (2012), forcing her to drop out. In October 2011, Jacqueline Fernandez who had opted out "Krrish 3" & "Raaz 3" was cast as a replacement for Sinha. Shortly afterwards, it was announced that Bipasha Basu would be reprising her role as Sonia in a cameo appearance, and continuing to be Khan's love interest. The movie's plot will revolve around her murder. Despite rumours suggesting that Basu will be sharing screen space with ex-boyfriend John Abraham for the first time after their breakup, Abraham denied this.
Filming.
The first Indian schedule began on 5 November 2011 in Bombay for 15 days, wrapping up on 20 November. Meanwhile, Sanjay Dutt was in talks to join the cast, but he dropped out due to scheduling conflicts. The second schedule commenced on 23 January 2012 in Mumbai. However, Deepika dropped out within six days because the film was always being rescheduled. 
"Race 2"'s producer Ramesh Taurani released a statement to the media deeming Padukone's behavior as "unethical, unprofessional and unacceptable". Also, it was reported that Nargis Fakhri was offered the role to replace Padukone, although it has been rumoured that she declined the offer, thus avoiding any controversies regarding her and Kapoor. However, Deepika Padukone and Taurani agreed on a settlement after much negotiation and the filming continued as planned. Jacqueline Fernandez, John Abraham and Deepika Padukone joined the cast in May at Istanbul for the third schedule. On 7 October 2012, shooting was completed.The Mardan Palace in Turkey was the setting for many scenes in Race 2 where it was seen as the home of Deepika Padukone and John Abraham.
Release.
Race 2 was released in 3200 screens in India and the film is the third biggest release ever for a Hindi film after Ek Tha Tiger(3300 screens) and Dabangg 2(3700 screens). Race 2 was released in more than 50 countries, including US, UK, Gulf, Australia, Pakistan as well as non-traditional markets like Maldives,East Timor,Myanmar, Morocco and Vietnam(with as many as 7 screens). The film has a simultaneous release in Morocco in four to five screens, including theatres in Casablanca and Marrakech. Race 2 is subtitled in Arabic, Thai, Bahasa, Malay, Vietnamese, Dutch.
Soundtrack.
Reception.
The song Album received positive reviews from critics. 
IBN Live gave the soundtrack four stars of five saying, "Race 2's soundtrack is racy to the core. In a nutshell, the album is bound to be a hit. Let's just hope the movie is as good as the soundtrack is!" Shresht Poddar, of Score Magazine, gave the album three out of five stars saying, "Personally, as a standalone album with no biases, it is enjoyable but it could have done with better lyrics. The tracks are foot-tapping and they would appeal to the masses. But if you compare it to Race, the album undoubtedly falls flat."
Goku, of IndiBeats! included the album in the 'average' category commenting that "No doubt Pritam has worked on the album well, there is a fair deal of DJing done, but something is amiss and hence the album is worth a hear, nothing more."
Critical reception.
"Race 2" received mostly mixed to negative reviews from critics. Madhureeta Mukherjee of "Times of India" rated "Race 2" 3 stars out of 5 star while commenting "Heists, hot-babes, roulette, raging cars, gizmos and gags — Director duo, Abbas-Mustan have thrown in everything with pompous grandeur, save for a riveting plot that shocks or stuns." Rubina A Khan of "The First Post" gave it 3 out of 5 stars, adding, "Race 2 delivers what it promises — good looking ensemble cast, exotic locations, cars, bomb squads, revenge, lust and love, a couple of good music tracks and, most importantly, a plot which unravels at a thrilling pace." Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave 2.5 out of 5 stars and said "The writing isn't watertight, the film lacks a hit score, the climax is far from effective and overall, Race 2 pales in comparison to Race." Race 2 gets negative reviews everywhere. 
Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN award it a score of 2.5 out of 5 whule commenting "The film has no intellectual pretentions; its only ambition is to offer a good time. In that, it mostly succeeds." Anupama Chopra of "Hindustantimes" gave 2 out of 5, reviewing, "Race 2 is essentially a big-budget cartoon in which coolness is all. The director duo Abbas-Mustan have no pretensions about what they are making — full-on masala with a dash of revenge, a slice of heist and characters who are either strutting their chiselled bodies in slow motion or betraying each other." Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave it a score of 1.5 out of 5 and feels "This is a wreck of a movie strictly for action junkies who might be looking for a feverish two-and-a-half-hour ride that is far more giddy than heady." Shivesh Kumar of "IndiaWeekly" awarded the movie 3 out of 5 stars.
Ahmed Sher Jan of BollyTown gave the film 3 stars saying that, 'It's an entertainment product'
Controversy.
Jamiat Ulama-i-Hind, the largest of Sunni clerics in India, urged PM Manmohan Singh to stop their publication and display of Race 2 posters that featured verses from the Quran.
Box office.
India.
"Race 2" had a good opening at both multiplexes and single screens with occupancy of around 60-70% range, in domestic market. The film had a very good opening day, netting . The film showed 37% growth in its second day, collecting approx. nett. "Race 2" did well on its first weekend by collecting around nett by collecting around on Sunday. "Race 2" dropped on Monday as it collected around nett. Despite dropping collections after the weekend,the film managed to do well and netted around in its first week.Race 2 did pretty well on its second Friday collecting around nett.Race 2 had a decent second weekend and collected around with first Sunday collections going to around 6 crore nett plus. The film has collected around nett in 10 days.Race 2 did well in its second week collecting around nett.The two week total for the film is around nett.It further added in third week.
Overseas.
Race 2 had a good opening in overseas with $3.25 million approx in opening weekend. Race 2 has grossed $5.5 million approx Overseas in ten days.After grossing $6 million in 17 days overseas, the film was decalred a hit. Race 2 have recorded similar figures in overseas markets like Race.
