Star Wars is an American epic space opera franchise centered on a film series created by George Lucas. The film series has spawned a media franchise outside the film series called the Expanded Universe including books, television series, computer and video games, and comic books. These supplements to the film trilogies have resulted in significant development of the series' fictional universe. These media kept the franchise active in the interim between the film trilogies. The franchise portrays a universe which is in a galaxy that is described as far, far away. It commonly portrays Jedi as a representation of good, in conflict with the Sith, their evil counterpart. Their weapon of choice, the lightsaber, is commonly recognized in popular culture. The fictional universe also contains many themes, especially influences of philosophy and religion.
The first film in the series was originally released on May 25, 1977, under the title "", by 20th Century Fox, and became a worldwide pop culture phenomenon, followed by two sequels, released at three-year intervals. Sixteen years after the release of the trilogy's final film, the first in a new prequel trilogy of films was released. The three prequel films were also released at three-year intervals, with the final film of the trilogy released on May 19, 2005. In October 2012, The Walt Disney Company acquired Lucasfilm for $4.05 billion and announced that it would produce three new films, with the first film, "Star Wars Episode VII", planned for release in 2015. 
20th Century Fox still retains the distribution rights to the first two "Star Wars" trilogies, owning permanent rights for the original film "Episode IV: A New Hope", while holding the rights to "Episodes I"–"III", "V" and "VI" until May 2020.
Reactions to the original trilogy were mostly positive, with the last film being considered the weakest, while the prequel trilogy received a more mixed reaction, with most of the praise being for the final movie, according to most review aggregator websites. All six of the main films in the series were also nominated for or won Academy Awards.
All of the main films have been box office successes, with the overall box office revenue generated by the "Star Wars" films (including the theatrical "") totalling $4.49 billion, making it the third-highest-grossing film series. The success has also led to multiple re-releases in theaters for the series.
Setting.
The events depicted in "Star Wars" media take place in a fictional galaxy. Many species of alien creatures (often humanoid) are depicted. Robotic droids are also commonplace and are generally built to serve their owners. Space travel is common, and many planets in the galaxy are members of a Galactic Republic, later reorganized as the Galactic Empire.
One of the prominent elements of "Star Wars" is the "Force", an omnipresent energy that can be harnessed by those with that ability, known as Force-sensitives. It is described in the first produced film as "an energy field created by all living things surrounds us, penetrates us, [and binds the galaxy together." The Force allows users to perform various supernatural feats (such as telekinesis, clairvoyance, precognition, and mind control) and can amplify certain physical traits, such as speed and reflexes; these abilities vary between characters and can be improved through training. While the Force can be used for good, it has a dark side that, when pursued, imbues users with hatred, aggression, and malevolence. The six films feature the Jedi, who use the Force for good, and the Sith, who use the dark side for evil in an attempt to take over the galaxy. In the "Star Wars" Expanded Universe, many dark side users are Dark Jedi rather than Sith, mainly because of the "" (see Sith Origin).
Theatrical films.
The film series began with ', released on May 25, 1977. This was followed by two sequels: ', released on May 21, 1980, and "", released on May 25, 1983. The opening crawl of the sequels disclosed that they were numbered as "Episode V" and "Episode VI" respectively, though the films were generally advertised solely under their subtitles. Though the first film in the series was simply titled "Star Wars", with its 1981 re-release it had the subtitle "Episode IV: A New Hope" added to remain consistent with its sequel, and to establish it as the middle chapter of a continuing saga.
In 1997, to correspond with the 20th anniversary of "A New Hope", Lucas released a "Special Edition" of the "Star Wars" trilogy to theaters. The re-release featured alterations to the three films, primarily motivated by the improvement of CGI and other special effects technologies, which allowed visuals that were not possible to achieve at the time of the original filmmaking. Lucas continued to make changes to the films for subsequent releases, such as the first ever DVD release of the original trilogy on September 21, 2004 and the first ever Blu-ray release of all six films on September 16, 2011.
More than two decades after the release of the original film, the series continued with the long-awaited prequel trilogy; consisting of ', released on May 19, 1999; ', released on May 16, 2002; and "", released on May 19, 2005.
On August 15, 2008 "" was released theatrically as a lead-in to the weekly . "Episode VII" is scheduled to be released in 2015.
Plot overview.
The prequel trilogy begins with the greedy Trade Federation setting up a blockade around the peaceful planet Naboo, under the orders of the Sith Lord Darth Sidious. It is revealed that Sidious secretly planned the blockade to give his alter ego, Senator Palpatine, a pretense to overthrow the Supreme Chancellor of the Galactic Republic and take his place. The Jedi Knight Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi are sent to Naboo to negotiate with the Federation, but are forced to instead help the planet's ruler, Queen Padmé Amidala, escape from the blockade and plea her case before the Galactic Senate on Coruscant. When their spaceship is damaged during the escape, they land on the desert planet Tatooine for repairs, where Qui-Gon discovers a young slave named Anakin Skywalker. Qui-Gon comes to believe that Anakin is the "Chosen One" foretold by Jedi prophecy to bring balance to the Force, and he helps liberate the boy from slavery. The Jedi Council, led by Yoda, sense that Anakin's future is clouded by fear, but reluctantly allows Obi-Wan to train Anakin after Qui-Gon is killed by Palpatine's first apprentice, Darth Maul, during the Battle of Naboo.
The remainder of the prequel trilogy chronicles Anakin's gradual fall to the dark side of the Force as he fights in the Clone Wars, which Palpatine secretly engineers in order to destroy the Republic and lure Anakin into his service. Anakin and Padmé fall in love and secretly wed, and eventually Padmé becomes pregnant. Anakin has a prophetic vision of Padmé dying in childbirth, and Palpatine convinces him that the dark side holds the power to save her life; desperate, Anakin submits to the dark side and takes the Sith name Darth Vader. While Palpatine re-organizes the Republic into the tyrannical Galactic Empire—appointing himself Emperor for life—Vader participates in the extermination of the Jedi Order, culminating in a lightsaber battle between himself and Obi-Wan on the volcanic planet Mustafar.
Obi-Wan ultimately defeats his former apprentice and friend, severing his limbs and leaving him for dead beside a lava flow. However, Palpatine arrives shortly afterward and saves Vader, putting him into a black, mechanical suit of armor that keeps him alive. At the same time, Padmé dies while giving birth to twins Luke and Leia. The twins are hidden from Vader and are not told who their real parents are.
The original trilogy begins 19 years later as Vader nears completion of the massive Death Star space station, which will allow the Empire to crush the Rebel Alliance, an organized resistance formed to combat Palpatine's tyranny. Vader captures Princess Leia, who has stolen the plans to the Death Star and hidden them in the astromech droid R2-D2. R2, along with his protocol droid counterpart C-3PO, escapes to Tatooine. There, the droids are purchased by Luke Skywalker and his step-uncle and aunt. While Luke is cleaning R2, he accidentally triggers a message put into the droid by Leia, who asks for assistance from Obi-Wan. Luke later assists the droids in finding the Jedi Knight, who is now passing as an old hermit under the alias Ben Kenobi. When Luke asks about his father, Obi-Wan tells him that Anakin was a great Jedi who was betrayed and murdered by Vader.
Obi-Wan and Luke hire the smuggler Han Solo and his Wookiee co-pilot Chewbacca to take them to Alderaan, Leia's home world, which they eventually find has been destroyed by the Death Star. Once on board the space station, Obi-Wan allows himself to be killed during a lightsaber rematch with Vader; his sacrifice allows the group to escape with the plans that help the rebels destroy the Death Star. Luke himself fires the shot that destroys the deadly space station.
Three years later, Luke travels to find Yoda, now living in exile on the swamp-infested world Dagobah, in order to start his Jedi training. However, Luke is interrupted when Vader lures him into a trap by capturing Han and the others. During a fierce lightsaber duel, Vader reveals that he is Luke's father and attempts to turn him to the dark side. Luke escapes, and, after rescuing Han from the gangster Jabba the Hutt a year later, returns to Yoda to complete his training. However, now over 900 years old, Yoda is on his deathbed. Before he passes away, Yoda confirms that Vader is Luke's father; moments later, Obi-Wan's spirit tells Luke that he must face his father before he can become a Jedi, and that Leia is his twin sister. As the Rebels attack the second Death Star, Luke confronts Vader as Palpatine watches; both Sith Lords intend to turn Luke to the dark side and take him as their apprentice.
During the subsequent lightsaber duel, Luke succumbs to his anger and brutally overpowers Vader, but controls himself at the last minute; realizing that he is about to suffer his father's fate, he spares Vader's life and proudly declares his allegiance to the Jedi. An enraged Palpatine then attempts to kill Luke with Force lightning, a sight that moves Vader to turn and kill his master, suffering mortal wounds in the process. Redeemed, Anakin Skywalker dies in his son's arms. Luke becomes a full-fledged Jedi, and the Rebels destroy the second Death Star.
Themes.
"Star Wars" features elements such as knights, witches, and princesses that are related to archetypes of the fantasy genre. The "Star Wars" world, unlike fantasy and science-fiction films that featured sleek and futuristic settings, was portrayed as dirty and grimy. Lucas' vision of a "used future" was further popularized in the science fiction-horror films "Alien", which was set on a dirty space freighter; "Mad Max 2", which is set in a post-apocalyptic desert; and "Blade Runner", which is set in a crumbling, dirty city of the future. Lucas made a conscious effort to parallel scenes and dialogue between films, and especially to parallel the journeys of Luke Skywalker with that of his father Anakin when making the prequels.
Technical information.
All six films of the "Star Wars" series were shot in an aspect ratio of 2.40:1. The original trilogy was shot with anamorphic lenses. Episodes IV and V were shot in Panavision, while Episode VI was shot in Joe Dunton Camera (JDC) scope. Episode I was shot with Hawk anamorphic lenses on Arriflex cameras, and Episodes II and III were shot with Sony's CineAlta high-definition digital cameras.
Lucas hired Ben Burtt to oversee the sound effects on "A New Hope". Burtt's accomplishment was such that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences presented him with a Special Achievement Award because it had no award at the time for the work he had done. Lucasfilm developed the THX sound reproduction standard for "Return of the Jedi". John Williams composed the scores for all six films. Lucas' design for "Star Wars" involved a grand musical sound, with leitmotifs for different characters and important concepts. Williams' "Star Wars" title theme has become one of the most famous and well-known musical compositions in modern music history.
Lucas hired 'the Dean of Special Effects' John Stears, who created R2-D2, Luke Skywalker's Landspeeder, the Jedi Knights' lightsabers, and the Death Star. The technical lightsaber choreography for the original trilogy was developed by leading filmmaking sword-master Bob Anderson. Anderson trained actor Mark Hamill (Luke Skywalker) and performed all the sword stunts as Darth Vader during the lightsaber duels in "The Empire Strikes Back" and "Return of the Jedi", wearing Vader's costume. Anderson's role in the original "Star Wars" trilogy was highlighted in the film "Reclaiming the Blade", where he shares his experiences as the fight choreographer developing the lightsaber techniques for the movies.
Production history.
Original trilogy.
In 1971, Universal Studios agreed to make "American Graffiti" and "Star Wars" in a two-picture contract, although "Star Wars" was later rejected in its early concept stages. "American Graffiti" was completed in 1973 and, a few months later, Lucas wrote a short summary called "The Journal of the Whills", which told the tale of the training of apprentice C.J. Thorpe as a "Jedi-Bendu" space commando by the legendary Mace Windy. Frustrated that his story was too difficult to understand, Lucas then began writing a 13-page treatment called "The Star Wars" on April 17, 1973, which had thematic parallels with Akira Kurosawa's "The Hidden Fortress". By 1974, he had expanded the treatment into a rough draft screenplay, adding elements such as the Sith, the Death Star, and a protagonist named Annikin Starkiller. For the second draft, Lucas made heavy simplifications, and introduced the young hero on a farm as Luke Starkiller. Annikin became Luke's father, a wise Jedi knight. "The Force" was also introduced as a supernatural power. The next draft removed the father character and replaced him with a substitute named Ben Kenobi, and in 1976 a fourth draft had been prepared for principal photography. The film was titled "Adventures of Luke Starkiller, as taken from the Journal of the Whills, Saga I: The Star Wars". During production, Lucas changed Luke's name to Skywalker and altered the title to simply "The Star Wars" and finally "Star Wars".
It wasn't long after I began writing "Star Wars" that I realized the story was more than a single film could hold. As the saga of the Skywalkers and Jedi Knights unfolded, I began to see it as a tale that could take at least nine films to tell—three trilogies—and I realized, in making my way through the back story and after story, that I was really setting out to write the middle story.
The second draft contained a teaser for a never-made sequel about "The Princess of Ondos," and by the time of the third draft some months later Lucas had negotiated a contract that gave him rights to make two sequels. Not long after, Lucas met with author Alan Dean Foster, and hired him to write these two sequels as novels. The intention was that if "Star Wars" were successful, Lucas could adapt the novels into screenplays. He had also by that point developed an elaborate backstory to aid his writing process.
When "Star Wars" proved successful, Lucas decided to use the film as the basis for an elaborate serial, although at one point he considered walking away from the series altogether. However, Lucas wanted to create an independent filmmaking center—what would become Skywalker Ranch—and saw an opportunity to use the series as a financing agent. Alan Dean Foster had already begun writing the first sequel novel, but Lucas decided to abandon his plan to adapt Foster's work; the book was released as "Splinter of the Mind's Eye" the following year. At first Lucas envisioned a series of films with no set number of entries, like the James Bond series. In an interview with "Rolling Stone" in August 1977, he said that he wanted his friends to each take a turn at directing the films and giving unique interpretations on the series. He also said that the backstory in which Darth Vader turns to the dark side, kills Luke's father and fights Ben Kenobi on a volcano as the Galactic Republic falls would make an excellent sequel.
Later that year, Lucas hired science fiction author Leigh Brackett to write "Star Wars II" with him. They held story conferences and, by late November 1977, Lucas had produced a handwritten treatment called "The Empire Strikes Back". The treatment is very similar to the final film, except that Darth Vader does not reveal he is Luke's father. In the first draft that Brackett would write from this, Luke's father appears as a ghost to instruct Luke.
Brackett finished her first draft in early 1978; Lucas has said he was disappointed with it, but before he could discuss it with her, she died of cancer. With no writer available, Lucas had to write his next draft himself. It was this draft in which Lucas first made use of the "Episode" numbering for the films; "Empire Strikes Back" was listed as "Episode II". As Michael Kaminski argues in "The Secret History of Star Wars", the disappointment with the first draft probably made Lucas consider different directions in which to take the story. He made use of a new plot twist: Darth Vader claims to be Luke's father. According to Lucas, he found this draft enjoyable to write, as opposed to the yearlong struggles writing the first film, and quickly wrote two more drafts, both in April 1978. He also took the script to a darker extreme by having Han Solo imprisoned in carbonite and left in limbo.
This new story point of Darth Vader being Luke's father had drastic effects on the series. Michael Kaminski argues in his book that it is unlikely that the plot point had ever seriously been considered or even conceived of before 1978, and that the first film was clearly operating under an alternate storyline where Vader was separate from Luke's father; there is not a single reference to this plot point before 1978. After writing the second and third drafts of "Empire Strikes Back" in which the point was introduced, Lucas reviewed the new backstory he had created: Anakin Skywalker was Ben Kenobi's brilliant student and had a child named Luke, but was swayed to the dark side by Emperor Palpatine (who became a Sith and not simply a politician). Anakin battled Ben Kenobi on the site of a volcano and was wounded, but then resurrected as Darth Vader. Meanwhile Kenobi hid Luke on Tatooine while the Republic became the Empire and Vader systematically hunted down and killed the Jedi.
With this new backstory in place, Lucas decided that the series would be a trilogy, changing "Empire Strikes Back" from "Episode II" to "Episode V" in the next draft. Lawrence Kasdan, who had just completed writing "Raiders of the Lost Ark", was then hired to write the next drafts, and was given additional input from director Irvin Kershner. Kasdan, Kershner, and producer Gary Kurtz saw the film as a more serious and adult film, which was helped by the new, darker storyline, and developed the series from the light adventure roots of the first film.
By the time he began writing "Episode VI" in 1981 (then titled ""), much had changed. Making "Empire Strikes Back" was stressful and costly, and Lucas' personal life was disintegrating. Burned out and not wanting to make any more "Star Wars" films, he vowed that he was done with the series in a May 1983 interview with "Time" magazine. Lucas' 1981 rough drafts had Darth Vader competing with the Emperor for possession of Luke—and in the second script, the "revised rough draft", Vader became a sympathetic character. Lawrence Kasdan was hired to take over once again and, in these final drafts, Vader was explicitly redeemed and finally unmasked. This change in character would provide a springboard to the "Tragedy of Darth Vader" storyline that underlies the prequels.
Prequel trilogy.
After losing much of his fortune in a divorce settlement in 1987, Lucas had no desire to return to "Star Wars", and had unofficially canceled his sequel trilogy by the time of "Return of the Jedi". Nevertheless, the prequels, which were quite developed at this point, continued to fascinate him. After "Star Wars" became popular once again, in the wake of Dark Horse's comic book line and Timothy Zahn's trilogy of novels, Lucas saw that there was still a large audience. His children were older, and with the explosion of CGI technology he was now considering returning to directing. By 1993 it was announced, in "Variety" among other sources, that he would be making the prequels. He began outlining the story, now indicating the series would be a tragic one examining Anakin Skywalker's fall to the dark side. Lucas also began to change how the prequels would exist relative to the originals; at first they were supposed to be a "filling-in" of history tangential to the originals, but now he saw that they could form the beginning of one long story that started with Anakin's childhood and ended with his death. This was the final step towards turning the film series into a "Saga".
In 1994, Lucas began writing the first screenplay titled "Episode I: The Beginning". Following the release of that film, Lucas announced that he would also be directing the next two, and began working on "Episode II" at that time. The first draft of "Episode II" was completed just weeks before principal photography, and Lucas hired Jonathan Hales, a writer from "The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles", to polish it. Unsure of a title, Lucas had jokingly called the film "Jar Jar's Great Adventure." In writing "The Empire Strikes Back", Lucas initially decided that Lando Calrissian was a clone and came from a planet of clones which caused the "Clone Wars" mentioned by Princess Leia in "A New Hope"; he later came up with an alternate concept of an army of clone shocktroopers from a remote planet which attacked the Republic and were repelled by the Jedi. The basic elements of that backstory became the plot basis for "Episode II", with the new wrinkle added that Palpatine secretly orchestrated the crisis.
Lucas began working on "Episode III" before "Attack of the Clones" was released, offering concept artists that the film would open with a montage of seven Clone War battles. As he reviewed the storyline that summer, however, he says he radically re-organized the plot. Michael Kaminski, in "The Secret History of Star Wars", offers evidence that issues in Anakin's fall to the dark side prompted Lucas to make massive story changes, first revising the opening sequence to have Palpatine kidnapped and his apprentice, Count Dooku, murdered by Anakin as the first act in the latter's turn towards the dark side. After principal photography was complete in 2003, Lucas made even more massive changes in Anakin's character, re-writing his entire turn to the dark side; he would now turn primarily in a quest to save Padmé's life, rather than the previous version in which that reason was one of several, including that he genuinely believed that the Jedi were evil and plotting to take over the Republic. This fundamental re-write was accomplished both through editing the principal footage, and new and revised scenes filmed during pick-ups in 2004.
Lucas often exaggerated the amount of material he wrote for the series; much of it stemmed from the post–1978 period when the series grew into a phenomenon. Michael Kaminski explained that these exaggerations were both a publicity and security measure. Kaminski rationalized that since the series' story radically changed throughout the years, it was always Lucas' intention to change the original story retroactively because audiences would only view the material from his perspective. When congratulating the producers of the TV series "Lost" in 2010, Lucas himself jokingly admitted, "when "Star Wars" first came out, I didn't know where it was going either. The trick is to pretend you've planned the whole thing out in advance. Throw in some father issues and references to other stories – let's call them homages – and you've got a series".
Sequel trilogy.
In , The Walt Disney Company agreed to buy Lucasfilm and announced that a new "Star Wars Episode VII" film will be released in 2015. The co-chairman of Lucasfilm, Kathleen Kennedy became president of the company, reporting to Walt Disney Studios chairman Alan Horn. In addition, Kennedy will serve as executive producer on new "Star Wars" feature films, with franchise creator and Lucasfilm founder Lucas serving as creative consultant. The screenplay for "Episode VII" will be written by Michael Arndt. On January 25, 2013, The Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm officially announced J.J. Abrams as Star Wars Episode VII's director and producer, along with Bryan Burk and Bad Robot Productions. 
On , "The Hollywood Reporter" reported that Lawrence Kasdan, writer of ' and ', and Simon Kinberg will write and produce "Episodes VIII" and "IX". Kasdan and Kinberg were later confirmed as creative consultants on those films, in addition to writing stand-alone films.
Stand-alone films.
In January 2013, "New York" reported that director Zack Snyder is developing a stand-alone "Star Wars" film based on Akira Kurosawa's 1954 film, "Seven Samurai". In response to this report, Snyder's spokesperson informed The Hollywood Reporter that Snyder has no involvement with any of the new "Star Wars" films.
On February 5 2013, Disney CEO Bob Iger confirmed the development of two stand-alone films, each individually written by Lawrence Kasdan and Simon Kinberg. On February 6, Entertainment Weekly reported that Disney is working on two films featuring Han Solo and Boba Fett.
3D releases.
At a ShoWest convention in 2005, Lucas demonstrated new technology and stated that he planned to release the six films in a new 3D film format, beginning with "A New Hope" in 2007. However, by January 2007, Lucasfilm stated on StarWars.com that "there are no definitive plans or dates for releasing the Star Wars saga in 3-D." At Celebration Europe in July 2007, Rick McCallum confirmed that Lucasfilm is "planning to take all six films and turn them into 3-D," but they are "waiting for the companies out there that are developing this technology to bring it down to a cost level that makes it worthwhile for everybody". In July 2008, Jeffrey Katzenberg, the CEO of DreamWorks Animation, revealed that Lucas plans to redo all six of the movies in 3D. In late September 2010, it was announced that "The Phantom Menace" would be theatrically re-released in 3-D on February 10, 2012. All six films would be re-released in order, with the 3-D conversion process taking at least a year to complete per film.
Critical reaction.
Academy Awards.
The six films together were nominated for 25 Academy Awards, of which they won ten. Three of these were Special Achievement Awards.
Expanded Universe.
The term "Expanded Universe" ("EU") is an umbrella term for officially licensed "Star Wars" material outside of the six feature films. The material expands the stories told in the films, taking place anywhere from 25,000 years before "The Phantom Menace" to 140 years after "Return of the Jedi". The first "Expanded Universe" story appeared in Marvel Comics' "Star Wars" #7 in January 1978 (the first six issues of the series having been an adaptation of the film), followed quickly by Alan Dean Foster's novel "Splinter of the Mind's Eye" the following month.
George Lucas retains artistic control over the "Star Wars" universe. For example, the death of central characters and similar changes in the status quo must first pass his screening before authors are given the go-ahead. In addition, Lucasfilm Licensing devotes efforts to ensure continuity between the works of various authors across companies. Elements of the Expanded Universe have been adopted by Lucas for use in the films, such as the name of capital planet Coruscant, which first appeared in Timothy Zahn's novel "Heir to the Empire" before being used in "The Phantom Menace". Additionally, Lucas so liked the character Aayla Secura, who was introduced in Dark Horse Comics' "Star Wars" series, that he included her as a character in "Attack of the Clones".
Lucas has played a large role in the production of various television projects, usually serving as storywriter or executive producer. "Star Wars" has had numerous radio adaptations. A radio adaptation of "A New Hope" was first broadcast on National Public Radio in 1981. The adaptation was written by science fiction author Brian Daley and directed by John Madden. It was followed by adaptations of "The Empire Strikes Back" in 1983 and "Return of the Jedi" in 1996. The adaptations included background material created by Lucas but not used in the films. Mark Hamill, Anthony Daniels, and Billy Dee Williams reprised their roles as Luke Skywalker, C-3PO, and Lando Calrissian, respectively, except in "Return of the Jedi" in which Luke was played by Joshua Fardon and Lando by Arye Gross. The series also used John Williams' original score from the films and Ben Burtt's original sound designs.
Literature.
"Star Wars"-based fiction predates the release of the first film, with the 1976 novelization of "Star Wars" (ghost-written by Alan Dean Foster and credited to Lucas). Foster's 1978 novel, "Splinter of the Mind's Eye", was the first Expanded Universe work to be released. In addition to filling in the time between "A New Hope" and "The Empire Strikes Back", this additional content greatly expanded the "Star Wars" timeline before and after the film series. "Star Wars" fiction flourished during the time of the original trilogy (1977–1983) but slowed to a trickle afterwards. In 1992, however, Timothy Zahn's "Thrawn trilogy" debuted, sparking a new interest in the "Star Wars" universe. Since then, several hundred tie-in novels have been published by Bantam and Del Rey. A similar resurgence in the Expanded Universe occurred in 1996 with the Steve Perry novel "", set in between "The Empire Strikes Back" and "Return of the Jedi", and accompanying video game and comic book series.
LucasBooks radically changed the face of the "Star Wars" universe with the introduction of the "New Jedi Order" series, which takes place some 20 years after "Return of the Jedi" and stars a host of new characters alongside series originals. For younger audiences, three series have been introduced. The ' series follows the adventures of Qui-Gon Jinn and his apprentice Obi-Wan Kenobi prior to "The Phantom Menace". The "Jedi Quest" series follows the adventures of Obi-Wan and his apprentice Anakin Skywalker in between "The Phantom Menace" and "Attack of the Clones". ' series follows the adventures of Obi-Wan and another surviving Jedi almost immediately, set in between "Revenge of the Sith" and "A New Hope".
Marvel Comics published "Star Wars" comic book series and adaptations from 1977 to 1986. A wide variety of creators worked on this series, including Roy Thomas, Archie Goodwin, Howard Chaykin, Al Williamson, Carmine Infantino, Gene Day, Walt Simonson, Michael Golden, Chris Claremont, Whilce Portacio, Jo Duffy, and Ron Frenz. The Los Angeles Times Syndicate published a "Star Wars" newspaper strip by Russ Manning, Goodwin and Williamson with Goodwin writing under a pseudonym. In the late 1980s, Marvel announced it would publish a new "Star Wars" comic by Tom Veitch and Cam Kennedy. However, in December 1991, Dark Horse Comics acquired the "Star Wars" license and used it to launch a number of ambitious sequels to the original trilogy instead, including the popular "Dark Empire" stories. They have since gone on to publish a large number of original adventures set in the "Star Wars" universe. There have also been parody comics, including "Tag and Bink".
Games.
Since 1977, dozens of board, card, video, miniature, and tabletop role-playing games, among other types, have been published bearing the "Star Wars" name, beginning in 1977 with the board game "Star Wars: Escape from the Death Star" (not to be confused with another board game with the same title, published in 1990).
"Star Wars" video games commercialization started in 1982 with "" published for the Atari 2600 by Parker Brothers. Since then, "Star Wars" has opened the way to a myriad of space-flight simulation games, first-person shooter games, role-playing video games, RTS games, and others.
Three different official tabletop role-playing games have been developed for the "Star Wars" universe: in the 1980s and 1990s, one by Wizards of the Coast in the 2000s and one by Fantasy Flight Games in the 2010s.
The best-selling games so far are the ' and the ' series, with 12 million and 10 million units respectively while the most critically acclaimed is the first "".
The most recently released games are ', ', ' and ', for the PS3, PSP, PS2, Xbox 360, Nintendo DS and Wii. While "The Complete Saga" focuses on all six episodes of the series, "The Force Unleashed", of the same name of the , takes place in the largely unexplored time period between "Revenge of the Sith" and "A New Hope" and casts players as Darth Vader's "secret apprentice" hunting down the remaining Jedi. The game features a new game engine, and was released on September 16, 2008 in the United States. There are three more titles based on the Clone Wars which were released for the Nintendo DS (') and Wii (' and ").
"Star Wars" trading cards have been published since the first 'blue' series, by Topps, in 1977. Dozens of series have been produced, with Topps being the licensed creator in the United States. Some of the card series are of film stills, while others are original art. Many of the cards have become highly collectible with some very rare "promos", such as the 1993 Galaxy Series II "floating Yoda" P3 card often commanding US$1000 or more. While most "base" or "common card" sets are plentiful, many "insert" or "chase cards" are very rare.
From 1995 until 2001 Decipher,_Inc had the license for, created and produced a collectible card game based on "Star Wars"; the "Star Wars Collectible Card Game" (also known as SWCCG).
The board game Risk has been adapted to the series in two editions by Hasbro: and ' (2005) and ' (2006).
Fan works.
The "Star Wars" saga has inspired many fans to create their own non-canon material set in the "Star Wars" galaxy. In recent years, this has ranged from writing fan-fiction to creating fan films. In 2002, Lucasfilm sponsored the first annual Official "Star Wars" Fan Film Awards, officially recognizing filmmakers and the genre. Because of concerns over potential copyright and trademark issues, however, the contest was initially open only to parodies, mockumentaries, and documentaries. Fan-fiction films set in the "Star Wars" universe were originally ineligible, but in 2007 Lucasfilm changed the submission standards to allow in-universe fiction entries.
While many fan films have used elements from the licensed Expanded Universe to tell their story, they are not considered an official part of the "Star Wars" canon. However, the lead character from the "Pink Five" series was incorporated into Timothy Zahn's 2007 novel "Allegiance", marking the first time a fan-created "Star Wars" character has ever crossed into the official canon. Lucasfilm, for the most part, has allowed but not endorsed the creation of these derivative fan-fiction works, so long as no such work attempts to make a profit from or tarnish the "Star Wars" franchise in any way.
Attractions.
Before Disney's acquisition of the franchise, George Lucas had established a partnership in 1986 with Disney and its Walt Disney Imagineering division to create Star Tours, an attraction that opened at Disneyland in 1987. The attraction also had subsequent incarnations at other Disney Parks worldwide, with the exception of Hong Kong Disneyland.
The attractions at Disneyland, Disney's Hollywood Studios and Tokyo Disneyland closed on July 27, 2010, September 7, 2010 and April 2, 2012, respectively, in order to allow the rides to be converted into . The successor attraction opened at Disney's Hollywood Studios on May 20, 2011 and June 3, at Disneyland. The Japan version is expected to open in 2013.
The Jedi Training Academy is a live show where children are selected to learn the teachings of the Jedi Knights and the Force in order to become Padawan learners. The show is present at the Rebels stage at Disney's Hollywood Studios and at the Tomorrowland Terrace at Disneyland.
The Walt Disney World Resort's Disney's Hollywood Studios park hosts an annual festival, "Star Wars" Weekends during specific dates from May to June. The event began in 1997.
Legacy.
The "Star Wars" saga has had a significant impact on modern American pop culture. Both the films and characters have been parodied in numerous films and television.
