Brackets are tall punctuation marks used in matched pairs within text, to set apart or interject other text. Used unqualified, brackets refer to different types of brackets in different parts of the world and in different contexts.
List of types.
Characters ‹ › and « », known as guillemets or "angular quote brackets", are actually quotation mark glyphs used in several European languages.
History.
The chevron was the earliest type to appear in written English. Desiderius Erasmus coined the term lunula to refer to the rounded parentheses (), recalling the round shape of the moon.
Usage.
In addition to referring to the class of all types of brackets, the unqualified word "bracket" is most commonly used to refer to a specific type of bracket. In modern American usage this is usually the square bracket and in modern British usage this is usually the parenthesis.
In American usage, parentheses are usually considered separate from other brackets, and calling them "brackets" at all is unusual even though they serve a similar function. In more formal usage, "parenthesis" may refer to the entire bracketed text, not just to the punctuation marks used (so all the text in this set of round brackets may be said to be a parenthesis or a parenthetical).
According to early typographic practice, brackets are never set in italics, even when the surrounding characters are italic.
Types.
Parentheses ( ).
Parentheses () (singular, parenthesis ()) (also called simply brackets, or round brackets, curved brackets, oval brackets, or, colloquially, parens) contain material that could be omitted without destroying or altering the meaning of a sentence (in most writing, overuse of parentheses is usually a sign of a badly structured text). A milder effect may be obtained by using a pair of commas as the delimiter, though if the sentence contains commas for other purposes, visual confusion may result.
Parentheses may be used in formal writing to add supplementary information, such as "Sen. John McCain (R., Arizona) spoke at length." They can also indicate shorthand for "either singular or plural" for nouns – e.g., "the claim(s)" – or for "either masculine or feminine" in some languages with grammatical gender.
Parenthetical phrases have been used extensively in informal writing and stream of consciousness literature. Examples include the southern American author William Faulkner (see "Absalom, Absalom!" and ) as well as poet E. E. Cummings.
Parentheses have historically been used where the dash is currently used – that is, in order to depict alternatives, such as "parenthesis)(parentheses". Examples of this usage can be seen in editions of "Fowler's".
Parentheses may be nested (generally with one set (such as this) inside another set). This is not commonly used in formal writing (though sometimes other brackets square brackets will be used for one or more inner set of parentheses other words, secondary {or even tertiary} phrases can be found within the main parenthetical sentence).
Any punctuation inside parentheses or other brackets is independent of the rest of the text: "Mrs. Pennyfarthing (What? Yes, that was her name!) was my landlady." In this usage, the explanatory text in the parentheses is a parenthesis. (Parenthesized text is usually short and within a single sentence. Where several sentences of supplemental material are used in parentheses the final full stop would be within the parentheses. Again, the parenthesis implies that the meaning and flow of the text is supplemental to the rest of the text and the whole would be unchanged were the parenthesized sentences removed.)
Parentheses are included in the syntaxes of many computer programming languages. Typically needed to denote an argument; to tell the compiler what data type the Method/Function needs to look for first in order to initialise. 
A related convention is that when parentheses have two levels of nesting, braces are the outermost pair.
Parentheses are also used to set apart the arguments in mathematical functions. For example, "f"("x") is the function "f" applied to the variable "x". In coordinate systems parentheses are used to denote a set of coordinates; so in the Cartesian coordinate system may represent the point located at 4 on the "x"-axis and 7 on the "y"-axis. Parentheses may also represent intervals; , for example, is the interval between 0 and 5, not including 0 or 5.
Parentheses may also be used to represent a binomial coefficient, and in chemistry to denote a polyatomic ion.
In Chinese and Japanese, 【 】, a combination of brackets and parentheses called "方頭括號" and "sumitsuki", are used for inference in Chinese and used in titles and headings in Japanese.
Square brackets [ ].
Square brackets – also called simply brackets (US) – are mainly used to enclose explanatory or missing material usually added by someone other than the original author, especially in quoted text.
Examples include: "I appreciate it honor, but I must refuse", and "the future of psionics definition is in doubt". They may also be used to modify quotations. For example, if referring to someone's statement "I hate to do laundry", one could write: He "hate to do laundry". In particular, square brackets are used to mark a shift between lower and upper case. Empty square brackets may indicate letters were deleted from a quotation.
The bracketed expression “]” is used after a quote or reprinted text to indicate the passage appears exactly as in the original source; a bracketed ellipsis [...] is often used to indicate deleted material; bracketed comments indicate when original text has been modified for clarity: "I'd like to thank unimportant people and my parentals ["sic"] for their love, tolerance [...] and "assistance" added".
In translated works, brackets are used to signify the same word or phrase in the original language to avoid ambiguity.
For example: "He is trained in the way of the open hand ."
When nested parentheses are needed, brackets are used as a substitute for the inner pair of parentheses within the outer pair.
When deeper levels of nesting are needed, convention is to alternate between parentheses and brackets at each level.
In linguistics, phonetic transcriptions are generally enclosed within brackets, often using the International Phonetic Alphabet, while phonemic transcriptions typically use paired slashes.
Brackets are used to denote parts of the text that need to be checked when preparing drafts prior to finalizing a document. They often denote points that have not yet been agreed to in legal drafts and the year in which a report was made for certain case law decisions.
Brackets are used in mathematics in a variety of notations, including standard notations for intervals, commutators, the floor function, the Lie bracket, the Iverson bracket, and matrices.
Brackets can also be used in chemistry to represent the concentration of a chemical substance or to denote distributed charge in a complex ion.
Brackets are used in many computer programming languages, especially those derived or inspired by the C language, to indicate array indexing operators. In this context, the opening bracket is often pronounced as "sub", indicating a "sub"script.
Braces or curly brackets { }.
Curly brackets – also properly called braces in the UK (according to the OED) and US – are used in specialized ways in poetry and music (to mark repeats or joined lines). The musical terms for this mark joining staves are accolade and "brace", and connect two or more lines of music that are played simultaneously. In mathematics they delimit sets, and in writing, they may be used similarly, "Select your animal {goat, sheep, cow, horse} and follow me". In many programming languages, they enclose groups of statements. Such languages (C being one of the best-known examples) are therefore called curly bracket languages. Some people use a brace to signify movement in a particular direction.
Presumably due to the similarity of the words "brace" and "bracket" (although they do not share an etymology), many people mistakenly treat "brace" as a synonym for "bracket". Therefore, when it is necessary to avoid any possibility of confusion, such as in computer programming, it may be best to use the term "curly bracket" rather than "brace". However, general usage in North American English favours the latter form. Indian programmers often use the name "flower bracket".
Angle brackets or chevrons ⟨ ⟩.
Chevrons ; are often used to enclose highlighted material.
In physical sciences, chevrons are used to denote an average over time or over another continuous parameter. For example,
The inner product of two vectors is commonly written as formula_4, but the notation (a, b) is also used.
In mathematical physics, especially quantum mechanics, it is common to write the inner product between elements as formula_5, as a short version of formula_6, or formula_7, where formula_8 is an operator. This is known as Dirac notation or bra-ket notation.
In set theory, chevrons or parentheses are used to denote ordered pairs and other tuples, whereas curly brackets are used for unordered sets.
In linguistics, chevrons indicate graphemes (i.e., written letters) or orthography, as in “The English word is spelled .” In epigraphy, they may be used for mechanical transliterations of a text into the Latin script.
In textual criticism, and hence in many editions of pre-modern works, chevrons denote sections of the text which are illegible or otherwise lost; the editor will often insert his own reconstruction where possible within them.
The mathematical or logical symbols for greater-than (>) and less-than (<) are inequality symbols, and are not punctuation marks when so used. Nevertheless, true chevrons are not available on a typical computer keyboard, but the less-than and greater-than symbols are, so they are often substituted. They are loosely referred to as "angled brackets" or "chevrons" in this case.
Single and double pairs of comparison operators («, ») (meaning "much smaller than" and "much greater than") are sometimes used instead of guillemets (, ) (used as quotation marks in many languages) when the proper characters are not available.
In comic books, chevrons are often used to mark dialogue that has been translated notionally from another language; in other words, if a character is speaking another language, instead of writing in the other language and providing a translation, one writes the translated text within chevrons. Of course, since no foreign language is actually written, this is only "notionally" translated.
Chevron-like symbols are part of standard Chinese, and Korean punctuation, where they generally enclose the titles of books: and or and for traditional vertical printing, and and or and for horizontal printing. See also non-English usage of quotation marks.
Corner and half brackets ｢｣, ⌊ ⌋.
In East Asian punctuation, angle brackets are used as quotation marks. Half brackets are used in English to mark added text, such as in translations: "Bill saw ⌊her⌋".
The corner brackets ⌈ and ⌉ have at least two uses in mathematical logic: first, as a generalization of quotation marks, and second, to denote the gödel number of the enclosed expression. They are also used to denote the integer floor and ceiling functions.
In editions of papyrological texts, half brackets enclose text which is lacking in the papyrus due to damage, but can be restored by virtue of another source, such as an ancient quotation of the text transmitted by the papyrus. For example, Callimachus "Iambus" 1.2 reads: ἐκ τῶν ὅκου βοῦν κολλύ⌊βου π⌋ιπρήσκουσιν. A hole in the papyrus has obliterated βου π, but these letters are supplied by an ancient commentary on the poem.
Double brackets ⟦ ⟧.
In formal semantics, double brackets, ⟦ ⟧, also called Strachey brackets, are used to indicate the "semantic evaluation function." The CJK glyphs 〚 〛 look identical except they have added width. They can be typeset in LaTeX with the package stmaryrd.
Computing.
Encoding.
Representations of various kinds of brackets in ASCII, Unicode and HTML are given below.
Braces (curly brackets) first became part of a character set with the 8-bit code of the IBM 7030 Stretch.
The angle brackets or chevrons at U+27E8 and U+27E9 are for mathematical use and Western languages, while U+3008 and U+3009 are for East Asian languages. The chevrons at U+2329 and U+232A are deprecated in favour of the U+3008 and U+3009 East Asian angle brackets. Unicode discourages their use for mathematics and in Western texts because they are canonically equivalent to the CJK code points U+300x and thus likely to render as double-width symbols. The "less-than" and "greater-than" symbols are often used as replacements for chevrons.
These various bracket characters are frequently used in many computer languages as operators or for other syntax markup. The more common uses follow.
Uses of "<" and ">".
These symbols are used in pairs as if they are brackets,
Layout styles.
In normal writing (prose) an opening bracket is rarely left hanging at the end of a line of text nor is a closing bracket permitted to start one. However, in computer code this is often done intentionally to aid readability. For example, a bracketed list of items separated by semicolons may be written with the brackets on separate lines, and the items, followed by the semicolon, each on one line.
A common error in programming is mismatching braces; accordingly, many IDEs have braces matching to highlight matching pairs.
Mathematics.
In addition to the use of parentheses to specify the order of operations, both parentheses and brackets are used to denote an interval, also referred to as a half-open range. The notation is used to indicate an interval from to that is inclusive of but exclusive of . That is, would be the set of all real numbers between 5 and 12, including 5 but not 12. The numbers may come as close as they like to 12, including 11.999 and so forth (with any finite number of 9s), but 12.0 is not included. In Europe, the notation is also used for this. The endpoint adjoining the bracket is known as "closed", while the endpoint adjoining the parenthesis is known as "open". If both types of brackets are the same, the entire interval may be referred to as "closed" or "open" as appropriate. Whenever +∞ or −∞ is used as an endpoint, it is normally considered "open" and adjoined to a parenthesis. See Interval (mathematics) for a more complete treatment.
In quantum mechanics, chevrons are also used as part of Dirac's formalism, bra-ket notation, to note vectors from the dual spaces of the Bra  and the Ket . Mathematicians will also commonly write for the inner product of two vectors. In statistical mechanics, chevrons denote ensemble or time average. Chevrons are used in group theory to write group presentations, and to denote the subgroup generated by a collection of elements. Note that obtuse angled chevrons are not always (and even not by all users) distinguished from a pair of less-than and greater-than signs <>, which are sometimes used as a typographic approximation of chevrons.
In group theory and ring theory, brackets denote the commutator. In group theory, the commutator is commonly defined as . In ring theory, the commutator is defined as . Furthermore, in ring theory, braces denote the anticommutator where } is defined as . The bracket is also used to denote the Lie derivative, or more generally the Lie bracket in any Lie algebra.
Various notations, like the vinculum have a similar effect to brackets in specifying order of operations, or otherwise grouping several characters together for a common purpose.
In the Z formal specification language, braces define a set and chevrons define a sequence.
Accounting.
Traditionally in accounting, negative amounts are placed in parentheses.
Law.
Brackets are used in some countries in the citation of law reports to identify parallel citations to non-official reporters. For example: Chronicle Pub. Co. v. Superior Court, (1998) 54 Cal.2d 548, Cal.Rptr. 109. In some other countries (such as England and Wales), square brackets are used to indicate that the year is part of the citation and parentheses are used to indicate the year the judgment was given. For example, National Coal Board v England AC 403, is in the 1954 volume of the Appeal Cases reports although the decision may have been given in 1953 or earlier, whereas (1954) 98 Sol Jo 176 reports a decision from 1954, in volume 98 of the Solicitor's Journal which may be published in 1955 or later.
When quoted material is in any way altered, the alterations are enclosed in brackets within the quotation. For example: Plaintiff asserts his cause is just, stating, "causes is sic just." While in the original quoted sentence the word "my" was capitalized, it has been modified in the quotation and the change signalled with brackets. Similarly, where the quotation contained a grammatical error, the quoting author signalled that the error was in the original with "["sic"" (Latin for 'thus'). ("California Style Manual", section 4:59 (4th ed.))
Sports.
Tournament brackets, the diagrammatic representation of the series of games played during a tournament usually leading to a single winner, are so named for their resemblance to brackets or braces.
