Adventure Time (originally titled Adventure Time with Finn & Jake) is an American animated television series created by Pendleton Ward for Cartoon Network. The series follows the adventures of Finn (voiced by Jeremy Shada), a 14-year-old human boy, and his best friend Jake (voiced by John DiMaggio), a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will. Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo, and travel the land while they adventure. Along the way, they interact with the other main characters of the show: Princess Bubblegum (voiced by Hynden Walch), The Ice King (voiced by Tom Kenny), and Marceline the Vampire Queen (voiced by Olivia Olson).
The series is based on a short produced for Frederator's Nicktoons Network animation incubator series "Random! Cartoons". After the short became a viral hit on the internet, Cartoon Network picked it up for a full-length series that previewed on March 11, 2010, and officially premiered on April 5, 2010. The series, which is heavily inspired by the fantasy, role-playing game "Dungeons and Dragons" as well as video games, is produced via hand-drawn animation. Episodes are created through the process of storyboarding, and a single episode takes roughly nine months to complete. The "Adventure Time" cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor, and the series also regularly employs guest actors and actresses for minor and recurring characters.
Each "Adventure Time" episode is about eleven minutes in length; pairs of episodes are often telecast in order to fill a half-hour program time slot. The series has completed four seasons of twenty-six episodes each, and is currently on its fifth, which debuted on November 12, 2012. Ever since its debut, "Adventure Time" has been a ratings success for Cartoon Network. As of November 2012, the show is viewed by approximately 3.3 million viewers per week. The show has received positive reviews from critics and has developed a cult following among teenagers and adults, many of whom are attracted due to the series' animation and stories. "Adventure Time" has also been nominated for three Annie Awards, three Primetime Emmy Awards, and a Sundance Film Festival Award. In 2013, the series won a Motion Picture Sound Editors Award for the episode "Card Wars". In addition, the series has also produced various clothing and merchandise, video games, comic books, and DVD compilations.
Characters.
The series follows the adventures of Finn the Human, a 14-year-old boy, and his best friend Jake, a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will. Ward describes Finn as a "fiery little kid with strong morals", while Jake is based on Bill Murray's character Tripper Harrison from "Meatballs". Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo. Along the way, they interact with the other main characters of the show: Princess Bubblegum, The Ice King, and Marceline the Vampire Queen.
Development.
Concept and creation.
According to series creator Pendleton Ward, the show's style was influenced by his time at California Institute of the Arts and his work as a storyboard artist on "The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack". He tries to include "beautiful" moments like those in Hayao Miyazaki's film "My Neighbor Totoro", as well as elements of subversive humor. The show began as a single stand-alone animated short which ran for seven minutes. It aired in January 2007 and again as part of Frederator Studios' "Random! Cartoons" on December 7, 2008. After its release, the short video became a viral hit on the internet. Frederator Studios then pitched an "Adventure Time" series to Nicktoons Network, but the network passed on it twice. The studio then approached Cartoon Network. The network said they would be willing to produce the series if Ward could prove that the series could be expanded into a series while maintaining elements from the original short. Ward, with help from Pat McHale and Adam Muto, turned in a rough storyboard that featured Finn and an "oblivious" Princess Bubblegum going on a spaghetti-supper date. However, the network was not happy with this story, and asked for another. Ward then created an early storyboard for the episode, "The Enchiridion", which was his attempt to emulate the style of the original short. Cartoon Network approved the first season in September 2008, and "The Enchiridion" became the first episode to enter into production.
Production.
While many cartoons are based on script pitches to network executives, Cartoon Network allowed "Adventure Time" to "build their own teams organically" and communication through the use of storyboards and animatics. Cartoon Network chief content officer Rob Sorcher explained that the network allowed this because the company was "dealing with artists who are primarily visual people" and by using storyboards, the writers and artists could learn and grow “by actually doing the work.” Many of the series' writers and storyboard artists have a background in indie comics. Pendleton Ward refers to them as "really smart, smartypants people" who are responsible for inserting weirder and more spiritual ideas into the series during its third season.
In an interview with "The A.V. Club", Ward explained that the writing process for the show usually began with the writers telling each other what they had done the past week. He also said that, "a lot of the time, if we’re really stuck, we’ll start saying everything that comes to our mind, which is usually the worst stuff, and then someone else will think that’s terrible but it’ll give him a better idea and the ball just starts rolling like that." Ward also revealed that a major inspiration for the series is the fantasy, role-playing game "Dungeons and Dragons". Before the series aired, many of the writers were avid fans of the game. However, because of the busy schedule that comes with writing and coordinating a television series, they no longer had time to actively play the game. Ward explained that, because the writers were too busy, they would attempt to write stories that they would "want to be playing D&D with."
After the writers pitch the stories, the ideas are compiled onto a "two-to-three" page outline that contain "the important beats". The episodes are then handed off to storyboard artists, who are given a week to "thumbnail a storyboard" and fill in the details. Ward and his creative directors then review the storyboard and make notes. The storyboard artists are then given another week to implement the notes and clean up the episode. Ward noted that it takes about nine months for a single episode to be created. According to character designer Andy Ristaino, almost all of the animation in "Adventure Time" is hand drawn. There have been elements of episodes that were not hand-drawn, such as the second season entry "Guardians of Sunshine", which was partially rendered in 3-D to emulate a video game. For the computer-generated segment in "Guardians of Sunshine", the series asked animator Ke Jiang for assistance; he single-handedly "modeled, rigged and animated" the sequence. A future episode, entitled "A Glitch is a Glitch" was written and directed by Irish film maker & writer David O'Reilly, and it will feature his distinct 3-D animation.
Ward described the show as a "dark comedy"; he said "dark comedies are my favorite, because I love that feeling – being happy and scared at the same time. It's my favorite way to feel – when I'm on the edge of my seat but I'm happy, that sense of conflicting emotions. And there's a lot of that in the show, I think." Executive producer Fred Seibert compares the show's animation style to that of Felix the Cat and various Max Fleischer cartoons, but says that its world is also equally inspired by "Dungeons and Dragons" and video games. Ward intends the show's world to have a certain physical logic instead of "cartoony slapstick"; even though magic exists in the story, the show's writers try to create an internal consistency in how the characters interact with the world. The series is rated TV-PG. Ward, in an interview, has said that he does not want to push the show's PG rating. He explained, "I’ve never really even thought about the rating. [...] we don’t like stuff that’s overly gross. We like cute stuff and nice things".
Cast.
The voice actors include voice acting veterans John DiMaggio (who portrays Jake the Dog), Tom Kenny (who plays The Ice King), and Hynden Walch (who voices Princess Bubblegum). In addition, Jeremy Shada portrays the voice of Finn the Human, and Olivia Olson portrays Marceline the Vampire Queen. Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters, as well as Lumpy Space Princess. Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console Beemo, as well as Jake's girlfriend, Lady Rainicorn. Polly Lou Livingston, a friend of Pendleton Ward's mother, Bettie Ward, plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks. The "Adventure Time" cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor. This is to record more natural sounding dialogue among the characters. Hynden Walch described these group recordings as like "doing a play reading – a really, really out there play." The series also regularly employs guest actors and actresses for minor and recurring characters.
Setting.
The show is set in a fictional continent called the "Land of Ooo", in a post-apocalyptic future about a thousand years after the "Great Mushroom War". According to Ward, the show takes place "after the bombs have fallen and magic has come back into the world". Before the series was fully developed, Ward's original intention was for the Land of Ooo to simply be "magical". After "Business Time" aired, in which an iceberg containing reanimated business men floats to the surface of a lake, the show suddenly became post-apocalyptic, and Ward notes that the production crew "just ran with it." Ward later described the setting as "candyland on the surface and dark underneath".
Ward stated that he has never intended for the Mushroom War and the post-apocalyptic elements to be "hit over the head in the show". In fact, he limited it to "cars buried underground in the background elements that do not raise any eyebrows." Ward has acknowledged that the post-apocalyptic elements of the series were influenced by the 1979 film "Mad Max". Kenny called the way the elements are worked into the plot "very fill-in-the-blanks", and DiMaggio noted that "it's been obvious the Land of Ooo has some issues". Ward has admitted that the details behind the Mushroom War form "a story worthy telling", but that he feels that the show will "save it and continue to dance around how heavy the back-history of Ooo is."
Title sequence and music.
Originally, when Ward was developing the title sequences, the rough draft version consisted of quick shots and vignettes that were "just sort of crazy, nonsensical", and that alluded to the show's theme of quirky adventures. These shots included "the characters [...] just punching random ghosts and monsters, jumping through anything and everything there were a bunch of atomic bombs at the end of it". Ward later called this version "really silly". After he sent the draft to the network, they did not enjoy it; they wanted something more graphical, like the intro to "The Brady Bunch". Ward, inspired by the intros to "The Simpsons" and "Pee Wee's Playhouse" developed a new intro that would feature a panning sweep of the Land of Ooo, all the while, a synthesizer note would slowly rise until the main theme enters. Ward's initial draft for this idea, was handed off to layout animators and the sequence took shape. Notably, Pat McHale worked on the Ice King's shot and gave him a "high school book" smile, and the crew also struggled on getting Marceline's shadows correct. After the panning sweep, the intro cuts to the theme song, with shots of Finn and Jake adventuring. For this part of the sequence, Ward was inspired by the "simple" aspects of the intro for the 2007 comedy film "Superbad"; when the theme mentions "Jake the Dog" and "Finn the Human", the characters names are displayed next to their heads, with only a solid color in the background. The sequence was finalized right before the series aired.
The theme song for the show, entitled "Adventure Time", is performed by Ward accompanied by a ukelele. The theme was originally used for the pilot episode, although Ward used guitar for the earlier version. Because the ukelele is a higher instrument, Wards singing is noticeably higher pitched; he explains that he was "trying to match the ukelele". The theme song used during the credits was originally a temp version. Ward explained, "I recorded the lyrics for the opening title in the animatics room where we have this little crummy microphone just so that we could add it to the titles and submit it to the network. Later, we tried re-recording it and I didn’t like it… I only liked the temp one!" According to Ward, much of the music has "hiss and grit" because the show's original composer Casey James Basichis, reportedly "lives in a pirate ship he’s built inside of an apartment you can hear floorboards squeak and lots of other weird sounds." As the show progressed, Basichis's friend Tim Kiefer joined the show as an additional composer. The two currently work together on the music.
The series regularly features songs and musical numbers. Many of the cast members—such as Shada, Kenny, and Olson—sing their own songs. Characters often express their emotions via song; examples of this include Marceline's "I'm Just Your Problem", as well as Finn's "All Gummed Up Inside". Although the background music for the series is composed by Basichis and Kiefer, the songs sung by characters are often written by the storyboard artists. For instance, the "Fry Song" was written by artist Rebecca Sugar, who storyboarded the song's parent episode "It Came From the Nightosphere". Reportedly, during the network pitch of the episode, Ward beatboxed and Sugar played ukelele and the two performed the "Fry Song". Sugar later called the experience "super terrifying", although the network did green-light the episode. Frederator, Seibert's production company, would often post various demos and full versions of songs sung by the characters.
Episodes.
Each "Adventure Time" episode is about eleven minutes in length; pairs of episodes are often telecast in order to fill a half-hour program time slot. The series has completed four seasons of twenty-six episodes each, and is currently on its fifth. The series previewed on March 11, 2010, and the first season officially premiered on April 5, 2010. The season concluded on September 27 of the same year. The second season premiered several weeks later, on October 11. It concluded on May 2, 2011. The third season premiered on July 11, 2011, and concluded on February 13, 2012. Its fourth season ran from April 2, 2012 through October 22, 2012. The show is currently on its fifth season, which started airing on November 12, 2012. On January 28, 2013, it was officially announced that the show had been renewed for a sixth season.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Reception.
Ratings.
Since its debut, "Adventure Time" has been a ratings success for Cartoon Network. The show first premiered on April 5, 2010 and was watched by 2.5 million viewers. The episode was a ratings smash; according to a press release sent out by Cartoon Network, the episode's timeslot saw triple digit percentage increases from the time period of the previous year. For instance, the entry was viewed by 1.661 million kids aged 2–11, which marked a 110 percent increase from the previous year. Furthermore, it was watched by 837,000 kids aged 9–14, which saw a 239 percent increase. The second season premiere, "It Came From the Nightosphere", marked a decline from the first season premiere, but it marked an increase from the first season finale, which was watched by only 1.77 million viewers. "It Came from the Nightospere" also marked gains when compared to the same timeslot a year prior; for instance, 732,000 kids aged 6–11 watched the episode, an increase by 35 percent when compared to the previous year. As the show has gone on, its ratings have continued to grow. The third season debut was watched by a total of 2.686 million viewers, and the fourth season premiere was watched by 2.655 million. The fifth season premiere, "Finn the Human"/"Jake the Dog", was watched by 3.435. This makes it the highest-rated premiere for any season of "Adventure Time". On November 14, 2012, it was reported that the shows averages roughly 3.3 million viewers an episode. According to the Nielsen ratings, the show consistently ranks first in its timeslot among boys aged 2 to 14.
Reviews.
The show has received positive reviews from critics and has developed a cult following among teenagers and adults; "Adventure Time" has a passionate audience of both children and adults "who are drawn to the show’s silly humor, imaginative stories, and richly populated world." Television critic Robert Lloyd, in an article for the "LA Times", said that the series was a good companion piece "to the network's currently airing "Chowder" and "The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack"." Furthermore, he complimented the setting and compared the series to "Chowder" and "The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack", noting that each take "place in a fantastical land peopled with strange, somewhat disturbing characters and has at its center a young male person or person-like thing making his way in that world with the help of unusual, not always reliable, mentors." He went on to write that the show is "not unlike CN's earlier "Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends", about a boy and his imaginary friend, though darker and stranger and even less connected to the world as we know it." Lloyd also compared it to "the sort of cartoons they made when cartoons themselves were young and delighted in bringing all things to rubbery life."
Mike LeChevallier of "Slate" magazine award the third and fourth seasons of the show four stars out of five. In a review of the third season, LeChevallier wrote that the series "scores relatively high marks for storytelling, artwork, music, voice acting, and realization with its neatly wrapped, 11-minute packages of multicolored awesomeness." He further complimented the show because he felt that "it scarcely appears to be trying too hard to attract attention, yet it does just that". He did note that "the short-form format leaves some emotional substance to be desired", although he noted this was inevitable for a series with such short episodes. In a review of season four LeChevallier positively complimented the show for "growing up" with its characters, and that "the show's dialogue is among the best of any current animated series." He concluded that the series possesses "strikingly few faults".
"The A.V. Club" reviewer Zack Handlen summed "Adventure Time" up as "a terrific show, and it fits beautifully in that gray area between kid and adult entertainment in a way that manages to satisfy both a desire for sophisticated (i.e., weird) writing and plain old silliness. This is basically what would happen if you asked a bunch of 12-year-olds to make a cartoon, only it’s the best possible version of that, like if all the 12-year-olds were super geniuses and some of them were Stan Lee and Jack Kirby and the Marx Brothers." Robert Mclaughlin of Den of Geek wrote that "Adventure Time" "is the first cartoon in a long time that is pure imagination". He heavily complimented the show for "its non-reliance on continually referencing pop culture [...] and the general outlook is positive and fun." Eric Kohn of IndieWire said that the show "represents the progress of medium" in the current decade. Kohn also enjoyed the way the show not only revels in "random, frequently adorable and effusive" aspects, but also "toys with an incredibly sad subtext". "Entertainment Weekly" named "Adventure Time" #20 on their The 25 Greatest Animated Series Ever list. Later, in 2013, "Entertainment Weekly" reviewer Darren Franich awarded the series an "A" and called it "a hybrid sci-fi/fantasy/horror/musical/fairy tale, with echoes of "Calvin and Hobbes", Hayao Miyazaki, "Final Fantasy", Richard Linklater, "Where the Wild Things Are", and the music video you made with your high school garage band." Franich praised the series' "consistently inventive" plotlines and its "vivid landscape", as well as its continued maturation.
"What Was Missing" controversy.
The episode "What Was Missing" became controversial because of an allegedly implied past relationship between Marceline and Princess Bubblegum. The accompanying "Mathematical" video recap caused more controversy about these implied lesbian relations between Princess Bubblegum and Marceline by making it seem as if the writing staff actively seeks input from fans. This incident was addressed by the show's producer, Fred Seibert, who said that "in trying to get the show’s audience involved we got wrapped up by both fan conjecture and spicy fanart and went a little too far." Soon after, the video recap and the entire channel was pulled off of YouTube, although "What Was Missing" still airs during reruns. Ward later addressed the issuing and gave a more neutral view; he said that, because there were "so many extreme positions taken on it all over the Internet", he did not "really want to comment on it because of issues, because there were so many extreme sides taken. It was a big hullaballoo."
Other media.
Toys and clothing.
Jazwares has produced an assortment of 2-, 5-, 10-, and 20-inch licensed action figures for the series, which were launched in the fall of 2011. "Grow Your Own" characters that expand more than 500 percent when immersed in water were also released. Role playing toys have also be produced, with a 24-inch "Finn Sword" being released first. Jazwares is also producing a cuddle pillow of Jake and Lumpy Space Princess. Splat toys of Jake and Lumpy Space Princess have been released as of spring 2012.
Since the dramatic series increase in popularity, many graphic t-shirts have been officially licensed through popular clothing retailers like Hot Topic, We Love Fine, and Threadless. Pendleton Ward even hosted t-shirt designing contests on the latter two sites. Other shirts can be purchased directly from Cartoon Network's store.
Comic books.
On November 19, 2011, Boom! Studios#BOOM Kids.21 and KaBOOM.21KaBOOM! Studios announced plans for an "Adventure Time" comic book series written by independent web comic creator Ryan North, noted for penning the series "Dinosaur Comics". The series launched February 8, 2012, with art by Shelli Paroline and Braden Lamb. A future graphic novel series, written by Danielle Corsetto and illustrated by Zack Sterling will focus on Flame Princess, and it will follow her on "her very first adventure" with Finn and Jake. The graphic novel is set for release in February 2013.
After the success of the initial comic book line, several spin-offs were launched. In April 2012, a series written by Meredith Gran—who had created the series "Octopus Pie"—was announced; entitled "Marceline and the Scream Queens," it was launched with a six-issue miniseries in July 2012 and features the characters Marceline and Princess Bubblegum touring the Land of Ooo as part of Marceline's rock band, the titular Scream Queens. Another spin-off series, "Adventure Time: Fionna and Cake" was released in November 2012. This series, drawn by "Adventure Time" series character designer and storyboard revisionist Natasha Allegri, follows the gender-bent characters of Fionna the Human and Cake the cat.
Video games.
A video game based on the series was announced by Pendleton Ward on his Twitter account. The game, titled "", was developed by WayForward Technologies for Nintendo DS, and Nintendo 3DS and was released by D3 Publisher on November 13, 2012.
The game also has an app called "Legends of Ooo: Big Hollow Princess" available on the iOS app store. It features characters and locations from the show, puzzle solving with Finn and Jake, and voiceovers performed by "Adventure Time" characters. The game costs US$.99 in the United States.
