Pitch Perfect is a 2012 musical comedy film directed by Jason Moore. The screenplay was written by Kay Cannon. The musical comedy features an ensemble cast consisting of Anna Kendrick, Rebel Wilson, Skylar Astin, Anna Camp, Brittany Snow, Ester Dean, Alexis Knapp, Ben Platt, and Adam DeVine. The plot follows an all girl college a cappella group, The Barden Bellas, as they compete against another a cappella group from their college to win Nationals. The film is loosely adapted from Mickey Rapkin's non-fiction novel, also titled "Pitch Perfect". Filming concluded in Mid-December 2011, in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
The film premiered in Los Angeles on September 24, 2012. Released on September 28, 2012 in the United States, "Pitch Perfect" grossed over $65 million domestically and $40 million internationally, as well as peaking at No. 3 at the Box Office. The film became the second highest grossing musical comedy film behind "School of Rock". The film was also met with positive reviews from critics, receiving an 81% positive rating on the review website Rotten Tomatoes based on 135 reviews. It was mostly praised by critics for its comedic approach, its flashy musical numbers and the performance of Wilson.
Plot.
Beca Mitchell, a Barden freshman, has no desire to go to college, but is forced to attend by her father, a professor at the university. Wishing to instead move to Los Angeles to pursue a career in music making, she takes up an internship at the school radio station, where she meets fellow freshman Jesse Swanson who intends to start to have a not-so-secret crush on Beca. When Beca's father finds out that Beca has not been attending classes, he offers to let Beca go to Los Angeles (which he will help pay for) if she joins a club and proves that she wants to be involved for the rest of the year. After some persuasion from Aubrey Posen, the group leader, and Chloe Beale, she joins the Bellas (an all girl acapella group), along with a group of other women who do not fit the Bellas' typical mold, including Cynthia-Rose, the sexually driven Stacie Conrad, the awkwardly quiet Lilly Onakuramara, who speaks inaudibly, and Fat Amy.
At practice, Aubrey's controlling nature gets on the nerves of the other girls, especially Beca. She is constantly critical and insists that they use the same set list the Bellas have been using for years, which clashes with Beca's original style. Meanwhile, Beca hangs out with Jesse, who has joined the Treblemakers, the Bellas' main rival. Aubrey warns the group not to have any sexual contact with the Treblemakers, or they'll be forced to leave the Bellas. Beca plays several of her own mixes of contemporary songs for him, and he compliments her for her talent. He then tries to get Beca to watch the ending of The Breakfast Club, one of his favorite movies, after Beca tells him she does not like movies and would rather go to a gynecologist or relive her parents divorce because they bore her and she never makes it to the ending.
Despite their issues, the Bellas attend the regional acapella competition. In spite of their distasteful set list, the group manages to place second at the regional acapella competition, which gives them the bid to semi-finals. On the way to the semi-finals, the group stops for gas where Fat Amy is hit with a burrito by Bumper Allen, the leader of the Treblemakers, as they drive past in their own bus. After the other girls clean her up, they continue on to the venue but run out of gas since Fat Amy forgot to put any in the bus. They are then forced to call the Treblemakers to drive them to the venue, which then leads to some smack talk during the car ride there.
At the semi-finals, Beca notices how bored the audience is with Aubrey's traditional (but overused arrangement), so she provides impromptu back-up, La Roux's. The Bellas come in third in the competition behind the Treblemakers and the Footnotes. Even though the audience was pleased, Aubrey is not and she yells at Beca, who quits the group after yelling at both Aubrey and Jesse. The Bellas make it into the Nationals after the Footnotes are disqualified because their lead singer was discovered to be in high school, not college. The Bellas get back together after spring break, but Beca is not included.
During this time, Beca begins working as a DJ at the university radio station, playing her music on the overnight shift, and also steadily distancing herself from Jesse. She finds a copy of "The Breakfast Club" and watches it. She realizes how much she needs the Bellas in her life. Her father convinces her to rejoin the Bellas, who she finds falling apart. The Bellas, complete once again, have a heart-to-heart and appoint Beca as the leader. During their heart-to-heart talk session they reveal secrets and decide use Beca's 21st-century mash-ups. Meanwhile, Bumper leaves the Treblemakers after being offered a job as a back-up singer for John Mayer. Jesse persuades the Trebles to allow Benji to join the group to replace Bumper. 
At the National competition, the Bellas sing a piece arranged by Beca. The Bellas win the competition and Beca and Jesse reunite with a kiss. Fast forward to 6 months later with new auditions, where it shows Jesse and Benji sitting at a desk in the auditions hall, followed by Beca and the Bellas, along with their Nationals trophy, preparing to select new members for their groups.
Production.
The film is based on Mickey Rapkin's non-fiction novel "Pitch Perfect". Rapkin, senior editor at "GQ" magazine, spent a season covering competitive collegiate a cappella. He followed the Tufts University Beelzebubs, the University of Oregon Divisi (the loose inspiration for the Bellas), and the University of Virginia Hullabahoos (who have a cameo in the film), writing about the singing, groupies, partying and rivalries. Two members of the a cappella community, Ed Boyer and Deke Sharon, both in Rapkin's book, were brought on board to arrange songs, produce vocals and act as on-site music directors. The movie was filmed throughout campus and inside buildings at Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Elizabeth Banks is a co-producer and a co-star in the film.
Casting.
The casting department included Justin Coulter, Rich Delia, Allison Estrin, and Michael Roth. The film stars Anna Kendrick, Anna Camp, and Brittany Snow. Producer Elizabeth Banks appears throughout the film alongside John Michael Higgins as commentators for the competitions.
Paul Brooks stated “First and foremost, we were looking for actors who had comedic instincts and thought we’d get lucky with terrific actors who happened to be funny and can actually dance and maybe sing. It turns out we did get lucky with our cast!” According to producer Elizabeth Banks, “The character Beca required someone who was grounded, who has a strong point of view on the world, who is funny and empathetic and someone who we can all relate to and root for." Of Kendrick's stating she said, "Anna is all those things, and there was no other choice for the movie.” Fellow producer Brooks said "I saw Anna in "Up in the Air" and thought it was the most exquisite, elegant, balanced, sublime performance. Anna was our first choice for the role of Beca."
When casting the character of Jesse, Max Handelman said "We were looking for a young John Cusack-type guy. We needed to find someone who was kind of awkward but not a geek, but not so cool that you’re not rooting for him." Skylar Astin was chosen for the role. Of Astin's audition, Banks said the chemistry between Skylar and Anna when they read together prior to shooting was "clear and they were able to riff off each other."
Rebel Wilson was recognized for her performance in the comedy film "Bridesmaids" upon auditioning for the role of Fat Amy, which she won instantly. Moore recalled Wilson singing Lady Gaga's "The Edge of Glory" while beating "on her chest with her fists". He said, "I didn’t even hear the end of the song because I was laughing so hard. There’s this beautiful openness to the way Rebel approaches everything, and that’s what works great for the character. She’s fearless". Adam DeVine was personally chosen by Banks and Handelman for the role of Bumper after they saw him on the television series "Workaholics". Banks confessed that she and her husband are "big "Workaholics" fans" and after watching one night during the film's casting, they saw DeVine and "immediately thought" he would be a good choice for Bumper. However, he declined because he wasn't a singer. However, DeVine eventually surprised Banks and Handelman with his vocal skills.
Anna Camp was chosen for the role of Aubrey. Producer Max Handelman said, "Elizabeth and I were huge fans of Anna’s from "True Blood". Aubrey is set up as the antagonist for Beca, and Beca’s already a bit hard-edged, so it was so important to find an actress who could play Aubrey as someone who could marshal the crazy but also was sympathetic."
Release.
The world premiere of "Pitch Perfect" took place on September 24, 2012 in Los Angeles, California. "Pitch Perfect" has earned $64,666,000 (63.5%) in the United States, and a further $37,200,000 (36.5%) elsewhere, for a worldwide box office gross of $101,866,000 since release. The film opened to limited release in the United States and Canada on September 28, 2012 and wide release in the United States and Canada on October 5, 2012. It grossed $1,755,935 upon its opening day of limited release and $4,889,050 on its wide release. In its opening weekend the film opened at number 3 behind "Taken 2" and "Hotel Transylvania" grossing $14,846,830 million. The opening weekend audience was 81 percent female, which is considered overwhelming. The opening weekend also attracted a younger audience with 55 percent of the opening weekend audience being under the age of 25. The film has become the second highest grossing Music Comedy film behind "School of Rock" ($81.2M). It is also the seventh highest grossing college comedy film behind "Road Trip" (68.5M). "Pitch Perfect" was released on Blu-ray and DVD on December 18, 2012
Critical Reception.
"Pitch Perfect" received generally positive reviews. It received an 81% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 124 reviews as well as 65 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 30 "generally favorable reviews". The film was mostly praised for its comedic approach, which some critics have compared to "Bring It On", as well as the film's flashy musical numbers and Rebel Wilson's performance. NPR's David Edelstein selected it as one of the top movies of the year and Entertainment Weekly chose the soundtrack as one of the year's best.
Possible sequel.
Producer Paul Brooks and director Jason Moore told "Variety" that since the reception to the film was good, a sequel could potentially happen next year. In December 2012, Skylar Astin revealed that he and Rebel Wilson had meetings with Universal Studios about the potential sequel.
