Spartacus is an American television series that premiered on Starz on January 22, 2010. The series was inspired by the historical figure of Spartacus, a Thracian gladiator who from 73 to 71 BC led a major slave uprising against the Roman Republic. Executive producers Steven S. DeKnight and Robert Tapert focused on structuring the events of Spartacus' obscure early life leading up to the beginning of historical records. The show has been rated TV-MA for graphic violence, strong sexual content, and coarse language.
After the completion of the first season titled , production for another season was delayed because lead actor Andy Whitfield was diagnosed with early-stage non-Hodgkin lymphoma so Starz produced a six-episode prequel mini-series entitled . When the actor's cancer recurred and he later died on September 11, 2011, Starz had actor Liam McIntyre for the role of Spartacus in the second season titled . On June 4, 2012, Starz announced that the upcoming third season, titled , would be the final season.
Plot.
"Blood and Sand".
The story begins with an unnamed Thracian's involvement in a unit of Roman auxiliary in a campaign against the Getae (Dacian tribes that occupied the regions of the Lower Danube, in what today is Bulgaria and Romania) under the command of the "legatus", Claudius Glaber. In 72-71 BC, Roman general Marcus Terentius Varro Lucullus, proconsul of the Roman province of Macedonia, marched against the Getae, who were allies of Rome's enemy, Mithridates VI of Pontus. The Getae frequently raid the Thracians' lands, so the Thracians are persuaded by Glaber to enlist in the Romans' service as auxiliaries. Glaber is persuaded by his wife Ilithyia to seek greater glory, decides to break off attacking the Getae and directly confront the forces of Mithridates in Asia Minor. The Thracian, feeling betrayed, leads a mutiny against Glaber, and returns to find his village destroyed. The Thracian and his wife Sura, are captured by Glaber the next day; the Thracian is condemned to die in the gladiator arena for his crime, while Sura is taken away, condemned to slavery. The Thracian is shipped to Capua in Italy, a center of gladiator training. Against all odds in the arena he slays the four gladiators appointed to execute him and becomes an instant sensation with the crowd. Senator Albinius commutes the punishment from death to slavery. The prisoner's true name unknown, Lentulus Batiatus, the owner of a "ludus" in Capua, suggests to name him "Spartacus", because he fought like the ferocious Thracian king of that name.
Noting well the Thracian's fierce raw talent and popularity with the masses, Batiatus purchases him for training within the walls of his "ludus" under the tutelage of Doctore, a former gladiator and fellow slave. He is befriended by Varro, a Roman who sold himself into slavery in order to pay his debts and support his family. He is harassed by more senior gladiators, notably Crixus, an undefeated Gaul, and Barca, a Carthaginian. Spartacus soon learns that Sura was sold to a Syrian slave trader. Batiatus, who has been unable to control Spartacus during his first days of training, promises to find Sura and reunite them in exchange for the promising neophyte's cooperation in the arena.
After many near-fatal ordeals and much further training Spartacus attains the status of a living legend and is named the "Champion of Capua". Batiatus arranges the purchase of Sura, but she is delivered mortally wounded, supposedly having been waylaid by bandits en route. Her murder was secretly ordered by Batiatus to keep Spartacus loyal and focused. Spartacus casts off his heritage as a Thracian and forgets his dream of freedom, becoming content with life as champion.
The turning point comes when Spartacus is set to fight his only friend in the ludus, Varro, in an exhibition match celebrating the coming to manhood of the Capuan magistrate's son, Numerius. Ilithyia, who has hated Spartacus since he embarrassed her husband Glaber by his mutiny, seduces the young man and convinces him to demand death for the loser of the match. Spartacus wins (as expected), and when the young man gives the "thumbs down", Batiatus, wishing to ingratiate himself with the boy's powerful father, forces Spartacus to comply and kill Varro. While suffering from both his wound in this match and his remorse and sorrow over having to kill his friend, Spartacus has fever dreams that lead him to discover that Batiatus arranged Sura's death. Knowing that it is all or nothing when it comes to resistance of his enslavement, he resolves to "kill them all" and lead a revolt against the ruling house he once fought for.
In order to get his revenge, Spartacus enlists the help of Crixus and the rest of the gladiators to defeat the house of Batiatus once and for all. A battle to the death between Crixus and Spartacus is arranged for the Capuan elite at the ludus. Doctore (who Batiatus refers to by his real name, Oenomaus) confronts Batiatus about Barca's death and Ashur's hand in it. Spartacus gains support from Mira who is tasked with opening the gate to the villa from the training area. Crixus resists aiding Spartacus in hopes of reuniting with Naevia; however, after learning he was weakened to ensure Spartacus' victory, at the last moment he joins with Spartacus. Doctore initially stops Spartacus from killing Batiatus. In the ensuing chaos of the gladiators killing the guards and some guests, Crixus persuades Doctore to join him with Spartacus, Illithyia escapes and has her guards seal the door to the ludus from the outside, Doctore, making good on his word, tries to kill Ashur but ends up being eluded, Crixus grievously wounds Batiatus' wife, Lucretia, with a sword stab to her abdomen piercing her womb and killing their unborn child, Aurelia kills Numerius after revealing to him that Varro was her husband, and Spartacus finally kills Batiatus in front of the seriously wounded Lucretia. After the massacre, Spartacus vows to make "Rome tremble".
"Gods of the Arena".
The mini-series features the history of the House of Batiatus and the city of Capua before the arrival of Spartacus. The main story opens not long after Quintus Lentulus Batiatus becomes lanista, manager of the House's slaves and gladiators, when he takes over his father's ludus.
Batiatus is quickly revealed as having grand ambitions, beginning with stepping out of his father's shadow. As the story progresses, Batiatus continues to seek greatness for the House under "his" leadership, as well as recognition for his own name. By his side stands his devoted wife, Lucretia, who is willing to help her husband achieve his goals regardless of the cost. Batiatus soon places all of his fortunes on one man whom he believes will bring fame and glory to the House of Batiatus, his best gladiator, the Celt Gannicus. Gannicus is a skilled warrior almost without equal, who wields his dual swords in the arena with great prowess. However, Batiatus' opponents would not sit idly and allow his ascent to greatness without challenge.
Purchased as an undisciplined and disheveled recruit in the first episode, Crixus the Gaul initially endures mockery and threats of death, before eventually rising to become a gladiator of skill and fame second only to Gannicus. As Batiatus fends off repeated attempts by his professional rival Tullius to obtain Gannicus, his relationships with his father Titus and friend Solonius begin to suffer the strain of Quintus' relentless ambition. Former champion gladiator Oenomaus reluctantly retires from combat to become Doctore, while Syrian recruits Ashur and Dagan become fierce enemies as Ashur tries to prove himself worthy of being a gladiator. Veteran gladiators Barca and Gannicus accept the rising star of Crixus but fear that their own careers will suffer, as the machinations of Batiatus and Lucretia to court Capua's elite end in tragedy for several members of the household. Against all of this, the city's splendid new arena nears completion and with it the opening games that will make men into gods. When the arena opens, the match between Solonius' and Batiatus' gladiators compete with each other. Batiatus's gladiators prevail in the contest. Gannicus again proves himself to be the champion of Capua and the god of the arena and by virtue of his win against Solonius' gladiators, becomes the champion of Capua and gains his freedom.
"Vengeance".
After the bloody escape from the House of Batiatus that concluded "Spartacus: Blood and Sand", the gladiator rebellion begins to strike fear into the heart of the Roman Republic in "Spartacus: Vengeance". Praetor Claudius Glaber and his Roman troops are sent to Capua to crush Spartacus' growing band of freed slaves before they can inflict further damage. Spartacus is given a choice between satisfying his personal need for vengeance against the man who condemned his wife to slavery and eventual death, or making the larger sacrifices necessary to keep his budding army from breaking apart.
"War of the Damned".
This will be the final season of Spartacus and began airing January 25, 2013.
Style.
Spartacus is presented with a slightly over the top, overexposed video stylization, akin to the style used in the film "300".
The program is preceded by a statement that it is a "historical portrayal of ancient Roman society that contains graphic violence and adult content". Incidental nudity and scenes of intense sexual and violent nature are present throughout.
Production.
After filming in early 2009 and promoting for some time, it was announced that Starz would premiere "Spartacus: Blood and Sand" on Jan 22, 2010. On December 22, 2009, a month before it premiered, it was announced that the show was renewed by Starz for a second season.
On March 9, 2010, IGN.com reported that production of Season 2 had been delayed due to star Whitfield being diagnosed with early-stage non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Due to the delay, Starz announced in May 2010 that it would be developing a six-episode prequel series, entitled "Spartacus: Gods of the Arena", to allow star actor Whitfield to seek medical treatment. The prequel featured both new and returning stars, headlined by John Hannah as Batiatus and Lucy Lawless as Lucretia. Star Andy Whitfield also briefly appeared in a voice-over role. Production began in New Zealand in the summer of 2010 and the prequel aired beginning January 2011.
In September of 2010, Starz announced that Whitfield's cancer had returned and that he had decided not to return for the production of Season 2, then tentatively scheduled for September 2011. Starz announced that the show would nevertheless continue, and planned on recasting the role of Spartacus in the wake of Whitfield's exit. Whitfield gave his blessing for Starz to recast the role when he announced he would not return.
"Spartacus" series creator Steven S. DeKnight said in an interview, "There are a "couple of very strong candidates" for the role of Spartacus, and season two should begin production in New Zealand in April 2011. DeKnight added that the "Spartacus" producers and Starz executives weren't always sure they would go forward without Andy Whitfield, who they said had brought "gravity and heart" to the role of the famous warrior. "It's unheard of to recast your titular character in a television show, and we did a lot of soul searching about whether we even wanted to try", DeKnight said. "And then Andy said, 'I really think the show should go forward without me. I give you the blessing. I want this story told. On January 17, 2011, it was announced that Australian film and TV actor Liam McIntyre had been selected to replace Whitfield.
On February 26, 2011 interview with "Entertainment Weekly", DeKnight revealed that the second season was set to air "the end of January" 2012. Additionally, he revealed that Lesley-Ann Brandt, the actress who portrayed the slave Naevia, would also not be able to return for season 2 due to the delay in production. On August 1, 2011, Starz released a trailer indicating that the long-delayed second season would premiere in January 2012, under the new sub-title, "Spartacus: Vengeance".
Andy Whitfield died on September 11, 2011, from complications of non-Hodgkin lymphoma. He was 39 years old.
Over two months before the premiere, on November 7, 2011, Starz announced that it was renewing "Spartacus" for a third season–a second year with Liam McIntyre in the titular role; and fourth year on the air overall.
The second season eventually premiered on January 27, 2012.
On June 1, 2012 Starz released a teaser video of the next season on YouTube.
On June 4, 2012, Starz announced that the 3rd season of Spartacus (War of the Damned) will be the final one for the series.
Starz released the first full trailer for Spartacus: War of the Damned on July 13, 2012.
Other media.
Board game.
In 2012 Gale Force Nine announced the creation of licensed board game based on the Spartacus series. The English language release of the game "Spartacus: A Game of Blood and Treachery" had a limited release at Gen Con 2012 and a general release to game and hobby stores on September 28, 2012.
Comics.
In 2009, Devil's Due published a four part prequel comic series, titled "Spartacus - Blood And Sand". Each issue spotlighted a character from the upcoming television series, mostly the minor gladiator rivals of the main cast.
The series was adapted as a 4-part motion comic adaptation called "Spartacus - Blood and Sand - Motion Comic". Ray Park and Heath Freeman were cast. Kyle Newman was the director, and the producers were Andy Collen and Jeff Krelitz.
Novels.
In 2012 Titan Books announced the publication of a series of novels based on Spartacus: Blood and Sand. The first one, titled "Spartacus: Swords & Ashes", was written by J.M. Clements and released on January 3rd, 2012.
The second book in the series, "Spartacus: Morituri" by Mark Morris, is expected in August 2012.
Video games.
In 2012, Ubisoft announced that they will be publishing a video game based on the series. The game, titled "Spartacus Legends", is being developed by Kung Fu Factory and will be released in Winter 2013 on Xbox Live and the PlayStation Network.
Reception.
The premiere episode of the series set a record for Starz, with 553,000 viewers on their network, and another 460,000 on Encore, where the show was available only that weekend. For the rest of the season the show had an average of 1.285 million viewers.
Critical reception of the first episode was mixed; the review aggregate website Metacritic which assigns a normalized average score out of 100 gave the show a score of 54% based on 22 reviews.
Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" gave it the grade B+, saying it "might prove to be the not-at-all-guilty pleasure of the season."
Barry Garron of the "Hollywood Reporter" suggested that with "such thin stories... it's small wonder that sex and violence are used to take up the slack." Robert Lloyd of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote that John Hannah as Batiatus "keeps the show grounded with a persuasive portrait of a man engaged in a stressful daily business" and called Whitfield as Spartacus "handsome and buff and smart and beastly."
Mark Perigard of the "Boston Herald" gave the season finale a positive review, rating it a B+. He commented on the improvement of the series throughout its first season.
Broadcast.
The series aired in Canada on TMN beginning on January 25, 2010. RTL 5 announced in their January newsletter that "Spartacus: Blood and Sand" will debut in the Netherlands in March. In the United Kingdom, Bravo began airing the series on May 25, 2010. Following the axe of Bravo on UK television, Sky1 has now picked up the rights to the series and will air all subsequent seasons. The series is also scheduled to premiere in Poland on HBO Poland starting from June 19, 2010 and in Hungary on HBO Magyarország starting from June 1, 2010. The series airs in Ireland on TV3. In Brazil, the show airs on Globosat HD. In Turkey the show releases on CNBC-E TV, while in Italy Sky Television is the broadcaster who gained the rights of the series. In India and Pakistan, the show is currently airing (as of June 2011) on HBO. In Slovenia, the series started airing on Kanal A on 2 January 2012, from Monday to Friday at 9.45 pm.
