Scandal is an American political thriller television series starring Kerry Washington. Created by Shonda Rhimes, it debuted on ABC on April 5, 2012. Kerry Washington's character, Olivia Pope, is partially based on former George Bush administration press aide Judy Smith, who serves as a co-executive producer. The show takes place in Washington, D.C. and focuses on Olivia Pope's crisis management firm, Pope & Associates, and its staff, as well as staff at the White House.
Plot.
Olivia Pope (Kerry Washington) dedicates her life to protecting the public images of the nation's elite and making sure their secrets never get out. Olivia is a former White House Communications Director for the president, but has left to start her own crisis management firm, Olivia Pope and Associates. She is hoping to begin a new chapter of her life, but is finding out that she cannot leave parts of her past behind without having a definite soft side.
Olivia Pope and Associates staff includes Stephen Finch (Henry Ian Cusick), a womanizer considering settling down, Harrison Wright (Columbus Short), a smooth and efficient litigator, Abby Whelan (Darby Stanchfield), the firm's investigator, Huck Finn (Guillermo Diaz), a hacker with a CIA past, and recent recruit Quinn Perkins (Katie Lowes), a fresh faced lawyer with a world-shattering secret.
Series overview.
Season One: 2012.
The first season of the show introduced Olivia Pope and the various members of her firm, as well as President of the United States Fitzgerald Grant (Tony Goldwyn) and Cyrus Beene (Jeff Perry), his chief of staff. Season one focused on the lives of all the team members, the relationship between Olivia and her former employer, the president, and the mystery surrounding Amanda Tanner (Liza Weil) and her involvement with the White House, among other cases the team solves.
Season Two: 2012–2013.
Several cast changes occurred including Henry Ian Cusick's exit as Stephen Finch and Bellamy Young and Joshua Malina being bumped up to series regulars. Season Two began airing in September in the same time slot.
Production.
Conception and development.
In early 2011 it was announced that Shonda Rhimes was developing a new pilot. In February, Kerry Washington was cast in a leading role. Henry Ian Cusick also landed a role with Washington. On February 28, 2011 it was announced that Tony Goldwyn landed the role as the president. In May 2011, ABC picked up the pilot as a mid-season replacement, During the Winter Television Critics Association Press Tour, it was announced that the show would premiere April 5, 2012 after "Grey's Anatomy", relocating "Private Practice" to Tuesday nights.
The program was renewed for a second season on May 11, 2012, in the same Thursday timeslot, while "Private Practice" remains in the new Tuesday evening timeslot to finish its final season. Rhimes has stated that the second season will likely be thirteen episodes or less.
Critical reception.
To be perfectly honest, after watching four episodes of "Scandal", I'm not 100 percent clear on what it is that Olivia and her team (most of them fellow lawyers who don't practice law) do, nor on exactly what the show is. I'm also not entirely sure that it matters. "Scandal" is a good example of what a show is about being far less important than how it's about it.
All the tropes, cliches and (especially) soap conventions creator Shonda Rhimes has poured so generously into ""Grey's Anatomy"" and ""Private Practice"" over the years have been poured right back into this Beltway potboiler. The hairpin plot twists. The whiplash character reveals. The bumptious moralizing. The Strong Woman/Wronged Woman character type, and its direct corollary, Weak, Middle-Aged, Married Man Who Secretly Likes Hookers. It's all here!
Broadcast.
In the United States "Scandal" airs on ABC on Thursday evenings at 10pm/9pm CT. The program airs at the same time in Canada through the CityTV television system with simsubbing of the ABC feed.
Ratings.
On January 10, 2013, Scandal acheived a series-high 2.8 18-49 rating, and 8.37 million viewers.
Home Release.
The first season DVD was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment under the ABC Studios label.
