Alecia Beth Moore (born September 8, 1979), better known by her stage name Pink (stylized as P!nk), is an American singer-songwriter, musician and actress. Pink released her first single, There You Go and her debut album, Can't Take Me Home in 2000. They were followed by two further singles, Most Girls and You Make Me Sick. Although it was not her most successful album, it was still certified platinum in the United Kingdom and 2× Platinum in the United States. In 2001 she released her second album M!ssundaztood. Just Like a Pill, one of four singles from the album, became Pink's first number-one single reaching the top of the UK Singles Chart. In November 2003, Pink released her third album, Try This. Although the album charted highly in most countries, its single releases Trouble, God Is a DJ and Last to Know did not fare as well, as her run of top-ten hits in the United States ended. Her fourth studio album, I'm Not Dead, was released in April 2006; it generated seven hit singles, including Stupid Girls, U + Ur Hand and Who Knew. Pink's fifth album, Funhouse, was released in late 2008 and was preceded by her first solo number one on the Billboard Hot 100, So What. In 2012 Pink released her sixth album The Truth About Love which debuted at number one in multiple countries including the US and Australia the album was a huge success worldwide. The album was preceded by the release of three singles; Blow Me (One Last Kiss) released in July 2012 and Try released in October 2012 and Just Give Me A Reason in March 2013.
Pink has contributed several songs to film soundtracks. In 2001, she collaborated with Lil' Kim, Christina Aguilera and Mýa on the title song for the film Moulin Rouge!, entitled Lady Marmalade. The song was a worldwide success; it charted in the top three in several countries, including Germany, France, the United Kingdom and the United States. Pink also recorded a song, Feel Good Time, for the 2003 film . It achieved the most success in the UK, where it charted at number three. 
Pink has sold over 43 Million Albums And 80 Million Singles worldwide making her one of the best selling artists in the world.. Her career accolades include three Grammy Awards, two Brit Awards and five MTV Video Music Awards, in addition to having eighteen Top 20 Hits on the "Billboard" charts and three #1 hits on the Billboard Hot 100. In 2009 "Billboard" magazine named Pink the #1 pop musician of the decade, and in 2012 VH1 named Pink #10 on their list of the 100 Greatest Women in Music.
Life and career.
1979–98: Early life and career beginnings.
Pink was born on September 8, 1979, in Abington, Pennsylvania to Judith, a nurse, and Jim Moore, a Vietnam veteran. Her father is Catholic and her mother is Jewish, and she has ancestors who emigrated from Ireland, Germany, and Lithuania. Pink grew up in Doylestown, where she attended Kutz Elementary School, Lenape Middle School, and Central Bucks High School West. Her father played guitar and sang songs, thus inspiring Pink from an early age to be a pop star. She was also a gymnast for eight years, saying in an interview that it was her first dream to be an Olympic gymnast. In high school, Pink joined her first band, Middleground, but it disbanded upon losing a battle of the bands competition. Pink developed her voice early in life. Although a healthy baby at birth, she quickly developed asthma that plagued her through her early years. As a teenager, she wrote lyrics as an outlet for her feelings, and her mother commented, "Her initial writings were always very introspective. Some of it was very black, and very deep, almost worrisome."
She began performing in Philadelphia clubs when she was 14. Her stage name, "P!nk", which she thought was a good nickname after Anthony Ragland suggested it, was a nickname of hers when she was singing in the clubs. Pink said, "I was extreme. I went through phases from skateboarder, to hip-hopper, to rave child, to lead singer in a band. I did it all, and all at the same time." At 14, she was convinced to audition to become a member of the all-female group Basic Instinct, and earned a spot in the lineup. Ultimately, the group disbanded without releasing any material. At 16, together with two other teenage girls, Stephanie Galligan and Chrissy Conway, Pink formed the R&B group Choice. A copy of their first song, "Key to My Heart", was sent to LaFace Records in Atlanta, Georgia, where L.A. Reid overheard it and arranged for the group to fly there so he could see them perform. After that, he signed them to a record deal. As the three girls were under 18 at the time, their parents had to cosign the contract. The group relocated to Atlanta and recorded an album, which was never released, and "Key to My Heart" appeared on the soundtrack to the 1996 film Kazaam. During a Christmas party, Reid gave Pink an ultimatum: go solo or go home. Choice disbanded in 1998.
1999–2000: Musical debut and "Can't Take Me Home".
Following the failure of Choice, Pink began working on her debut solo album under LaFace Records. When working on the album, Pink worked with producers such as Babyface, Kandi Burruss and Tricky Stewart. The album's lead single, "There You Go", was released on February 8, 2000 in the US and May of the same year in the UK. "There You Go" was produced by Kevin "Ske'kspere" Briggs, who had previously worked with female R&B group TLC. The single became a commercial success for Pink, becoming her first Top 10 entry on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, where it peaked at #7. It was also a success on the Hot Dance Club Play chart, peaking at #8. The single went on to receive a Gold certification from the RIAA, for sales exceeding 500,000 copies. The song was also a success outside of the US. In the United Kingdom, the song peaked at #6, and its highest peak was in Australia, where it reached #2. The single received mixed to positive critical reviews, with one review calling it the highlight of Pink's debut album. Pink's debut album, "Can't Take Me Home", was released on April 4, 2000. The album, seen as her only R&B album, was a commercial success. Despite a moderate peak of 26 on the Billboard 200 album chart, the album went on to be certified 2x Platinum by the RIAA, for sales exceeding 2 million copies in the US alone. The album was certified multi platinum in Australia and Canada as well, where it peaked on the albums chart at #10 and #20, respectively. The album was also certified Platinum in the United Kingdom, where it peaked at #13. Critical reception to the album was mixed. Allmusic gave the album four out of five stars, stating "thanks to LA Reid and Babyface's production and Pink's engaging talents, it's a promising first effort all the same." "Entertainment Weekly" gave the album a mixed review, and awarded the album two and half stars, claiming "All in all, Home's just another brick in the R&B wall."
"Most Girls", the second single from "Can't Take Me Home", was released on September 18, 2000. The single expanded on Pink's commercial success, and became her highest peaking single in numerous countries at the time of its release. It peaked at #4 on the Billboard Hot 100 on the week ending November 14, 2000. It became her first #1 single on any chart, when it peaked at #1 on the Australian singles chart. It also reached #5 in the United Kingdom, one spot higher than her previous single had peaked. For the US release of the song, a dance remix of the single was made and was used by most radio stations. The third and final single, "You Make Me Sick", was released on January 15, 2001. It became her third Top 40 hit on the Billboard Hot 100, where it peaked at #33 on the chart. This made it her lowest peaking single at the time of its release. Despite being successful in numerous other countries, it failed to match the success of Pink's first two singles. It peaked at #25 in Australia, and #9 in the United Kingdom. This made it her lowest peaking singles in both of those countries as well. Pink went on to tour with pop band 'N Sync throughout the Summer of 2000 in North America, as the opening act for their No Strings Attached Tour. She performed in over 20 different shows during the tours run throughout North America, along with Sisqo. The tour was financially successful, grossing over $70 million by the time of its completion. Pink apparently met the band during an awards show in mid-2000, and engaged band member Joey Fatone in a conversation about hair dye. The conversation eventually led to Pink touring with the band.
2001–02: Rise to fame with "Lady Marmalade" and "Missundaztood".
In 2001, Pink was a part of "Lady Marmalade" alongside singers Christina Aguilera, Mýa, and rapper Lil' Kim for the soundtrack of the film "Moulin Rouge!". Produced by hip-hop producers Rockwilder and Missy Elliott, the song topped the charts in countries including New Zealand, the UK, Australia and the U.S., where it became the most successful airplay-only single in history, and also became Pink's first #1 single. The success of the single was helped by its music video, which was popular on music channels and won the MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year. The song won Pink's first Grammy Award for Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals, and provided a boost for the four performers' careers. In a VH1 interview, Pink stated she had to fight with Christina Aguilera's manager to sing the high parts in the song.
Tired of being marketed as another cookie cutter pop act and eager to be seen as a more serious songwriter and musician, and to perform the type of music she wanted to, Pink took her sound in a new direction and sought more artistic or creative control during the recording of her second album, "Missundaztood", which was stylized as "M!ssundaztood". She recruited Linda Perry, former singer of 4 Non Blondes (one of Pink's favorites in her teenage years), who said Pink opened up to her: "In the beginning I just said: 'What do you feel?', and she (Pink) would just sit behind the piano and sing." Pink moved into Perry's Los Angeles home where the pair spent several months writing songs for the album. Perry co-wrote and co-produced the album with Dallas Austin and Scott Storch, and according to VH1's "Driven" program, Antonio "LA" Reid of LaFace Records was not initially content with the new music Pink was making. The album, named "Missundaztood" because of Pink's belief that people had a wrong image of her, was released in November 2001.
Its lead single, "Get the Party Started" (written and produced by Perry), went top five in the U.S. and many other countries, and #1 in Australia. At the 2002 MTV Video Music Awards, the music video won in the categories of Best Female Video and Best Dance Video. The album's other singles—"Don't Let Me Get Me", the Dallas Austin-produced "Just Like a Pill", and "Family Portrait"—were also radio and chart successes, with "Just Like a Pill" becoming Pink's first solo UK number-one hit. The singles were substantial hits on Adult Top 40 radio. "Missundaztood" was certified gold or platinum status in more than 20 countries. It was the second best-selling album in the UK during 2002. "Missundaztood" and "Get the Party Started" earned nominations at the 2003 Grammy Awards for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance, respectively. Faith Hill's 2002 album, "Cry", features a song co-written by Pink and Perry. In 2002, Pink started a headlining American, European and Australian tour, the Party Tour; later, she became a supporting act for Lenny Kravitz's American tour.
2003–04: "Try This" and other works.
In mid-2003, Pink contributed the song "Feel Good Time" to the soundtrack of the film ', in which she had a cameo appearance as a motocross race ramp owner/promoter. "Feel Good Time" was co-written by singer Beck, produced by electronic music artist William Orbit and based on the song, "Fresh Garbage", by the band, Spirit. It became Pink's first single to miss the top 40 on "Billboards Hot 100 chart, although it was a hit in Europe and Australia. During the same period, a song Pink co-wrote with Damon Elliott was released on Mýa's album "Moodring".
"Feel Good Time" was included on non-U.S. editions of Pink's third album, "Try This", which was released on November 11, 2003. Eight of the 13 tracks were co-written with Tim Armstrong of the band Rancid; Linda Perry was featured on the album as a writer and musician. Though "Try This" reached the top ten on album charts in the U.S., Canada, the UK and Australia, sales were considerably lower than those of "Missundaztood"; it went platinum in the U.S. The singles "Trouble" and "God Is a DJ" did not reach the U.S. top 40 but went top ten in other countries, and "Last to Know" was released as a single outside North America. "Trouble" earned Pink her second Grammy Award (for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance) at the 2004 Grammy Awards, and "Feel Good Time" was nominated in the category of Best Pop Collaboration with Vocals. She toured extensively on the Try This Tour through Europe and Australia, where the album was better received.
2005–09: Marriage, "I'm Not Dead", film debut, and "Funhouse".
In 2005, Pink collaborated with Lisa Marie Presley on the track "Shine" on Presley's second album "Now What". She took a break to write the songs for her fourth album, "I'm Not Dead", which she said she titled as such because "It's about being alive and feisty and not sitting down and shutting up even though people would like you to." Pink worked with producers Max Martin, Billy Mann, Christopher Rojas, Butch Walker, Lukasz Gottwald, and Josh Abraham on the album. The album's release in April 2006 through LaFace Records was a substantial success throughout the world, particularly in Australia. The album reached the top ten in the U.S., the top five in the UK, #1 in Germany, and sat at #1 in Australia for two non-consecutive weeks, though it was Pink's lowest seller in the U.S. until the success of the single "U + Ur Hand" in early 2007. The album ranked 96th in the USA during 2007.
Lead single, "Stupid Girls", was Pink's biggest U.S. hit since 2002 and earned a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Its music video, in which she parodies celebrities such as Lindsay Lohan, Jessica Simpson, Mary-Kate Olsen, and Paris Hilton, won the MTV Video Music Award for Best Pop Video. Subsequent singles "Who Knew" and "U + Ur Hand" were substantial hits in Australia and Europe, and they later became top ten singles in the U.S. in 2007. The non-U.S. singles were "Nobody Knows", a minor hit in the UK, Australia and Germany; "Dear Mr. President", an open letter to the U.S. President George W. Bush (featuring the Indigo Girls) and a #1 hit in Belgium, a top five hit in Germany, Australia and other countries; "Leave Me Alone (I'm Lonely)", a UK top 40 and Australian top five entry; and "'Cuz I Can". The album has sold over 1.3 million copies in the U.S., over 700,000 in Australia. Proving popular in Australia, with six top five singles, and a record-breaking 62 weeks in the top 10; so far the album has gone 10 times platinum. In June 2008, the "I'm Not Dead" album returned to the top 50 of the Australian ARIA charts and remained there until November 2009. In June 2009 the album returned once again to the Australian top ten album charts in its 142nd week in the national top fifty. It re-entered at No. 10 on the back of her mammoth Funhouse Tour, and as of 2010, has spent 162 weeks in the top 50 of the Australian ARIA albums chart.
In support of the album, Pink embarked on the world I'm Not Dead Tour, for which ticket sales in Australia were particularly high; she sold approximately 307,000 tickets in Australia, giving her the record for the biggest concert attendance for an arena tour by a female artist. One of the London shows on the tour was taped and released as a DVD, "" where she sang Linda Perry's "Whats Up?". In 2006, Pink was chosen to sing the theme song for "NBC Sunday Night Football", "Waiting All Day for Sunday Night", which is a take on "I Hate Myself for Lovin' You" by Joan Jett. She contributed a cover of Rufus's "Tell Me Something Good" to the soundtrack of the film "Happy Feet", and lent her name to PlayStation to promote the PSP, a special pink edition of which was released. Pink collaborated with several other artists in 2006 and 2007, when she opened for Justin Timberlake on the American leg of his FutureSex/LoveShow Tour. She sang on the Indigo Girls album "Despite Our Differences". She was featured on India.Arie's song "I Am Not My Hair" from the Lifetime Television film "Why I Wore Lipstick to My Mastectomy". She wrote a song ("I Will") for Natalia's third album, "Everything & More". "Outside of You", another song she co-wrote, was recorded by dance-pop singer Hilary Duff and released on her 2007 album "Dignity". Pink recorded a song with Annie Lennox and twenty-two other female acts for Lennox's fourth solo studio album, "Songs of Mass Destruction". Titled "Sing", it was written as an anthem for HIV/AIDS, according to Lennox's website. In December 2007, a special edition "Pink Box", which comprises her second to fourth albums and the DVD "Live in Europe", was released in Australia. It reached the top twenty on the albums chart and was certified Gold, selling over 35,000 units.
On August 7, 2008, Pink's single "So What" was leaked online, and radio stations across Australia were quick to give it massive airplay. Within less than 6 hours from the leak, "So What" was voted No.1 on Nova 100 Melbourne and shot to No.1 on the Today Network's national radio Hot30 Countdown. It also shot straight to #1 on the official Australian and British iTunes single downloads charts. On August 22, Pink announced a new track titled "Crystal Ball". On September 18, 2008, "So What" became the first solo #1 of her career on the Billboard Hot 100.
Pink was the guest of honor at the 2008 ARIA Music Awards held in Sydney, Australia, in October 2008, where she sang "So What". On November 3, 2008, "Funhouse" debuted at #1 on the ARIA charts, certified two times platinum and selling over 86,000 units in its first week. Pink's Funhouse Tour sold out all concerts in Australia, and she performed a total of 58 shows around the country between May and August 2009, performing for more than 600,000 Australian fans. The Funhouse Tour started in France on February 24 and continued through Europe until mid-May, with supporting act Raygun. Pink then performed a series of shows in Australia. On November 23, 2008, Pink performed her second single from "Funhouse", "Sober" at the American Music Awards. The third single was "Please Don't Leave Me", with a video directed by Dave Meyers. The fourth single was "Funhouse", although "Bad Influence" was released in Australia prior to "Funhouse"'s release as a promotional single for the tour. In May 2009, Pink released a four-CD set of her albums "Can't Take Me Home" / "Missundaztood" / "Try This" / "I'm Not Dead", excluding her current album "Funhouse". The album peaked at #7 in the UK Album Chart. In 2009, Pink performed in The People Speak a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's "A People's History of the United States".
On September 13, 2009, Pink performed "Sober" while doing a trapeze act at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, where she was nominated for Best Female Video. On January 31, 2010, Pink did another trapeze act in the form of aerial silks at the 2010 Grammy Awards, this time performing the song "Glitter in the Air". She received a standing ovation. The music of Pink was the theme of the October 4, 2009 episode of "Australian Idol".
2010–2011: "Greatest Hits... So Far!!!", and "Happy Feet Two".
Pink was a soloist in the remake of the 1985 charity single, "We Are the World". Pink collaborated on the 2010 Herbie Hancock album, "The Imagine Project", in which she sang Peter Gabriel's "Don't Give Up" with John Legend and contributed vocals to John Lennon's "Imagine" with Seal, India.Arie, Jeff Beck, Konono N°1, Oumou Sangare and others. Pink was featured on a track titled "Won't Back Down" for Eminem's 2010 album "Recovery". Eminem explained that he included Pink because he "felt like she would smash this record."
On July 15, 2010, Pink fell during one of her aerial tricks during a concert in Nurnberg, Germany, where she fell out of a harness which was supposed to carry her across the crowd. She was rushed off stage and taken to a local hospital but wasn't seriously injured. She was treated by American doctors Chris Lorch and Jeremy Nicholson. Pink moved a total of 3,000,000 concert tickets on her 2009–10 worldwide tour, according to a statement on behalf of U.K. tour promoter Marshall Arts.
In the first week of October 2010, Pink released "Raise Your Glass", the first single from her first compilation album, "Greatest Hits... So Far!!!". The song celebrates a decade since Pink's debut in 2000 and is dedicated to her fans who have been supporting her over the years. The song peaked at #1 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, becoming Pink's tenth Top 10 hit, and her second solo #1 on the chart.
On November 12, 2010, Pink released her first compilation album, entitled "Greatest Hits... So Far!!!", and almost a month after that released her second single, named "Fuckin' Perfect." The song reached #2 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and peaked at #1 in Germany.
Pink voiced the character of Gloria in "Happy Feet Two", which premiered on November 18, 2011 in the United States. She also sings the movie's theme song, "Bridge of Light". Pink will also have her first leading role, in an upcoming dramatic comedy entitled "Thanks for Sharing", starring alongside Gwyneth Paltrow and Mark Ruffalo.
On October 7, 2011, RCA Music Group announced that it would be disbanding Jive Records, along with Arista Records and J Records. With the shutdown, Pink and all other artists previously signed to the labels, would release any future material through RCA Records.
2012-present: "The Truth About Love".
On February 29, 2012, Pink took to her Twitter account and confirmed that she was in the writing process for her new record which was eventually released on September 18, 2012. On June 19, 2012, Pink announced via a video on Twitter that the first single from her then upcoming album would be called, "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)". The single was produced by Greg Kurstin. It premiered on Pink's official website on July 2, 2012, and was released to iTunes the next day, July 3, 2012. On July 4, 2012, Pink announced that her sixth studio album would be called "The Truth About Love" and that it would be released on September 18, 2012, with a world tour to follow. On September 6, 2012, Pink performed, "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)", live for the first time at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards. Also on the same day, the second single, "Try", was released to radio. On September 18, 2012, Pink announced the first dates of her The Truth About Love Tour.
On November 13, 2012 VH1 premiered their 87th episode of Storytellers, giving background on some of Pink's newer songs as well as classic hits. Pink performed at the 2012 American Music Awards on November 18. In addition to her work for her album 'The Truth About Love' Pink also wrote two new tracks for Cher's new album, "I Walk Alone" and "You Can't Go Home" The album was in stores in December 2012. Additionally, Pink appeared on the track "Guns and Roses" on T.I.'s album "".
On February 5, 2013, Pink's music video for "Just Give Me a Reason" featuring Nate Ruess of fun. was released to her official Vevo channel on YouTube. On February 13, 2013; Pink kicked off her 6th tour, Truth About Love Tour in Phoenix, Arizona.
Artistry.
Influences.
Pink has named Madonna and Janis Joplin as two of her biggest musical influences. She stated that 
"I wanted to do it my way with my career, and I had this arrogant notion that people weren't just interested in my music but me as a person. That was my bit of arrogance, I guess. That's something I learned from Madonna. I was a fan right from the first time I heard 'Holiday'."
Of Joplin she expressed: 
"She was so inspiring by singing blues music when it wasn't culturally acceptable for white women, and she wore her heart on her sleeve. She was so witty and charming and intelligent, but she also battled an ugly-duckling syndrome. I would love to play her in a movie."
Legacy.
Pink has been described as an artist who has changed the scope of pop music, but has hardly received recognition for it. Referring to her as a "powerhouse vocalist", Ann Powers of the "Los Angeles Times" asked, "Why isn't she an even bigger star?" Rob Sheffield of "Rolling Stone" commented: "I think people respond to her sense of independence and dedication. It inspires people ... This is a prolific pop artist who is sometimes famous and successful, sometimes obscure, who nonetheless keeps making her own kind of music. Every few years, the spotlight comes back around to her—but her fans can trust that when the spotlight moves along, Pink will keep on writing Pink songs." Powers adds that her mix of rock-style rebellion, emotional rawness, humor and "infectious" dance beats created "a model for the mashup approach of latter-day divas such as Avril Lavigne, Katy Perry, Ke$ha, and even Rihanna." James Montgomery of MTV describes her as "a fabulously fearless pop artist" who can "out-sing almost anyone out there. She can out-crazy Gaga or Lily. She's the total pop-star package, everything you'd want in a singer/entertainer/icon. And still, she remains oddly off the radar. Such is the price of busting borders, I suppose."
British soul singer Adele considers Pink's performance at Brixton Academy in London as one of "the most defining moments" in her life, saying "It was the Missundaztood record, so I was about 13 or 14. I had never heard, being in the room, someone sing like that live. I remember sort of feeling like I was in a wind tunnel, her voice just hitting me. It was incredible."
Image.
Pink, aside from her musical feats, has also become known for her style and work outside of music. She has often been seen as "adventurous" with her hair, and has had styles such as fluorescent spikes to pink-streaked dreadlocks to a pitch-black skater cut. On her style, she told In Style "I'm eclectic. I'm a tomboy, but I'm kind of a hippie and kind of a gangster [...] I don't know if that's a good thing, but it is my thing."
Pink is a prominent campaigner for PETA, contributing her voice toward causes such as the protest against KFC. In conjunction with PETA, she criticized the Australian wool industry over its use of mulesing. In January 2007, she stated that she had been misled by PETA about mulesing and that she had not done enough research before lending her name to the campaign. Her campaigning led to a headlining concert called PAW (Party for Animals Worldwide) in Cardiff, Wales on August 21, 2007.
In June 2012, Pink told Cosmopolitan magazine that her diet is mostly vegan, but she occasionally eats chicken and fish.
Pink is also involved with several charities, including Human Rights Campaign, ONE Campaign, Prince's Trust, New York Restoration Project, Run for the Cure Foundation, Save the Children, Take Back the Night, UNICEF and World Society for the Protection of Animals. As of May 2008, Pink has been officially recognized as an advocate for the RSPCA in Australia. On February 16, 2009, Pink announced she was donating $250,000 to the Red Cross Bushfire Appeal to aid the victims of the bushfires that swept through the Australian state of Victoria earlier that month. Pink stated that she wanted to make "a tangible expression of support." Pink also donated money to Autism Speaks.
On August 6, 2012 Pink became the newest CoverGirl. "With the signing of Pink, COVERGIRL is celebrating 'Beauty with an Edge' and who better to deliver that message than someone who embodies art and attitude. Pink and COVERGIRL are looking to inspire women to celebrate their individuality and never settle for a single beauty standard."
Personal life.
Pink met professional motocross racer Carey Hart at the 2001 X Games in Philadelphia. Following a brief separation in 2003, Pink proposed to Hart in June 2005 during a Mammoth Lakes motocross race by holding up a "Will you marry me?" sign on her pit board. They married in Costa Rica on January 7, 2006.
After months of speculation, Pink announced in February 2008 that she and Hart had separated. Hart subsequently appeared in the video for her 2008 song "So What", which deals with their separation and pending divorce. The couple sought marriage counseling during their separation in hopes of reconciliation. In February 2010, Pink confirmed that she and Hart were back together, and announced the following November that they were expecting their first child. On June 2, 2011, Pink gave birth to their daughter, Willow Sage Hart. Pink is a supporter of breastfeeding.
Also in 2013 Hart appears with Pink in the video for her song "Just Give Me a Reason"
