Beasts of the Southern Wild is a 2012 American fantasy drama film directed by Benh Zeitlin and written by Zeitlin and Lucy Alibar from Alibar's one-act play "Juicy and Delicious". After playing at film festivals, it was released on June 27, 2012, in New York and Los Angeles, and later expanded wider. The film is nominated for four Academy Awards at the 85th Academy Awards, in the categories Best Picture, Best Director (Benh Zeitlin), Best Adapted Screenplay (Lucy Alibar, Benh Zeitlin), and Best Actress (Quvenzhané Wallis). At the age of 9, Wallis is the youngest ever nominee of the Academy Award for Best Actress.
Plot.
As a relentless storm approaches a southern Louisiana bayou community called the "Bathtub" (a community cut off from the rest of the world by a levee), five-year-old Hushpuppy and her unhealthy, hot-tempered father, Wink, are optimistic about their life and their future. The children in school are being taught by Miss Bathsheba about nature and the release of prehistoric creatures called "Aurochs" from the melting ice caps. At home, Hushpuppy fends for herself while her father is missing. When he returns, they argue and Hushpuppy sets her house on fire. A chase ensues between the two, and she ends up getting slapped by Wink. When she retaliates by punching him in the chest, Wink collapses. Hushpuppy, realizing the damage she has caused, runs for help only to find her father missing when she returns.
Meanwhile, in the Arctic, the frozen Aurochs in an ice shelf start drifting into the ocean.
Many of the Bathtub residents start fleeing due to the threat of the oncoming storm. Wink reappears staggering along the side of the road and finds and drags Hushpuppy home to start barricading before the storm hits the town. In an effort to make his daughter feel better Wink attempts to scare off the storm by firing a shotgun at the clouds. The next day, the two tour the devastation and connect with the surviving residents. The Bathtub residents celebrate and make plans to rebuild their community, but everything begins to die because of the salt water brought in by the storm surge. Wink hatches a plan to drain the water away by destroying the levee. A little dynamite does the trick, the water recedes but it doesn't matter, and it brings the authorities who force the mandatory evacuation order, removing the inhabitants of the Bathtub to an emergency shelter. There, Dr. Maloney performs surgery on Wink, but it doesn't restore Wink's health. At the first opportunity, the evacuees storm out and escape back to their homes.
Aware of her father’s condition, Hushpuppy leaves in search of her mother. She and her friends swim to a boat which takes them to a floating bar. Hushpuppy meets a waitress who may be her mother, though the woman doesn't recognize her. She wants to stay but the waitress tells her she can't take care of her, although Hushpuppy whispers to her inaudibly. Hushpuppy and her friends return home, where she confronts the Aurochs freed from the ice caps and recognizes the animals as friends. As the Aurochs leave, Hushpuppy enters her home and says her last goodbyes to the dying Wink, listening to his last heartbeat. She sets his funeral pyre ablaze, standing in solidarity along with the remaining residents of the Bathtub.
Setting and location.
The fictional island of the film, "Isle de Charles Doucet" known to its residents as the Bathtub, was inspired by several isolated and independent fishing communities threatened by erosion, hurricanes and rising sea levels caused by global warming in Louisiana's Terrebonne Parish, most notably the rapidly eroding Isle de Jean Charles. It was filmed in Terrebonne Parish town Montegut.
Production.
The film was shot on 16mm film, and director Benh Zeitlin created the production with a small professional crew, and with dozens of local residents in and around Montegut, Louisiana. The filmmakers call themselves "Court 13" and are the first credited at the end of the film.
Unorthodoxically, Zeitlin never looked at the raw footage until after the shoot was finished.
During the audition, Quvenzhané Wallis (who was five years old, though the casting call had been for girls between six and nine years) impressed the filmmakers with her reading ability, as well as a tremendous scream and her ability to burp on command, both of which are utilized in the film.
Dwight Henry, who plays Wink, was not looking for an acting job and had no acting experience. As he explained in an interview with the "San Diego Reader": </ref> During a slow hour, he read for the part, and was chosen. However, at the time, Henry was in the middle of moving to a larger building (which would become the Buttermilk Drop Bakery and Café, in the Tremé neighborhood of New Orleans), and the film-makers had trouble finding him. He explained that he could not leave a new business, but they were determined to have him. Henry concluded, "I was in Hurricane Katrina in neck-high water. I have an inside understanding for what this movie is about. I brought a passion to the part that an outside actor who had never seen a storm or been in a flood or faced losing everything couldn't have. … I was two-years-old when Hurricane Betsy hit New Orleans and my parents had to put me on the roof of the house. An outsider couldn't have brought the passion to the role that I did."
Reception.
The film has received largely positive critical reviews. According to Metacritic, which assigns aggregate scores from the amount of positive or negative critical reviews of films, "Beasts of the Southern Wild" has a 86/100 based on 41 critic reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". Similarly, Rotten Tomatoes reports that the film has received a "Fresh" rating of 86% from 141 reviews (122 positive, 19 negative), with the consensus: ""Beasts of the Southern Wild" is a fantastical, emotionally powerful journey and a strong case of filmmaking that values imagination over money."
The film was designated a 2012 "Critics' Pick" by the reviewers of "The New York Times". Author and critic A. O. Scott, writing for "The New York Times", calls "Beasts" a "blast of sheer, improbable joy, a boisterous, thrilling action movie with a protagonist who can hold her own... Hushpuppy, the 6-year-old heroine of 'Beasts of the Southern Wild,' has a smile to charm fish out of the water and a scowl so fierce it can stop monsters in their tracks. The movie, a passionate and unruly explosion of Americana, directed by Benh Zeitlin, winks at skepticism, laughs at sober analysis and stares down criticism." Scott subsequently named "Beasts of the Southern Wild" the third best film of 2012. Roger Ebert called the film a "remarkable creation... Sometimes miraculous films come into being, made by people you've never heard of, starring unknown faces, blindsiding you with creative genius. "Beasts of the Southern Wild" is one of the year's best films."
Conversely, Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" said that "Beasts" was "the most divisive film of 2012", opining that "The filmmaker comes from a perspective of great empathy and considerable skill. But he's a pile driver as a dramatist. The film's screw-tightening methods are so overbearing, the story, the characters, the little girl's plight have to struggle to breathe or develop anything like an inner life."
In addition to praise for the direction and screenplay, the performance of newcomer Quvenzhané Wallis has been met with critical acclaim. Amy Biancolli of the San Francisco Chronicle says, "Regarding Wallis' performance as Hushpuppy: it isn't one. It's a fact. Onscreen she simply is, a being as elemental, incontestable and strong as the advancing aurochs. She was 6 when the film was shot, yet the ferociousness of her presence – the anger and wisdom inside her – suggest someone older or ageless." Lou Lumenick of the New York Post describes that upon second viewing, he discovered that, "the best reason to wade into this (let’s be honest) challenging but hugely rewarding film is Quvenzhané Wallis — a 6-year-old with no acting experience at the time of filming — who’s unforgettable as the film’s fierce young protagonist... It’s the effortlessly charismatic Wallis who deserves a Best Actress Oscar nomination," Peter Travers of Rolling Stone describes Wallis as "flat-out amazement". He adds that "There's no way you won't be captivated by Wallis, chosen ahead of 3,500 candidates to play the tiny folk hero who narrates the story. Her performance in this deceptively small film is a towering achievement." A.O. Scott of The New York Times describes the character of Hushpuppy, "Played by Quvenzhané Wallis, an untrained sprite who holds the camera’s attention with a charismatic poise that might make grown-up movie stars weep in envy, Hushpuppy is an American original, a rambunctious blend of individualism and fellow feeling." Roger Ebert wrote in his positive review for the Chicago Sun-Times, that Hushpuppy is, "played by a force of nature named Quvenzhané Wallis... She is so uniquely and particularly herself that I wonder if the movie would have been possible without her." On January 10, 2013, Wallis was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress. At 9 years old, she is the youngest ever nominee in that category. 
In an interview with "People" magazine, President Barack Obama described the film as "spectacular".
The film's acclaim resulted in its Centerpiece screening at the 2012 Traverse City Film Festival. Sight & Sound film magazine listed the film at #5 on its list of best films of 2012.
Accolades.
The film won the Caméra d'Or award at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival after competing in the Un Certain Regard section. It also won the Grand Jury Prize: Dramatic at the 2012 Sundance Film Festival, where it premiered, and the Grand Jury Prize at the Deauville American Film Festival. The film went on to earn the Los Angeles Film Festival's Audience Award for Best Narrative Feature and the Seattle International Film Festival's Golden Space Needle Award for Best Director. In October, it was announced that the film had won the Sutherland Trophy for Most Innovative Debut. On January 10, 2013, the film was nominated for four Oscars, in the categories of Best Picture, Best Director (Benh Zeitlin), Best Actress (Quvenzhané Wallis), and Adapted Screenplay (Lucy Alibar & Benh Zeitlin).
