The second season of the American ABC fantasy/drama television series Once Upon a Time premiered on September 30, 2012. The series was renewed for a second season on May 10, 2012.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Production.
Development.
On May 10, 2012, ABC renewed "Once Upon a Time" for a second season, which premiered on September 30, 2012.
Co-creators Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis spoke about the repercussions of the first season finale's events, stating, "Magic as we know always comes with a price and we are introducing it to a world where it has never been before and I think that’s going to have unpredictable results. It’s going to affect everybody this season because that’s what’s more fun." said Kitsis. On everyone in Storybrooke's memories returning Horowitz commented, "One of the things that’s interesting to us to explore is this notion that just because the memories have returned does not mean that the past 28 years did not happen. Those memories, the Davids, the Mary Margarets, the Mr. Golds, all those people, who they were existed and what they did actually happened and those are the things that will have to be dealt with."
The show will still bounce back-and-forth between the fairy-tale world and Storybrooke, although there will be slight differences compared to Season 1. It had been hinted that another form of narrative will be introduced during the season.
Casting.
In June 2012, it was reported that Season 1 recurring actresses Meghan Ory (Red Riding Hood/Ruby) and Emilie de Ravin (Belle) had both been promoted to series regulars for Season 2. On July 5, 2012 it was announced that "The Tudors"' Sarah Bolger and "The Hangover Part II" actress Jamie Chung had joined the recurring cast as Princess Aurora (Sleeping Beauty) and Chinese warrior Mulan, respectively. On August 3, 2012, "The Rite" actor Colin O'Donoghue booked the recurring role of Captain Hook, the prime antagonist of J. M. Barrie's "Peter Pan". O'Donoghue will join the main cast during the second half of the season. Later, on August 3, 2012, it was reported that "True Blood's" Michael Raymond-James had joined the season's recurring cast in an unknown role, described only as "mysterious". "Lost" alum Jorge Garcia recurs as the Giant, from "Jack and the Beanstalk". Garcia was originally scheduled to appear in only one episode, but his character was later expanded. Actor Raphael Sbarge, who portrays Jiminy Cricket, will be a recurring guest star this season, as opposed to being a part of the first season main cast. "The L Word" actress Rachel Shelley is recurring as Milah, Rumplestiltskin's wife. "Eureka's" Christopher Gauthier is recurring throughout the season as Smee, Captain Hook's right-hand-man. In October 2012, "Can't Hardly Wait's" Ethan Embry joined the recurring cast as an unknown visitor to Storybrooke. Eion Bailey (Pinocchio/August) made an appearance in episode 6, and will again appear in episode 18, "Selfless, Brave and True". Lee Arenberg (Grumpy/Dreamy/Leroy), Tony Amendola (Geppetto/Marco), Beverley Elliott (Granny), David Anders (Dr. Viktor Frankenstein/Dr. Whale), Keegan Connor Tracy (The Blue Fairy/Mother Superior), Tony Perez (Henry), Alan Dale (King George/Albert Spencer), and Barbara Hershey (Cora) are all scheduled to appear in some capacity throughout the season.
In July 2012, it was announced that "Pretty Little Liars Julian Morris would be guest starring as Prince Phillip, an altruistic hero and adept warrior, while "Teen Wolf" actor Sinqua Walls was also cast as Sir Lancelot, a former member of the round table. Actor Noah Bean reprised his role as Daniel, The Evil Queen's love-interest, during episode five, "The Doctor". "The X-Files Annabeth Gish guest starred as Anita, the leader of a pack of werewolves, in episode 7 of the season. "The Christmas Card's" Chad Michael Collins and "24" veteran Gregory Itzin appeared in episode 12 as Gerhardt, Dr. Frankenstein's younger brother and as Alphonse, the boys' father, respectively. "Scream" and "Charmed" actress Rose McGowan has joined the guest cast of an upcoming episode, portraying a young Cora. Lesley Nicol, of "Downton Abbey" fame, has been cast in an unnamed role as a woman who has a "special connection to the Snow White family." "Heroes" vet Rena Sofer is set to guest star in a future episode, as Queen Eva, Snow White's mother. The role has the potential to become recurring. "Caprica" vet John Pyper-Ferguson will guest star in the seasons' 17th episode as Ben, a widower who longs to aid his son after experiencing the loss of his mother. Season one co-star Jamie Dornan is set to reprise his role as The Huntsman/Sheriff Graham during the second-half of the season for one episode.
Since the first season "Kings" actor Sebastian Stan had portrayed The Mad Hatter/Jefferson in a recurring role, he has since departed from the show with obligations to the Broadway play "Picnic" and the feature film "". ABC is set to recast the role with the potential for a possible spin-off based on the character. Stan appeared in six episodes overall, his last being "The Doctor".
Filming.
Principal photography for the season began in Vancouver, British Columbia on July 16, 2012. The town of Steveston doubles as Storybrooke for the series.
