Salman Khan (pronunciation : ; born Abdul Rashid Salim Salman Khan on 27 December 1965) is an Indian film actor. He has starred in more than 80 Hindi films. He played leading roles in five consecutive blockbusters including "Dabangg", "Ready", "Bodyguard", "Ek Tha Tiger" and "Dabangg 2". Having done so, he has established himself as a leading actor of Hindi cinema.
Salman Khan made his acting debut in "Biwi Ho To Aisi" (1988). He achieved commercial success with the blockbuster "Maine Pyar Kiya" (1989), for which he won a Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut. He has starred in several commercially successful films, such as "Saajan" (1991), "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!" (1994), "Karan Arjun" (1995), "Judwaa" (1997), "Pyar Kiya To Darna Kya" (1998), "Biwi No.1" (1999) and "Hum Saath Saath Hain" (1999), having appeared in the highest grossing film nine separate years during his career, a record that remains unbroken. Eight of the films he has acted in, have accumulated gross earnings of over worldwide.
In 1999, Khan won a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor for his extended guest appearance in "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" (1998).
Early life.
Khan is the eldest son of screenwriter Salim Khan and his first wife Salma ("née" Sushila Charak). His paternal grandfather was a Muslim from Afghanistan who immigrated to India and settled in Indore, Madhya Pradesh. Khan's mother is reported to be a Maratha Hindu. His family celebrate Islamic and Hindu festivals such as Maha Shivaratri and Ganesh Chaturthi. In 2010 Khan said that he is "half Muslim and half Hindu". His stepmother is Helen, a former actress, who has co-starred with him in a few films. He has two brothers, Arbaaz Khan and Sohail Khan, and two sisters, Alvira and Arpita. Alvira is married to actor/director Atul Agnihotri. Khan finished his schooling at St. Stanislaus High School in Bandra, Mumbai, as did his younger brothers Arbaaz and Sohail. Earlier, he studied at The Scindia School, Gwalior for a few years along with younger brother Arbaaz.
Career.
1989–93: Debut and breakthrough.
Salman Khan made his acting debut with a supporting role in the 1988 film "Biwi Ho To Aisi". His first leading role in a Bollywood movie was in Sooraj R. Barjatya's romantic family drama "Maine Pyar Kiya" (1989), one of India's highest grossing films. It earned him a Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut, as well as his first nomination for a Best Actor at Filmfare. Later the film was dubbed in English as "When Love Calls", a 125 minute version, was the biggest hit in the Caribbean market at Guyana and also dominated the box-office collections at Trinidad and Tobago. "Maine Pyar Kiya" had also been dubbed in Spanish as "Te Amo", the first experiment of its kind. This 125 minute film also proved its universal appeal with a glorious 10-week premiere run at Lima, capital of Peru. In Telugu as "Prema Paavuraalu", it crossed the 25 weeks at Visakhapatnam and had 100 plus day run at six centres in Andhra Pradesh. It was also dubbed in Tamil as "Kaadhal Oru Kavithai" and in "Malayalam as "Ina Praavukal".
1990 saw one film release starring Khan, "". The film was a box office success, followed by four hit films in 1991, "Patthar Ke Phool", "Sanam Bewafa", "Kurbaan" and "Saajan". Despite these early successes, nearly all of his 1992–1993 releases resulted in box office failures.
1994–2009: "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!!" and other films.
Khan returned to success in 1994 with his second collaboration with director Sooraj Barjatya in the romance "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!", Earning over worldwide, the film became the biggest Bollywood hit of the year,as well as one of the biggest Bollywood hits ever. During the 1995 awards season, the film won 5 Filmfare Awards and also won the National Award for being the most popular film of the year. It is one of the films on Box Office India's list of "Biggest Blockbusters Ever in Hindi Cinema"., co-starring Madhuri Dixit. This film was the biggest hit of that year, and turned out to be one of Bollywood's highest-grossing films ever, becoming the fourth-highest earner of all time. The film broke all the previous records and maintained itself as the highest-grossing Bollywood film throughout history for 7 years. In 1995 he starred in Rakesh Roshan's "Karan Arjun" alongside Shahrukh Khan, "Karan Arjun" is a mix of an upbeat Bollywood musical, religious overtones and an action movie. The film was released on 13 January 1995. The two played brothers who are reincarnated after being killed by family enemies. The film was the second biggest hit of the year, and his role of Karan once again put his name among the nominees for the Best Actor award for Filmfare Awards.
In 1996, Khan performed in two movies, Sanjay Leela Bhansali's directional debut "", a box office failure, but critically acclaimed; and Raj Kanwar's action hit "Jeet".
He had two releases in 1997: "Judwaa" and "Auzaar". The former was a comedy directed by David Dhawan where he played a dual role of twins separated at birth.
Khan worked in five different films in 1998, his first release being the comedy "Pyaar Kiya To Darna Kya" opposite Kajol, one of the biggest commercial successes of that year. This was followed by the moderately successful drama "Jab Pyaar Kisise Hota Hai". Khan played a young man who has to take a child who claims to be his son, under his custody. Khan's performance in the film earned him several positive notices and favourable reviews from critics. He rounded of the year with an extended cameo in Karan Johar's directorial debut, "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" for which he earned a second Filmfare Award under the Best Supporting Actor category.
In 1999, Khan starred in three films: "" and "Biwi No.1", three of the highest grossing films that year; and "Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam", which earned another Best Actor nomination at the Filmfare.
In 2000, Khan acted in films including Har Dil Jo Pyar Karega and Chori Chori Chupke Chupke, which addressed the issue of surrogate childbirth; Khan played the role of a rich industrialist, who hires a surrogate mother after his wife becomes infertile. Critics noted his turn towards a more serious role, which reportedly had more substance in comparison to his previous roles. In 2002 he starred in the delayed release "Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam".
For "Tere Naam", (2003) Taran Adarsh said of him, "Salman Khan is exceptional in a role that fits him to the T. He breathes fire in sequences that demand uneasiness. But beneath the tough exterior lies a vulnerable person and this facet in particular comes to the fore in the latter reels. His emotional outbursts are splendid..." "Tere Naam" is to date considered Salman Khan's best film with critically acclaimed performance. He subsequently continued his success at the box office, with comedies like "Mujhse Shaadi Karogi" (2004) and "No Entry" "(2005)". Khan's work in 2006 included "Jaan-E-Mann" and "Baabul", however neither of these films were successful in the box office.
Khan started 2007 with the ensemble film "Salaam E Ishq". His next release "Partner" did very well at the box office, receiving a blockbuster verdict. He next appeared in the Hollywood movie, "" which told the love story of an Indian man and an American woman. Khan starred in three films throughout 2008, all of which underperformed.
Khan hosted the second season of "10 Ka Dum" in year 2009 which turned out to be even more successful than his first season as host of the game show in year 2008. The show got very high TRPs for Sony Entertainment Television and according to reports, the show helped Sony TV regain its third position in the Indian television ratings.
2009–present: commercial success.
Khan's first film of 2009, "Wanted" directed by choreographer turned director Prabhu Deva. In the same year, he appeared in two other films, "Main Aurr Mrs Khanna" and "London Dreams". While "London Dreams" doing average business, only due to the uninspiring music, but "Main Aurr Mrs Khanna" made 21 crores through DTH Premiere. Khan's first release of 2010 was Anil Sharma's commercially and critically unsuccessful film "Veer". His next release, "Dabangg" The film was released on Eid, 10 September 2010 in nearly 1800 screens worldwide. It opened to generally positive reviews and broke several box-office records upon release. The film set another box office record, grossing 80.87 crore in its first week, thus becoming the highest opening week grossing Bollywood film, overtaking the previous record of "3 Idiots". "Dabangg" went on to gross 215 crore worldwide and "Box office India" declared it an all-time blockbuster in the second week of its release. It is the highest-grossing Bollywood film of 2010 and, as of 2012, the fourth highest–grossing Bollywood film of all time. "Dabangg" went on to win several awards, including the National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment. It was later remade in Tamil and Telugu, The film was produced by his brother Arbaaz Khan, and released on 10 September 2010. It made a record opening at the box office and Box Office India declared it an all-time blockbuster. Dabangg at that time was the second and now the fourh highest-grossing Bollywood film and for his performance, Khan received a Star Screen Award for Best Actor and a Stardust Award for Star of the Year – Male and was nominated for his sixth Filmfare Award for Best Actor. Anupama Chopra from NDTV wrote about his performance, "It's the role of a lifetime and Salman Khan bites into it like a starving man devours a feast. He inhabits it fully, strutting and swaggering and even, spoofing himself."
Khan's first release of 2011 was "Ready", The first look of the film was unveiled on 5 April 2011, while the theatrical trailer was released on 15 April 2011. The film was released on 3 June 2011. Upon release, "Ready" became the second highest opening day grosser, as well as the second highest weekend grossing Bollywood film, after "Dabangg", another Salman Khan-starrer. It also held records for being the second highest grossing Bollywood film of 2011 and the third highest grossing Bollywood film ever domestically. , the film is the eighteen highest grossing Bollywood film ever worldwide.
The film broke several box office records and mark the record of fourth highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time. He next appeared in "Bodyguard". Upon release, the film became an all time blockbuster at the box office, with Khan's performance receiving favourable comments from critics and thus making it second highest-grossing Bollywood film of that time. The film is third highest-grossing Bollywood film as of 2012. For his Performance in "Bodyguard", Khan received a Stardust Award for Star of the Year – Male and was nominated for his seventh Filmfare Award for Best Actor.
Salman Khan's first release of 2012 was "Ek Tha Tiger", Pre-production of the film started in the second half of 2010, after the script had been completed. Principal photography commenced on September 2011 and ended in June 2012. The film has been shot in as many as five countries across three continents. Initially scheduled for a release on June 2012, the film faced delays and opened on 15 August 2012, coinciding with the Independence Day of India.
"Ek Tha Tiger" garnered positive to mixed reactions from critics whilst opening to extremely strong box office collections. The film went on to become the second Bollywood film to gross over worldwide behind only "3 Idiots", It marks his first association with Yash Raj Films. After release the film mark several records. A record breaking box office opening as it collected 32.92 crores in the first day and thus became biggest opening in the history of Indian cinema and the biggest single day collection ever. The film also broke the record of Opening weekend net gross (First 3 Days of Release), Opening week net gross (First 7 Days of Release) and entered 100 crore club the fastest in just 5 days of release breaking Salman Khan's own record set by Bodyguard in 7 Days. The film stood as the highest-grossing film in the month of August also. Collecting Rs 307 Crore worldwide the film became the second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time.
Salman Khan's 2nd release of 2012 is Dabangg 2 which is a sequel of his blockbuster Dabangg under production of Arbaaz Khan. "Dabangg 2" had a very good opening at multiplexes and was extraordinary at single screens. The film netted an excellent on its opening day and became the biggest opener for a non-holiday Friday in India, beating the previous record held by "Don 2". The film's business grew on Sunday and it collected , taking the first weekend total to , beating the previous three-day record set by "Ek Tha Tiger". After a successful weekend, the film had a strong Monday where it made , beating the previous record held by "Dabangg". Dabangg 2 entered the 100 Crore Club just in 6 days making it the fastest to 100 Crore Race behing Ek tha Tiger. Salman Khan inked Rs 450–500 crore deal with Rupert Murdoch and his Indian entertainment empire Star India.
Brand endorsements.
Salman Khan was associated as a brand when he done the advertisement of Hero Honda bikes and "Double Bull" shirts , much before he entered film Industry. Even after he became a superstar, he never showed interest in promoting himself as a brand, but he was signed for Thums Up in 2002 and continued until its contract was over. Later Akshay Kumar replaced Khan. Later he was the brand ambassador of soft drink Mountain Dew with whom he ended the contract in December 2010. and now he is once again promoting Thums Up. He has also became the brand ambassador for the travel website, Yatra.com, which also made him a shareholder. He is also the face of the History Channel and the new brand for Suzuki motorcycles, Previously he endorsed "Red Tape Shoes" and now he is endorsing "Relaxo Hawaii" Salman Khan is also the brand ambassador of the detergent brand, "Wheel" He has also appeared for Chlormint, a brand of gum with his brother Sohail Khan. The actor has also done a jewellery brand, Sangini with Kareena Kapoor apart from innerwear brand "Dixcy Scott" and "tablet BlackBerry Playbook". Britannia' s "Tiger biscuits" is the latest endorsement of Salman. He is also the face of Ranbaxy' s "Revital" replacing Yuvraj Singh Apart from these brands, he also has Rotomac Pen and SF Sonic Batteries endorsements
Philanthropy.
Khan has been involved in several charities during his career.
He has started an NGO called "Being Human" which will sell T-shirts and other products online and in stores. A portion of the sales will go to a worthy cause supporting the underprivileged. Being Human Foundation is a registered charitable trust set up by Salman Khan for helping the cause of the underprivileged. In its early days, Salman Khan set up and funded the Foundation using his own money. The Foundation has two focus areas: Education and Healthcare. To increase the reach and corpus of the Foundation, Salman Khan has undertaken initiatives such as Being Human Art; Being Human merchandise; and Being Human Gitanjali Gold Coins.
In 2011, he launched his own production company called SKBH Productions (Salman Khan Being Human Productions). Money which will be generated from film productions will be donated to "Being Human". First film made under the banner was kids entertainer Chillar Party, which went on to win 3 National Awards, for Best Children's film, best original screenplay and Child Artist's Award .
In January 2012, Khan has offered to pay for releasing around 400 prisoners from around 63 prisons in the state of Uttar Pradesh via his NGO. The prisoners had completed their term but due to economical reasons, they were unable to pay a legal fine for their charges.
Personal life.
He lives in Galaxy Apartments, Bandra, Mumbai. He also has a 150 acre plot in Panvel, which has 3 bungalows, swimming pool and gym. Khan is a dedicated bodybuilder. He has a 42-inch chest, 17-inch biceps and a 30-inch waist.
Khan has never married. In 1999, he began dating Bollywood actress Aishwarya Rai; their relationship was often reported in the media until the couple separated in 2001. Khan started dating actress Katrina Kaif but after years of speculations, Kaif admitted in an interview in 2011 that she was in a serious relationship with Salman Khan for several years, which ended in 2010.
In August 2011 he admitted he suffers from trigeminal neuralgia, a facial nerve disorder commonly known as the suicide disease. In an interview he said that he has been quietly suffering it for the past seven years, but now the pain’s become unbearable. It has even affected his voice, making it much harsher.
Controversies.
Khan has been the subject of several controversies, including certain legal troubles. On 28 September 2002, Khan was arrested for rash and negligent driving. His car had run into a bakery in Mumbai; one person who was sleeping on the pavement outside the bakery died and three others were injured in the mishap. Charges of culpable homicide were laid against him, but later dropped.
His relationship with actress Aishwarya Rai was a well publicised topic in the Indian media. After their break-up in March 2002, Rai accused him of harassing her. She claimed that Khan had not been able to come to terms with their break-up and was hounding her; her parents lodged a complaint against him. In 2005, news outlets released what was said to be an illicit copy of a mobile phone call recorded in 2001 by the Mumbai police. It appeared to be a call in which he threatened Rai, in an effort to force her to appear at social events held by Mumbai crime figures. The call featured boasts of connections to organised crime and derogatory comments about other actors. However, the alleged tape was tested in the government's Forensic lab in Chandigarh, which concluded that it was fake.
On 17 February 2006, Khan was sentenced to one year in prison for hunting the Chinkara, an endangered species. The sentence was stayed by a higher court during appeal.
On 10 April 2006, he was handed a five-year jail term and remanded to Jodhpur jail until 13 April when he was granted bail. On 24 July 2012, Rajasthan High Court finalised charges against Salman Khan and his other colleagues in the endangered black buck killing case, paving way for start of the trial.
On September 2010, Khan was reported to have claimed during an interview to a Pakistani channel that the 26/11 attacks got a lot of attention because the "elite" were targeted. During the interview the actor had said – ""It was the elite that was targeted this time. Five star hotels and stuff. So they panicked. Then they got up and spoke about it. My question is why not before. Attacks have happened in trains and small towns too, but no one talked about it so much."" Khan also said that Pakistan was not to be blamed for it, and that the Indian security forces had failed. Khan's comments had drawn strong reactions from Deputy Chief Minister of Maharashtra Chagan Bhujbal, Shiv Sena, BJP and other political parties. The comments were also condemned by Ujwal Nikam, Special Prosecutor in the 26/11 trial. Khan later apologised for his comments.
