Keith Cozart (born 1995) better known by his stage name Chief Keef, is an American rapper from Chicago, Illinois. He has signed a major record deal with Interscope Records, and is the CEO of his own record label Glory Boys Entertainment. His debut album "Finally Rich" was released on December 18, 2012.
Biography.
Early life.
Keith Cozart was born in Chicago, Illinois. He lived in the Englewood area, 64th and Normal to be exact. He attended school in the South Side of the city.
Music career.
While under house arrest for a previous weapons charge, Cozart posted several videos to his YouTube account. The attention he received increased during the short time between the release of several mixtapes and music videos, including "Bang", "3Hunna" and "I Don't Like". After two locally successful mixtapes, "I Don't Like" became a local hit in Chicago. It also caught fellow Chicago rapper Kanye West's attention, and West created a remix of the song with rappers Pusha T, Jadakiss and Big Sean. 
In the summer of 2012 Keef was in the middle of a bidding war with many labels to sign him including Young Jeezy's CTE World. He would end up signing with Interscope Records due to them giving him his own label to run in Glory Boyz Entertainment. The deal is worth six million dollars over a three album deal. According to the deal Interscope has the right to pull out of the contract if he doesn't sell 250,000 copies of his debut LP by December 2013. On July 7, 2012, it was announced that Chief Keef would be performing at the 2012 Lollapalooza music festival. Chief Keef's debut studio album "Finally Rich", was released on December 18, 2012. Featured guests on the album included rappers 50 Cent, Young Jeezy, Rick Ross and his fellow Glory Boyz member Lil Reese. In December 2012, Chief Keef announced that his hit single Love Sosa will be included in the soundtrack to Grand Theft Auto 5. 
On January 15, 2013, Cozart was taken into custody after a juvenile court judge ruled that a web video posted on Pitchfork Media, in which Cozart can be seen firing a gun, constituted evidence of a probation violation. Two days later, Cozart was sentenced to two months in a juvenile detention facility and was additionally made a ward of the state.
Legal issues.
On January 27, 2011, Cozart was apprehended on charges of heroin manufacture and distribution. He was found delinquent and served time on house arrest.
In December 2011, Cozart left his grandmother's home holding a coat over his hands in front of his waistband. A policeman stopped to question the rapper, who dropped the coat, flashed a handgun and ran away. Officers chased then 16-year-old Cozart, who turned around several times and pointed the gun at them. The policemen "discharged their weapons," but missed. They caught him a half-block later and recovered the pistol, which was loaded. Cozart was charged with three counts of aggravated assault with a firearm on a police officer and aggravated unlawful use of a weapon. He was also given a misdemeanor charge for resisting arrest. He was held in the Cook County Juvenile Detention Center until a judge sentenced him to home confinement at his grandmother’s house.
On September 5, 2012, Chicago Police disclosed to the Sun Times that Cozart is being investigated for a possible connection in the shooting death of fellow rapper and Englewood resident, Joseph 'Lil JoJo' Coleman. This came after Keef had mocked his death on twitter, which he later claimed was the result of his account being hacked. Coleman's mother has openly claimed that Chief Keef paid to have her son killed. 
On October 17, 2012, Cook County prosecutors asked a judge to remand Cozart to juvenile detention for alleged parole violations stemming from a video interview he held at a shooting range which included him discharging a firearm. A hearing was set for November 20 which was subsequently moved to January 28, 2013 and again moved to January 15. The website that posted it, Pitchfork Media, was ordered by the court to provide the interview's footage after they removed it three months prior. On December 31, 2012, Cozart was issued a judicial summons for a new and unrelated alleged parole violation. Prosecutors claimed that he failed to notify his juvenile parole officer about a change of address. A hearing was set for January 2, 2013. Cozart scored a victory in court, when the judge allowed him to remain free over prosecutors request that he be jailed.
On January 15, 2013, Cozart was taken into custody after a juvenile court judge ruled that the aforementioned gun range interview video constituted a probation violation. Two days later, Cozart was sentenced to two months in a juvenile detention facility and was additionally made a ward of the state.
On January 17, 2013 Keef was sued by Washington, D.C.-based promotion company Team Major for $75,000 for a missed show. According to the firm, Keef was supposed to perform at the Indigo 02 Arena in London this past December 29, 2012 but never showed. Neither Keef or his label has given any kind of response as to why he missed the date.
Controversy.
Rhymefest.
In June 2012, Chicago rapper Rhymefest authored a blog post critical of Chief Keef's image and message, describing Cozart as a "bomb" and a "spokesman for the Prison Industrial Complex". The post was also critical of rappers Waka Flocka Flame and Rick Ross, citing similar reasons. Rhymefest reiterated these views in a subsequent interview with Salon.
Lupe Fiasco.
In an August 2012 interview with Baltimore radio station 92Q Jams, Lupe Fiasco stated that Chief Keef "scares" him and went on to describe the other rapper as a "hoodlum" and representative of Chicago's "skyrocketing" murder rate. Keef responded on September 5 with a tweet threatening Lupe Fiasco, but then claimed that his account had been hacked and that the previous tweet was inauthentic. On September 13, 2012, Fiasco released a video interview in which he made amends to Keef.
Instagram.
On September 15, 2012, Cozart uploaded a photograph of himself receiving oral sex to the image sharing application Instagram. As a result, his account was subsequently banned for violating Instagram's terms of service.
Video shoot.
On November 16, 2012, Chief Keef was supposedly a no-show on the set of the video for his song "Hate Bein' Sober" which features 50 Cent and Wiz Khalifa off his debut album Finally Rich.
Personal life.
Cozart was born when his mother was 16, and is named after his deceased uncle. At the age of 16, Cozart had his first child. He had been put on child support. Two of his cousins, Fredo Santana and Tadoe, are on his label Glory Boys Entertainment. According to his lawyer, he is estranged from his biological father. Cozart's stepbrother was shot dead on January 2, 2013. Upon release from Juvenile Detention, Keef plans to get baptized.
