Shameless is an American television Comedy-drama which airs on Showtime. It is a remake of the award-winning British series of the same name. The series is set in Chicago's South Side Canaryville neighborhood. It is filmed in the South Lawndale community area of Chicago and Burbank, California at Warner Bros. Studios. The series premiered on January 9, 2011. The show's second season, which began shooting on July 5, premiered on Sunday, January 8, 2012. On February 1, 2012, the series was renewed for a third season, which began shooting on June 27, 2012 and premiered on Sunday, January 13, 2013. On January 29, 2013 Showtime renewed Shameless for a fourth season. 
Premise.
The series follows the dysfunctional family of Frank Gallagher, a single father of six children. While he spends his days drunk, his kids learn to take care of themselves.
The show's producers sought to distinguish it from previous American working-class shows by highlighting how Frank's alcoholism affects his family. Paul Abbott, creator of the original, said, "It's not "My Name Is Earl" or "Roseanne". It's got a much graver level of poverty attached to it. It's not blue collar; it's no collar." When John Wells, the showrunner, began pitching the show, he had to fight efforts to place the show in the South or in a trailer park. He explained, "We have a comedic tradition of making fun of the people in those worlds. The reality is that these people aren't 'the other' — they're people who live four blocks down from you and two blocks over".
Development and production.
HBO began developing an American version of "Shameless" after striking a deal with John Wells in January 2009. By October 2009, the development had moved to Showtime. John Wells Productions filmed a pilot episode for the cable network in December 2009. William H. Macy stars in the lead role as Frank Gallagher. Also joining the cast were former "Dragonball Evolution" co-stars Emmy Rossum as Fiona, and Justin Chatwin as Steve. Paul Abbott, whose semi-autobiographical telescript became the pilot episode for the original UK version, is credited as an executive producer on the U.S. version.
In April 2010, Showtime green-lit the series with a twelve-episode order. In late August, Joan Cusack was cast as Sheila, a romantic interest for Frank, replacing Allison Janney, who portrayed the role in the pilot. Production began in mid-September. 
A preview of the pilot aired on December 12, 2010, after the season 5 finale of "Dexter". The first season officially began airing on Showtime on Sunday, January 9, 2011.
Although the series is set in Chicago, the show is mostly filmed in Los Angeles, with the exterior scenes filmed in Chicago.
Reception.
Ratings.
The first episode of the series, "Pilot", was watched by 982,000 viewers, which makes it the network's biggest turnout for a series premiere since "Dead Like Me" in 2003. The episode airing January 30, "Casey Casden", received 1.45 million total viewers, making "Shameless" the best performing first-year drama on Showtime.
Reviews.
Critical reaction to the series has been mostly positive. Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" said that ""Shameless" is excellent, compelling television from the first moment. As long as it stays true to the roots of the original, it's going to be essential viewing". The show's first season score on Metacritic is a 66 of 100, which is a generally favorable review. The second season score on Metacritic a 76 of 100, indicating favorable reviews. Tom O'Neill of the "Los Angeles Times" acknowledged the Emmy buzz around "Shameless", especially the performance of Emmy Rossum, stating "she didn't have much Emmy buzz after "Shameless" debuted in January, but that changed after she gave powerhouse turns in such episodes as 'But at Last Came a Knock'".
BuddyTV ranked "Shameless" #8 on its list of 2011's best new TV shows.
