The ninth and final season of the American television comedy "The Office" premiered on September 20, 2012 on the National Broadcasting Company (NBC), and will conclude on May 16, 2013. The season will consist of 24 episodes. "The Office" is an American adaptation of the British comedy series of the same name, and is presented in a mockumentary format, portraying the daily lives of office employees in the Scranton, Pennsylvania branch of the fictitious Dunder Mifflin Paper Company. The ninth season of "The Office" airs on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m. (Eastern) in the United States, as part of the Comedy Night Done Right television block.
Production.
The ninth season of the show is produced by Reveille Productions and Deedle-Dee Productions, both in association with Universal Television. The show is based on the British comedy series of the same name, which was created by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant for the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). In addition, the two are executive producers on the show. On May 11, 2012, NBC renewed "The Office" for a ninth season. Series developer Greg Daniels returned as showrunner this season. Daniels stated that the season will feature more big season arcs, saying "I'll tell you that the last couple of years, I don't think we did any big arc-type things in the way that we used to in the beginning, I think the thing we’re going to do is bring back a lot of arcs." Brent Forrester, who has been a consulting producer and writer since the third season, and new series writer Dan Sterling are new executive producers. 
In a conference call with reporters on August 21, 2012, Greg Daniels announced that this will be the final season of the series. Daniels said, "This year feels like the last chance to really go out together and make an artistic ending for the show that pays off a lot of the stuff that matters most to fans." Daniels also said all the questions will be answered, such as who is the behind the documentary, and why they have been filming it for so long, as well as the reveal of the Scranton Strangler. A central point during the season is the romance between Erin Hannon (Ellie Kemper) and Pete Miller (Jake Lacy). According to Michael Ausiello of TVLine, the nature of their relationship has been heavily debated by the writers and producers; he noted that "the triangle Andy, Erin, and Pete has stirred up a number of debates in the writers room, which tells me even they don't know at this point which guy Erin will choose." According to Kemper, Daniels asked for her personal input due to her understanding of the character.
For the season, cast members John Krasinski, Jenna Fischer, Rainn Wilson, and Ed Helms are now credited as producers. John Krasinski also directed an episode. Guest directors for the season included noted actor Bryan Cranston, who directed the episode "Work Bus", and filmmaker Jon Favreau, who directed the episode "Moving On". Daniels directed the first episode, which he also wrote. This marked the first time that he had both written and directed an episode of "The Office" since the fourth season entry "Fun Run". It has been announced that Ken Kwapis will direct the series finale; Kwapis also directed the show's pilot episode. While "The Office" was mainly filmed on a studio set at Valley Center Studios in Van Nuys, California, the city of Scranton, Pennsylvania, where the show is set, was also used for shots of the opening theme. In addition, exterior shots of the real Scranton bar The Bog were featured in the tenth episode "Lice". Angela Kinsey and Rainn Wilson, during an interview, expressed the hope to film an episode of the season in Scranton.
Cast.
"The Office" employs an ensemble cast. Most of the main characters, and some minor ones, are based on characters from the British version of "The Office". While these characters normally have the same attitudes and perceptions as their British counterparts, the roles have been redesigned to better fit the American show. The show is known for its large cast size, many of whom are known particularly for their improvisational work. Rainn Wilson portrays Dwight Schrute, who, based upon Gareth Keenan, is the Assistant to the Regional Manager, although the character frequently fails to include "to the" in his title. John Krasinski portrays Jim Halpert, a sales representative and prankster, who is based upon Tim Canterbury, and is married to Pam Halpert, the office administrator. Pam (Jenna Fischer), who is based on Dawn Tinsley, is shy, but is often a cohort with Jim in his pranks on Dwight. Ed Helms plays Andy Bernard, the preppy manager—who was previously a salesman—and boastful Cornell alumnus whose love for A cappella music and awkward social skills generates mixed feelings from his employees. Andy is an original character, meaning he has no British equivalent from Gervais's series. 
Krasinski and Helms are expected to appear in fewer episodes in order to film several upcoming movies. Helms was temporarily written out the series with a storyline that saw his character travel to the Caribbean with his brother on a boat. As such, Helms made only a small appearance in "The Whale" and was absent from the following eight episodes. He returned in the episode "Couples Discount". According to TVLine, he returned to work right before the show's Christmas break. Wilson was initially slated to appear in only 13 episodes before leaving for a planned Dwight-centric spin-off, but the spin-off was not picked up by NBC. Mindy Kaling and B. J. Novak have much lesser roles as Kelly Kapoor and Ryan Howard, respectively. Kaling appeared in the season opener "New Guys" and has stated that she would like to appear in the series finale. Novak is also expected to only return in recurring appearances. Actress Catherine Tate, who joined the series as a series regular midway through season eight portraying Nellie Bertram, continued with the series. Clark Duke and Lacy joined the cast as customer service representatives hired to deal with the many neglected customer service complaints Kelly has amassed over the years; Lacy's character, Pete, is also a love interest for Erin. 
Stephen Colbert guest starred in the Halloween episode as Broccoli Rob, a former member of Here Comes Treble, Andy’s a cappella group. The episode "Lice" guest starred Julius Erving playing himself as an investor in Jim's sports marketing business. Former NBC co-chairman and "Office" executive producer Ben Silverman has a minor recurring role as one of Jim's colleagues. He already appeared in the episodes "Here Comes Treble", "Suit Warehouse", and "Customer Loyalty". The fourteenth episode, "Junior Salesmen", featured several guest stars. These included Eric Wareheim as Gabor, Matt L. Jones as Zeke, and Will McCormack as Wolf. Comedienne Roseanne Barr will appear in a future episode as a talent agent named Carla Fern. Michael Imperioli will appear in a future episode as a character named Sensei Billy, and he will act as a foil for Dwight. Daniels later said that the season will feature the return of "15 veteran cast members". Former series regular David Denman was the first of the 15 to return, and he did as Roy Anderson in the second episode of the season "Roy's Wedding"; he was last seen as part of the "Threat Level Midnight" film in season seven. Josh Groban reprised his role as Andy's brother, Walter Jr, appearing in the episode "The Boat". Melora Hardin returned as Jan Levinson in the episode "The Whale" and had a small vocal cameo in the episode "Couples Discount". "Junior Salesman" saw the return of several minor characters, including Lance Krall as Sensei Ira (who first appeared in the second season episode "The Fight"), Noel Petok as Troy Underbridge (who first appeared in the fourth season episode "Night Out"), Beth Grant as Dwight's babysitter (who first appeared in the fourth season episode "Dinner Party"), and James Urbaniak as Rolf (who first appeared in the fifth season episode "Company Picnic"). Although cast member Zach Woods' series regular contract was not renewed for the season, Gabe returned to the series in the episode "Moving On".
Kinsey and Wilson also noted that the cast and crew can neither "confirm nor deny" but are "hoping" for a return of Steve Carell as Michael Scott. In mid-December, Krasinski later revealed that he was optimistic about a return; in an interview with E! Online Krasinski said that the producers were supposedly "still trying to figure out [Carell's] schedule" and that the finale "just wouldn't be the same without him". However, NBC chairman Robert Greenblatt later admitted during an interview that while he is "hopeful", he does not think Carell will return; he noted that Carell was satisfied with his character's exit and did not want to tarnish it. On January 16, Daniels revealed that Carell would not appear in the finale in any capacity, a decision that Carell later reiterated.
Reception.
Ratings.
The season airs on Thursdays at 9:00 p.m., as part of Comedy Night Done Right. The season premiere, "New Guys" received a 2.1/6 percent share in the Nielsen ratings among viewers aged 18 to 49, meaning that 2.1 percent of viewers aged 18 to 49 watched the episode, and 6 percent of viewers watching television at the time watched the episode. The episode was viewed by 4.28 million viewers and became the lowest-rated season premiere for the series. In addition, it marked a 46 percent drop in viewership from the season eight premiere "The List". Rainn Wilson argued that the show's lower ratings were a combination of the overall trend in lower television ratings in 2012, as well as the fact that "NBC didn't promote series one bit".
Critical response.
The ninth season of "The Office" has received moderately positive reviews from television critics so far. Based on seven reviews, review aggregation website Metacritic gave the ninth season of the show a 64 out of 100 rating, which denotes "generally favorable reviews". Entertainment website Holy Moly named the series one of the best shows during the 2012–13 season, writing that "this final season of "The Office" has been great" largely due to the fact that "that every single relationship in the show rings true with the audience."
Andrea Reiher of Zap2it named "Dwight Christmas" the best comedy TV episode of 2012. She wrote that the episode "was not only funny but had a huge nostalgia factor", and continued the show's trend of strong holiday episodes. Reiher also praised the episode's two subplots, writing that "drunk Darryl and "Die Hard"" helped produce "a classic episode of "The Office" that brought back the warm and fuzzy feelings of the early seasons of the show."
Awards.
On December 12, 2012, the series was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series, but lost to "Modern Family".
Episode list.
In the following table, "U.S. viewers (million)" refers to the number of Americans who viewed the episode on the night of broadcast. Episodes are listed by the order in which they aired, and may not necessarily correspond to their production codes. ‡ denotes an hour-long episode (with advertisements; actual runtime around 42 minutes).
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
