Kendrick Lamar Duckworth (born June 17, 1987), simply known as Kendrick Lamar, previously known as K.Dot, is an American hip hop recording artist from Compton, California. He is currently signed to Top Dawg, Aftermath, and Interscope. Lamar is also a member of West Coast hip hop supergroup, Black Hippy, along with fellow California-based rappers and label-mates Jay Rock, Schoolboy Q and Ab-Soul. 
He first gained major attention after the release of his fourth mixtape, "Overly Dedicated", in 2010. In 2011, he released his first independent album to critical acclaim, "Section.80", released exclusively through iTunes and instantly ranked as one of the top digital hip hop releases of the year. Early in his career, before releasing his major label debut, Lamar amassed a large Internet following, and had already worked with Dr. Dre, Game, Drake, Young Jeezy, Talib Kweli, Busta Rhymes, E-40, Warren G, Bun B, Tech N9ne and Lil Wayne among other popular artists. His major label debut studio album "good kid, m.A.A.d city", was released October 22, 2012 to universal acclaim. The album was later certified Gold by the RIAA.
Life and career.
1987–2009: Early life and musical beginnings.
Kendrick Lamar was born in Compton, California, to parents from Chicago, Illinois. In 1995, at the age of eight, Lamar witnessed his idols, Tupac Shakur and Dr. Dre, film the music video for their hit single "California Love", a very significant moment in Lamar's life. Lamar attended Centennial High School in Compton, where he was a good student. 
In 2003, at the age of sixteen, Lamar released his first mixtape, "Youngest Head Nigga In Charge", under the moniker K-Dot. The mixtape garnered enough attention for Lamar to get a record deal with Los Angeles-based independent record label Top Dawg Entertainment. He then released a twenty-six track mixtape two years later titled "Training Day" (2005). From 2006 through 2007, Lamar, alongside other young West Coast rappers such as Jay Rock and Ya Boy, had opened for fellow West Coast rapper Game. Lamar, under his pseudonym K-Dot, was also featured on Game's songs "The Cypha" and "Cali Niggaz". 
In 2008, Lamar made a cameo appearance in the music video for Jay Rock's debut single, "All My Life (In the Ghetto)". More recognition came Lamar's way after a video of a Charles Hamilton show surfaced, where Hamilton went in the crowd to battle fellow rappers in attendance. Lamar did not hesitate and began rapping a verse over Miilkbone's "Keep It Real", that would later appear on a track titled "West Coast Wu-Tang".
After receiving a co-sign from Lil Wayne, Lamar released his third mixtape in 2009 titled "C4", heavily themed around "Tha Carter III" LP. Soon after, he decided to drop K-Dot as his stage name and go by his birth name. This resulted in him releasing a self-titled EP, the "Kendrick Lamar EP", in late 2009. In 2009, Lamar also formed Black Hippy, a supergroup with label-mates and fellow California-based rappers Jay Rock, Ab-Soul and Schoolboy Q.
2010–2011: "Overly Dedicated".
In 2010, he toured with Tech N9ne and Jay Rock on "The Independent Grind" tour. On September 23, 2010, he released "Overly Dedicated", a highly acclaimed mixtape that included a song titled "Ignorance Is Bliss" in which he glorifies gangsta rap and street crime, but ends each verse with "ignorance is bliss", giving the message "we know not what we do." That song specifically made legendary hip hop producer Dr. Dre want to work with Lamar. This led to Lamar working with Dr. Dre and Snoop Dogg on Dre's "Detox" album and him considering signing to Dre's label, Aftermath Entertainment.
2011–2012: "Section.80".
In January 2011, Lamar stated his next project was 90% finished. In early 2011, Lamar was included in "XXL" Magazine's annual Freshman Class, and was featured on the cover alongside fellow up and coming rappers CyHi the Prynce, Meek Mill, Mac Miller, Yelawolf, Lil B, Big K.R.I.T. and Diggy Simmons, among others. 
On the topic of whether his next project would be an album or a mixtape, Lamar answered: "I treat every project like it's an album anyway. It's not gonna be nothing leftover. I never do nothing like that. These are my leftover songs y'all can have 'em, nah. I'm gonna put my best out. My best effort. I'm tryna look for an album in 2012." On July 2, 2011, Lamar released his first independent album and digital release "Section.80", to critical acclaim. The album features guest appearances from GLC, Colin Munroe, Schoolboy Q, Ab-Soul and includes production from frequent collaborators Sounwave, Wyldfyer, Terrace Martin, J. Cole and many more. 
The first promotional single from "Section.80" was the J. Cole produced track "HiiiPoWeR", of which the concept was to further explain the HiiiPoWeR movement. "Section.80" went on to sell 5,300 digital copies in its first abbreviated week without any television or radio coverage and received mostly positive reviews.
In the second half of 2011, Lamar appeared on several albums including Game's "The R.E.D. Album", Tech N9ne's "All 6's and 7's", 9th Wonder's "The Wonder Years" and Drake's "Take Care", where he had a solo track. In August 2011, while onstage with Snoop Dogg, Dr. Dre and Game at a West Los Angeles concert, the three of them crowned Lamar the "New King of the West Coast".
2012–present: "good kid, m.A.A.d city".
On February 15, 2012, a song titled "Cartoon & Cereal" featuring Gunplay of Triple C's was leaked online. Lamar later revealed that the track was for his debut studio album and had plans to shoot a video for it. The song would later be ranked #2 in "Complex"'s Best 50 Songs of 2012 list. In March 2012, MTV announced that Top Dawg Entertainment closed a joint venture deal with Interscope Records and Aftermath Entertainment, marking the end of Lamar's career as an independent artist. Under the new deal, Lamar’s projects, including his debut album, "good kid, m.A.A.d city", was set to be jointly released via Top Dawg, Aftermath and Interscope, while releases from the rest of Black Hippy were to be distributed via Top Dawg and Interscope. In 2012, he toured alongside Drake on his Club Paradise Tour, along with ASAP Rocky and 2 Chainz. In March 2012, he appeared on the track "Fight the Feeling", from Mac Miller's "Macadelic" mixtape.
Lamar premiered his commercial debut single, "The Recipe", on Big Boy's Neighborhood at Power 106 on April 2, 2012. The song, which serves as the first single from his debut studio album, was released for digital download the following day. The song was produced by Scoop DeVille and mixed by, as well as featuring, his mentor Dr. Dre. 
It was announced on May 14, 2012, that Lamar was working on a collaborative album with rapper J. Cole. In an interview with Bootleg Kev, Cole stated: "I just started working with Kendrick the other day. We got it in, finally, again. We got maybe four or five together." 
On August 15, 2012, Lady Gaga announced via Twitter that she and Lamar had recorded a song tentatively titled, "PARTYNAUSEOUS". The song, later re-titled "Bitch, Don't Kill My Vibe, ultimately did not feature Lady Gaga due to creative differences. On August 17, 2012, Lamar liberated "Westside, Right on Time", a new song featuring Southern rapper Young Jeezy. The song was released as a part of the "Top Dawg Entertainment Fam Appreciation Week" that the label was hosting. Lamar was also seen touring with the rest of Black Hippy and Stalley on the BET Music Matters Tour, during 2012.
Lamar's major label debut studio album, "good kid, m.A.A.d city", was released October 22, 2012. The album was met with critical acclaim and debuted at number two, selling 242,122 copies in its first week. The album has sold 693,000 copies as of February 2013 and has been certified Gold by the RIAA. HipHop DX named Lamar "Emcee of the Year" for their 2012 Year End Awards. On January 26, 2013, Lamar performed the album's lead singles "Swimming Pools (Drank)" and "Poetic Justice" on "Saturday Night Live". He also appeared alongside host Adam Levine and The Lonely Island on an SNL Digital Short. On February 22, 2013, Lamar released video for "Poetic Justice", the Janet Jackson-sampling collaboration with Drake. The video features Drake in bed with a naked woman as he repeatedly tries to get in touch with an absent Kendrick on the phone. 
Artistry.
Influences.
He has stated that 2Pac, The Notorious B.I.G., Jay-Z, Nas and Eminem are his top five favorite rappers. Tupac Shakur who is probably his biggest influence, influences not only his music, but his day-to-day lifestyle as well. In terms of subject matter and technical ability, Kendrick Lamar has often been compared to Tupac, Eminem, Nas, and Jay-Z. Lamar gave Lil Wayne (during his Hot Boyz days) credit for influencing his style. He has said that he also grew up listening to Rakim, Dr. Dre and Tha Dogg Pound.
