New Girl is an American television sitcom that premiered on Fox on September 20, 2011. It stars Zooey Deschanel, Jake Johnson, Max Greenfield, Lamorne Morris, and Hannah Simone. On September 28, 2011, after two episodes aired, Fox ordered an additional 11 episodes to the initial 13-episode order, bringing the first season to 24 episodes.
"New Girl" has received favorable responses from critics since its conception, with many giving particular praise for Deschanel's performance. On December 15, 2011, the show was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy and Deschanel was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Musical or Comedy. The series received five 2012 Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including "Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series" for Deschanel, "Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series" for Greenfield, "Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series", "Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series" and "Outstanding Main Title Design". New Girl was longlisted at the 18th National Television Awards in the sitcom category, ultimately losing to "Mrs Browns Boys".
"New Girl" was officially renewed for a second season by Fox on April 9, 2012. It premiered on September 25, 2012. Fox ordered two new episodes of "New Girl" bringing the second season to 24 episodes.
Plot.
Jessica "Jess" Day (Zooey Deschanel) is an adorable, bubbly young woman who teaches at a Los Angeles middle school. Jess begins looking for a new place to live after breaking up with her boyfriend. She answers an ad for a new roommate on Craigslist, and moves in with three young men: Nick, Schmidt, and Coach. Very shortly after moving in, Coach moves out and is replaced by Winston, another young man who had previously lived in the apartment with Nick and Schmidt. Cece, Jessica's childhood best friend and a fashion model, also appears in various storylines.
Cast and characters.
Main cast.
The character of Coach, played by Damon Wayans, Jr., appeared in the pilot only. Coach, Nick, Schmidt and Winston were the original four roommates in the apartment, but Winston moved out prior to the first episode, creating an opening for Jess to move in. By the second episode Coach had left, and Winston returned to the apartment. The apartment now consists of Schmidt, Winston, Nick, and Jess.
Production.
The series was created, produced, and written by Elizabeth Meriwether for Chermin Entertainment and Fox Television Studios.
In development, the show was provisionally titled "Chicks and Dicks", which was temporarily used as the title owing to its description of the storyline at that point. As the script developed, the plot became more socially oriented, rather than being about the sexual endeavors of the roommates, so the title was changed to "New Girl".
The series premiered on Tuesday September 20 on Fox, and also airs on Channel 4 in the UK, Citytv in Canada and on FOUR in New Zealand.
Zooey Deschanel was once asked if the character was written for her specifically, to which she replied that it was not, but "should have been". When asked to join the team, Deschanel was questioned if she had any hesitation. Deschanel replied that she loves working with the team and that Jess is definitely the character she would like to play forever.
Damon Wayans, Jr. took the role of "Coach" expecting his previous show, the ABC sitcom "Happy Endings", to be cancelled. When that show was renewed for a second season, Wayans left "New Girl" and was replaced by Morris. According to "The Hollywood Reporter", Meriwether says that about 80 percent of the pilot would have needed to be re-shot in order to remove Wayans from the episode, since he was in one of the leading roles of the show. Therefore, Meriwether, 20th Century Fox and the studio decided to keep the characters and the plot of the episode as they were, with Morris joining the show in the second episode of the series.
Reception.
In June 2011, "New Girl" was one of eight honorees in the "most exciting new series" category at the 1st Critics' Choice Television Awards, voted by journalists who had seen the pilots. Review aggregate website Metacritic gave it a score of 66/100 based on "generally favorable reviews". BuddyTV ranked "New Girl" #5 on its list of 2011's best new TV shows.
The pilot episode drew 10.28 million viewers, a 4.8 adults 18–49 demo rating. This was the highest-rated fall debut for a Fox scripted show since "The Bernie Mac Show" in 2001.
The show has been nominated for several awards, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Comedy Series and for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for Zooey Deschanel, as well as a two Critics Choice Awards, Best Comedy Series and Best Comedy Actress for Deschanel. Zooey Deschanel won the award for Best Comedy Actress. The show also received 5 nominations at the 2012 Darwin Awards. This included Best Comedy Series, Best New TV Series, Best Actor (Jake Johnson), Best Actor/Actress in a New TV Series (Zooey Deschanel) and Best Screenplay, winning the latter two.
Release.
Online.
The pilot was first released on such online services as Hulu Plus, TiVo, and iTunes before the September 20 premiere on Fox
