My Mad Fat Diary is a British television series that debuted on E4 on 14 January 2013. It is based on "My Fat, Mad Teenage Diary" written by Rae Earl.
E4 confirmed on 18 February 2013 that the show has been re-commissioned for a second series.
Plot.
Set in Lincolnshire in 1996, My Mad Fat Diary follows the story of 16 year old, 16 stone Rae, who has just left a psychiatric hospital, where she has spent four months. She begins to reconnect with her best friend, Chloe, who is unaware of Rae's mental health and body image problems, believing she was in Paris for the past four months. Rae attempts to keep this information from her while also trying to impress Chloe's friends Izzy, Archie, Chop and Finn. 
Cast and characters.
Main cast.
Characters mentioned on E4 website, but never actually in show:"Italic text"
Sinead Peters - a girl mentioned in Rae's Diary on the E4 website who told Rae in the event of a nuclear disaster, she'd hide behind Rae as even sub atomic particles couldn't get past her blubber. This character is never mentioned but can be seen in Rae's diary at the E4 website.
Hannah Matthew - A girl who made fun of Rae's clothes, asking if she was dressed as Robbie Coltrane from Cracker
Episodes.
Second series.
E4 have confirmed that a second series will take place.
Critical response.
"My Mad Fat Diary" has received a very positive response from critics. "The Guardian"'s Sam Wollaston called it a "lovely drama – honest and painful, real, and very funny," going on to say "Sharon Rooney's performance in the lead is natural, effortless and utterly believable; she should win something for it." "The Stage" called it "a comedy drama that actually satisfies the criteria of both genres, "My Mad Fat Diary" offers a unique and uncompromising perspective on adolescent angst that distresses and delights by turns. Visual gimmicks – flashbacks, fantasies and animated squiggles leaping from the page – are used sparingly but effectively, allowing the focus to stay fixed on Rae and Rooney’s commanding and engagingly natural central performance." "The Art Desk" said "the first episode of this six-part comedy drama is touching, hilarious and perfectly cast." Claire Webb of the "Radio Times" said the plot is "as uplifting as it is moving, although the banter and gimmicks won't be to everybody's taste."
In a more mixed review, Robert Epstein of "The Independent" criticised E4 for relating the programme to its other teen shows: "If such comparisons are unfair, blame it on E4, whose continuity announcer declared: 'If you like "Skins", "The Inbetweeners" and "Misfits", you'll like this.' Well, sorry, I do like those three shows, but, even with a great soundtrack (if only the Mack really would return …) and the odd nice line, "My Mad Fat Diary" is a long way from the equal of that trio in invention, edge or humour."
