The second season of the ABC American television drama series "Revenge" started on September 30, 2012 on Sundays. An hour long recap show of the first season called "The First Chapter" showed a week before the premiere on September 26, 2012 at 9:00 pm Eastern/8:00 pm Central. The series stars Madeleine Stowe and Emily VanCamp.
Plot.
Having discovered her mother is alive Emily postpones her revenge plan and sets on a journey to find her mother. She digs deep into her past, and painful memories of her psychotic childhood resurface, as well as the Graysons' involvement with her mother's disappearance. Her search leads her to a woman named Kara Murphy who turns out to be her real mother, now married to the mysterious white-haired man, Gordon Murphy.
The Graysons face a turmoil after numerous events: Victoria has faked her own death and is now living in hiding, Charlotte is aware of her mother's orchestrations but herself faces drug addiction, meanwhile Daniel becomes a full-blown Grayson. After Victoria uncovers her lies, Daniel takes over the company, while she and Conrad renew their vows. Daniel now in charge of Grayson Global is posed against the mysterious organization known as The Initiative.
The Porters rejoice Jack's little son Carl, but the dangerous past of their father and Declan's rebellious behavior lead them to troubled lengths. Amanda is publicly accepted as a part of the Graysons but still hides her demons from her love Jack. After Declan is accused of theft, the secretive Ryan brothers buy their bar in order to free Declan from his accusations. However, more deeply rooted motivations are revealed to be ruling their decision.
Social climber Ashley Davenport takes over Victoria's spot as the Queen of The Hamptons, but is soon stripped of her position. A disgraced Ashley cooks up her own revenge plan. Nolan Ross is attracted by clever Padma Lahari, who becomes a CFO of his company, but Lahari has a secret agenda of her own. Last but not least, a man from Emily's past, Aiden Mathis, re-enters her life and becomes a fierce weapon in her revenge plan.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
