Cult is an American television series that airs on The CW. The series centers on a journalist blogger and a production assistant, who investigate a series of mysterious disappearances that are linked to a popular television series named "Cult". It premiered on The CW on February 19, 2013, and is currently airing on Tuesdays at 9:00 pm Eastern/8:00 pm Central.
Plot.
The series follows Jeff (Matthew Davis), a journalist blogger, and Skye (Jessica Lucas), a production assistant on a popular television crime series called "Cult", as they investigate the fans of the series, who could be re-creating the crimes committed on the series.
Production.
"Cult" was originally supposed to air on the now defunct network, The WB. When The WB was replaced by The CW, the executives of The CW at that time dropped the show, which was supposed to star Matthew Bomer. In January 2012, a revised version of the series was revived on The CW with a pilot order. The series was created by Rockne S. O'Bannon, who also serves as executive producer alongside Josh Schwartz, Stephanie Savage, Len Goldstein and the production companies Warner Bros. Television and Fake Empire Productions.
Jessica Lucas was cast in the lead role of Skye Yarrow in February 2012, a young production assistant who teams with a journalist blogger to investigate the fans of a popular television series entitled "Cult". Alona Tal was cast next as Marti Gerritsen, the actress playing the role of Kelly Collins in the fictional series "Cult". Robert Knepper then followed in the role of Roger Reeves, the actor playing the role of Billy Grimm in the show-within-a-show. Matthew Davis was cast in the lead role of Jeff Sefton, the journalist blogger working with Skye and Andrew Leeds was cast in the recurring role of Kyle Segal, the executive working on the show-within-a-show. Ben Hollingsworth will also have a recurring role, as associate producer Peter Grey. Stacey Farber joined the series in a recurring role as E.J. a tech-savvy girl, who works with Jeff and helps him in the search for his sibling.
The pilot was officially picked up by The CW on May 11, 2012. But after it finally premiered, "Cult" became the second U.S. show about a dangerous sect to debut in early 2013 (FOX's "The Following" premiered 21 January) -- an unusual subject matter for a television drama. While other shows featuring cults prominently have struggled recently (such as the similarly named New Zealand drama "The Cult," which ran for one season in 2010, and the still in-production "Don't Tell My Wife I'm a Cult Leader"[http://dont-tell-cult-leader.blogspot.com/search/label/Origins]), TV dramas featuring cult leaders as supporting characters are gaining critical acclaim and viewership (such as FX's "Justified").
