The Perks of Being a Wallflower is a 2012 American coming-of-age film and is a film adaptation of the 1999 epistolary novel of the same name. The film stars Logan Lerman, Emma Watson, and Ezra Miller, and was directed by the novel's author, Stephen Chbosky.
Filming in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, started on May 9 and ended on June 29, 2011. The film was released on September 21, 2012 to positive critical response, grossing almost $29 million worldwide.
Plot.
Charlie is nervous about beginning his freshman year of high school. He is extremely shy and slow to make friends; on the first day only making a connection with his English teacher, Mr. Anderson. He is reluctant to worry his parents by telling them how nervous and isolated he really feels. 
Charlie eventually befriends two seniors, Sam and her stepbrother Patrick. After a football game, they take him to a local restaurant and drive him home. Charlie later on dances with them at a high school dance and they invite him to a house party. At the party, Charlie eats a cannabis brownie, unaware of what was in it, and unintentionally gets stoned, amusing people with his clever observations. While stoned, he admits to Sam that his best friend committed suicide the year before. He also walks in on Patrick and Brad, a popular jock who is in the closet, making out in a room. Sam realizes that Charlie has no other friends, so she and Patrick resolve to make Charlie part of their group. Charlie also agrees to help Sam prepare for her SAT exams to enter her chosen college. On the way home, they drive through a tunnel and Sam stands up in the back of the pickup truck while listening to a song known through the film as "The Tunnel Song" ("Heroes" by David Bowie). 
During Christmas, the group organizes a Secret Santa. Even though Sam was not Charlie's Santa, she still gives him a present, a vintage typewriter. They start talking about relationships: Charlie reveals he has never been kissed, let alone had a girlfriend. Sam opens up and tells him that her first kiss was from her father's boss when she was 11 years old. Sam then tells Charlie that she wants his first kiss to be from someone who loves him and she kisses Charlie.
Sam, Patrick and all of their friends take part in acting out "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" at a theater, with Sam as Janet and Patrick as Dr. Frank-N-Furter. As time goes on, Charlie is asked to take part in the show as Rocky when Sam's college boyfriend, Craig, isn't able to make it. Afterwards, an impressed Mary Elizabeth, one of their friends, asks Charlie to the Sadie Hawkins dance and Charlie accepts. After the dance, Mary Elizabeth takes Charlie to her house and they kiss and make out, and she declares how glad she is to have him as her boyfriend. Not wanting to hurt her feelings, Charlie continues to reluctantly be her boyfriend. 
Mary Elizabeth dominates the relationship, and Charlie grows irritated by her. At a party, they break up during a game of Truth or Dare when Charlie, without thinking, kisses Sam after being dared to kiss the most beautiful girl in the room, and a fallout ensues. Sam is furious at Charlie. Charlie returns sadly to isolation and loneliness after being told by Patrick to stay away while things cool down. During his isolation from his friends, Charlie has flashbacks of the death of his Aunt Helen who died in a car accident when he was seven years old. 
Later, Patrick breaks up with Brad after Brad's strict father caught them both together and hit his son. At the school cafeteria, Brad calls Patrick a "faggot" as he was trying to prove to everyone that he is not friends with Patrick. Patrick is infuriated and attempts to attack him, but Brad's friends beat him up until Charlie intervenes and beats up Brad's friend. Charlie blacks out, waking up to see his bruised knuckles and the boys on the floor. After this, Patrick, Sam, and Charlie reconcile. Mary Elizabeth has since moved on to date Peter, Craig's friend. They plan to go to a movie but Patrick takes Charlie out when Sam takes too long. They talk and share stories, and Patrick tells about how he witnessed Brad's father beat him up when he found him with Patrick, and how Brad broke up with him. He then states how he wishes he can meet a nice guy, and kisses Charlie and hugs him repeatedly saying sorry. Charlie hugs him back, and is okay with it because he knows how much Patrick is hurt.
Sam breaks up with Craig after finding out he has been cheating on her the entire time. Sam receives her college acceptance letter from Pennsylvania State University, which states that she must leave immediately for a summer introductory program. The night before she departs, Sam takes Charlie upstairs where she asks why he never asked her out, and after several heartfelt confessions to each other including that they had 'been through the same things', they kiss. When she starts to touch him on his thigh, he pulls away gently. Sam asks, "What's wrong?" with Charlie replying, "Nothing" and they lay on the bed making out. In the morning, Charlie says goodbye as Sam and Patrick leave for college, leaving Charlie emotionally shaken and alone again.
In a daze, Charlie goes to his empty home, having severe flashbacks of his Aunt Helen and her death. He calls his sister, where he blames himself for the death of his Aunt Helen. His sister, Candace, believes he is suicidal and has a friend call the police. Charlie is in the kitchen staring at a large knife, then blacks out as the police are seen bursting through the door. Charlie then wakes up in hospital. Dr. Burton tells his parents that he was sexually abused by his aunt as a child and that he has repressed the memories because he always loved her.
Charlie undergoes therapy, recovers and returns home where he is visited by Sam and Patrick. The three go to a diner and Sam explains what life at college is like, and how she's also found "The Tunnel Song" Charlie was searching for. The three of them revisit the tunnel, where this time Charlie stands in the back of the truck as they drive through. Charlie acknowledges that he feels alive and in this moment, "We are infinite".
Production.
Development.
Mr. Mudd Productions (producers of "Juno") sought to hire Stephen Chbosky – author of the novel – to adapt the film. The producers – John Malkovich, Lianne Halfon, and Russell Smith – then hired Chbosky to write an adapted screenplay and to direct the film. In May 2010, actors Logan Lerman and Emma Watson were reported to be in talks for the film.
In January 2011, Summit acquired distribution rights. In the following February, Lerman and Watson were confirmed as Charlie and Sam. In the same month, Summit sought a buyer for the project at the European Film Market held simultaneously with the Berlin International Film Festival. In April 2011, Mae Whitman signed on as Mary Elizabeth and Nina Dobrev was cast as Candace. Paul Rudd was cast as Bill later that month. On May 9, 2011, Kate Walsh announced that she was cast in the film as Charlie's mother and had begun filming.
Filming.
The film was shot in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area from May 9 to June 29, 2011. Initial filming began in Pittsburgh's South Hills, including Bethel Park, Upper St. Clair, and Peters Township High School.
Scenes of the film's characters in costume at "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" were filmed at The Hollywood Theater in Dormont. Chbosky had seen "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" there when he was younger, and requested to rent the theater as a location when he found out it was re-opening.
The film also has scenes within Pittsburgh city limits inside the Fort Pitt Tunnel and Fort Pitt Bridge on Interstate 376.
Release.
The film was scheduled to be released on September 14, 2012, but it was announced in August 2012 that it would be released a week later, on September 21, 2012, in selected cities. The film continued to expand on September 28, 2012, with a nationwide release on October 12, 2012. The UK premiere was on September 23 at the Cambridge Film Festival.
Rating.
The film went under appeal for a PG-13 rating upon its originally given R rating for "teen drug and alcohol use, and some sexual references"; the appeals board changed it to a PG-13 for "mature thematic material, drug and alcohol use, sexual content including references, and a fight – all involving teens".
Reception.
Critical response.
The film received mainly positive reviews. It holds a certified "fresh" rating of 87% on Rotten Tomatoes, based on reviews from 145 critics, the consensus states: ""The Perks of Being a Wallflower" is a heartfelt and sincere adaptation that's bolstered by strong lead performances." 
Metacritic gives the film 67% based on reviews from 36 critics, indicating generally favorable reviews. 
The lead cast also received positive notices. Ian Buckwalter of "The Atlantic" said "The primary trio of actors delivers outstanding performances, starting with Watson, who sheds the memory of a decade playing Hermione in the "Harry Potter" series with an about-face as a flirtatious but insecure free spirit. Miller also plays against his most recent performance, which was as the tightly wound titular teenage psychopath in "We Need to Talk About Kevin", to deliver a giddy, scene-stealing turn as Patrick. Lerman, best known from the "Percy Jackson" series, shines as Charlie, a role that demands he be immediately likeable while still holding onto some deep darkness that can't be fully revealed until the end."
John Anderson of "Newsday" also praised the cast saying "As Sam, the quasi-bad girl trying to reinvent herself before college, she (Emma Watson) brings honesty and a lack of cliche to a character who might have been a standard-issue student. But equally fine are her co-stars: Ezra Miller, who plays the gay character Patrick as something messy and unusual; Paul Rudd, as their English teacher, is refreshingly thoughtful. And Charlie is portrayed by Lerman as quietly observant, yearning and delicate in a way that will click with audiences regardless of age".
Some critics had a less positive response to the film, with the main criticism being that the portrayal of teenage issues is idealized and the casting uninspired. "The Miami Herald" critic Connie Ogle notes that "the suicide of Charlie’s best friend, which takes place before the film opens, seems glossed over too quickly" despite the event being Charlie's main character motivation in the film. 
Jack Wilson of Australia's "The Age" writes, "the script is transparently fake at almost every moment, congratulating the gang on their non-conformity while soft-pedalling any aspect of adolescent behaviour - drug use, sex, profanity - that might upset the American mainstream." 
Richard Corliss of "Time" criticizes the casting of actors in their twenties to play teenagers, unlike the film "Heathers" where the cast were actually teenagers.
Box office.
"The Perks of Being a Wallflower" received a limited release of 4 theaters in the United States on September 21, 2012, and grossed $228,359 on its limited opening weekend, averaging $57,089 per theater. As of February 3, 2013, the film earned $17,742,948 in North America and $11,161,202 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $28,904,150.
