Oymyakon (, , Öymököön) is a rural locality (a "selo") in Oymyakonsky District of the Sakha Republic, Russia, located along the Indigirka River, northwest of Tomtor on the Kolyma Highway. 
Etymology.
It is named after the Oymyakon River, whose name comes from the Even word "kheium" 'unfrozen patch of water; place where fish spend the winter.' Though, by contraries, the dictionary of Tungusic languages says Even word "heyum" (hэjум) ("kheium" seems misspelling) is 'frozen lake.'
Geography.
Oymyakon, population 472, is located in eastern Yakutia at an elevation of approximately 750 meters above sea level. At the village's northernly position, day length varies from 3 hours in December to 21 hours in June.
History.
During World War II an airfield was built here for the Alaska-Siberian (ALSIB) air route used to ferry American Lend-Lease aircraft to the Eastern Front.
Climate.
With an extreme subarctic climate (Köppen climate classification "Dwd"), Oymyakon is known as one of the candidates for the Northern Pole of Cold, the other being the town of Verkhoyansk. The ground there is permanently frozen (continuous permafrost).
On February 6 1933, a temperature of was recorded at Oymyakon's weather station.
This is, along with the same reading at Verkhoyansk, the lowest recorded temperature for any permanently inhabited location on Earth. It is also the lowest temperature recorded in the Northern Hemisphere. But according to some data the temperature of is the lowest temperature in the Northern Hemisphere instead of . Only Antarctica has recorded lower official temperatures (the lowest being near the Russian station of Vostok).
The actual weather station is in a valley between Oymyakon and Tomtor. The station is at and the surrounding mountains at , causing cold air to pool in the valley: in fact, recent studies show that winter temperatures in the area "increase" with altitude by as much as 10°C (18°F). 
Sometimes the temperature drops below in late September and may remain negative until mid-May. In Oymyakon it sometimes happens that the average minimum temperature for January, February and December remains below . Sometimes summer months can also be quite cold, but June and July are the only months where temperature has never been dropped below . Oymyakon and Verkhoyansk are the only two permanently inhabited places in the world that had been recorded temperatures below every day of January.
Although winters in Oymyakon are long and excessively cold, summers are mild, sometimes with hot, and very hot days.
The warmest month on record is July 2010 with an average temperature of . In June, July and August temperatures over are not rare during the day. On July 28, 2010, Oymyakon recorded a record high temperature of , yielding a temperature range of 102.3 °C (184.1 °F). Verkhoyansk and Yakutsk are the only other places in the world with a temperature amplitude higher than 100 °C (180 °F).
The climate is quite dry, but as average monthly temperatures are below freezing for 7 months of the year, substantial evaporation occurs only in summer months. Summers are much wetter than winters.
