The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills is an American reality television series on Bravo. The sixth installment in the network's "The Real Housewives" franchise, production for the Evolution Media series began in March 2010. The show premiered on October 14, 2010. The January 20, 2011 finale of the show became the highest rated episode with 4.2 million viewers in its dual prime time telecasts. It was surpassed by "The Real Housewives of Atlanta" which attracted 4.4 million viewers for its season finale on January 30, 2011.
The series was renewed for a second season which premiered on September 5, 2011. The entire Season 1 cast returned, with Brandi Glanville and Dana Wilkey appearing as "Friends of the Housewives." The second season was re-edited after the death of Taylor Armstrong's husband, Russell, who committed suicide on Monday, August 15, 2011.
The third season premiered on November 5, 2012 at 9/8c on Bravo with Brandi Glanville added to the main cast, Yolanda Foster as a new housewife, and Marisa Zanuck and Camille Grammer as "Friends of the Housewives." Faye Resnick was added as a "Friend of the Housewife" mid-season 3.
Premise.
The series follows seven successful women who reside in Beverly Hills. The series started out with former child actresses (and Paris Hilton's aunts) Kim Richards and Kyle Richards, heiress/businesswoman Adrienne Maloof, restaurant-owner and entrepreneur Lisa Vanderpump-Todd, Camille Grammer, who is the former wife of actor Kelsey Grammer, and Taylor Armstrong.
During season two, Brandi Glanville was introduced to the series as a "Friends of the Housewives" with an upgrade to a main housewife for season 3. Camille Grammer left the main cast of the series after season two but has made appearances during season three as a "Friend of the Housewives", along with Marisa Zanuck and Faye Resnick. Yolanda Foster was added as a main housewife for season three.
Current Housewives.
Taylor Armstrong.
Taylor Armstrong was born in Independence, Kansas and moved to Beverly Hills eight years ago. She prides herself on being a devoted mother to Kennedy Caroline (born 2006), her daughter with venture capitalist Russell Armstrong. Taylor is portrayed as being extremely passionate about both her business and her philanthropic work. She serves as Chief Creative Director of BeautyTicket.com and volunteers for the 1736 Family Crisis Center; she has been an advocate for victims of domestic violence since 2004. While Taylor enjoys the luxurious lifestyle Beverly Hills has to offer, she professes a "work hard, play hard" attitude.
Taylor was born Shana Hughes, but has changed her name several times; she has also been known as "Shana Taylor" and "Taylor Ford". After allegations of spousal abuse and alleged money troubles, her husband Russell Armstrong took his own life and was found by Taylor and his landlord on August 15, 2011. A month later, in September 2011, Taylor alleged that she suffered severe physical abuse during her marriage.
Armstrong's memoir, "Hiding from Reality: My Story of Love, Loss, and Finding the Courage Within", was released February 7, 2012.
Status: Widowed
Adrienne Maloof.
Adrienne Maloof is an Albuquerque, New Mexico, native who moved to Beverly Hills 15 years ago. Adrienne, her mother, and four brothers comprise the Maloof dynasty, whose multi-faceted sports and entertainment enterprise includes the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas, Nevada; the Sacramento Kings; the Sacramento Monarchs; Maloof Productions' Maloof Music; and the annual Maloof Money Cup skateboarding event. She was earlier married with Dr. Paul Nassif, a rhinoplasty specialist and cosmetic surgeon who previously appeared on E!'s "Dr. 90210". The couple has three sons. On July 30, 2012, Adrienne confirmed reports that she and her husband, Paul, were separating after nine years of marriage.
On August 28, 2012, Paul filed for divorce seeking joint custody of his and Adrienne's three sons. They reached a divorce settlement on November 8, 2012.
Status: Divorced
Kim Richards.
Kim Richards is a former child actress best known for her work in Disney films. She starred in such movies as "Escape To Witch Mountain" (1975) and "No Deposit, No Return" (1976), and appeared in various television series, including "Nanny and the Professor", "James at 15", "Hello Larry", "Diff'rent Strokes", "CHiPS", and "Magnum P.I". After co-starring in the feature film "Tuff Turf" (1985) with James Spader and Robert Downey Jr., Kim decided to go into early retirement and devote her time to raising a family. She has four children: Brooke (25), Whitney (21), Chad (20), and Kimberly (16). Kim, who is currently single, is the younger half-sister of Kathy Hilton ((née Avanzino, later Richards; born 1959), elder sister of fellow "Housewife", Kyle Richards (born 1969), and aunt to Hilton's daughters, Paris and Nicky Hilton. She is currently working on various business endeavors including a jewelry and water bottle line that donates proceeds to charity. Kim loves the Beverly Hills lifestyle and says, "You can take the girl out of Beverly Hills but you can't take the Beverly Hills out of the girl".
Status: Divorced
Kyle Richards.
Kyle Richards was born in Hollywood, the daughter of Sharon Kathleen (née Dugan; 1933–2002) and Kenneth Edwin Richards (1917–1998). Kyle's siblings are Kathy Hilton (née Avanzino, later Richards; born 1959) and Kim Richards (born 1964). Nicky and Paris Hilton are her nieces. Kyle began acting as a baby star: she appeared in several episodes of the television series "Little House on the Prairie"; throughout the '70s she guest-starred in several television series and acted in a few horror films: "The Car", "Eaten Alive", and "Halloween"; and later she appeared in the Disney children's horror film "The Watcher in the Woods". Subsequent roles include Nurse Dori on the hit television series "ER" and a supporting character part in the film "National Lampoon's Pledge This!" She has also appeared in episodes of her niece Paris Hilton's reality series, "The Simple Life" and "My New BFF". Her greatest passion is the love of her life (husband Mauricio Umansky) and her four daughters: Farrah, Alexia, Sophia and Portia.
Kyle published a book, "Life Is Not a Reality Show: Keeping It Real with the Housewife Who Does It All", released December 27, 2011.
Status: Married
Lisa Vanderpump.
Lisa Vanderpump was born and raised in London but lived in Monte Carlo and Cheltenham before moving to California. She and Ken Todd, her husband of almost 30 years, have two children, Pandora and Max, plus three dogs they consider their babies. Lisa designed the various homes, yachts, and all 26 bars and restaurants the couple owned in London. Lisa and Ken downsized their franchise of restaurants to two, Villa Blanca in Beverly Hills and SUR in West Hollywood, both of which have featured on the show. Design is her passion, as she confessed in series' premier episode; she also writes a page each month for "Beverly Hills Lifestyle" magazine.
Lisa is a former ""Baywatch" babe", and she featured prominently in the '80s music videos "Poison Arrow", by the band ABC, and "(What) In The Name of Love", by the duo Naked Eyes.
Lisa published the book, "Simply Divine: A Guide to Easy, Elegant, and Affordable Entertaining", released November 8, 2011.
Status: Married
Brandi Glanville.
Brandi Glanville is a former fashion model; she is also a mother to two sons, Mason and Jake, with her ex-husband Eddie Cibrian.
Glanville is the first housewife in the entire franchise to start as a "Friend of the Housewives" and to be promoted to series regular. She appeared in "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" for season 2 because the show's producers liked her and wanted to give her a test drive on the series, and she made the cut with her drama and feisty attitude. The rumor that Brandi would replace former housewife Camille Grammer, with the latter not returning for season three, was confirmed on April 29, 2012, although Grammer has rejoined the show as a "Friend of the Housewives".
