The comma is a punctuation mark, and it appears in several variants in various languages. It has the same shape as an apostrophe or single closing quotation mark in many typefaces, but it differs from them in being placed on the baseline of the text. Some typefaces render it as a small line, slightly curved or straight but inclined from the vertical, or with the appearance of a small, filled-in number 9. It is used to separate parts of a sentence such as clauses and lists of three or more things.
The comma is used in many contexts and languages, principally for separating things. According to the "Oxford English Dictionary", the word "comma" comes directly from the Greek "komma" (κόμμα), which means "something cut off" or "a short clause." A comma can also be used as a diacritic when combined with other characters.
Comma variants.
Basically the comma is defined in Unicode as . Variants by typography or language exist.
History.
In the 3rd century BC, Aristophanes of Byzantium invented a system of single dots ("distinctiones") that separated verses (colometry), and indicated the amount of breath needed to complete each fragment of text, when reading aloud. The different lengths were signified by a dot at the bottom, middle, or top of the line. For a short passage (a "komma"), a "media distinctio" dot was placed mid-level ( · ). This is the origin of the concept of a comma, although the name came to be used for the mark itself, instead of the clause it separated.
The mark used today is descended from a diagonal slash, or "virgula suspensiva" ( / ), used from the 13th to 17th centuries to represent a pause, and was first used by Aldus Manutius.
Uses in English.
In general, the comma is used where ambiguity might otherwise arise, to indicate an interpretation of the text such that the words immediately before and after the comma are less closely or exclusively linked in the associated grammatical structure than they might be otherwise. The comma may be used to perform a number of functions in English writing. It is used in generally similar ways in other languages, particularly European ones, although the rules on comma usage – and their rigidity – vary from language to language.
In lists.
As a rule of thumb, "The Guardian Style Guide"
suggests that straightforward lists (he ate ham, eggs and chips) do not need a comma before the final "and", but sometimes it can help the reader (he ate cereal, kippers, bacon, eggs, toast and marmalade, and tea.) The Chicago Manual of Style, and other academic writing guides, require the "serial comma": all lists must have a comma before the "and" prefacing the last item in a series.
If the individual items of a list are long, complex, affixed with description, or themselves contain commas, semicolons may be preferred as separators, and the list may be introduced with a colon.
Separation of clauses.
Commas are often used to separate clauses. In English, a comma is generally used to separate a dependent clause from the independent clause if the dependent clause comes first: "After I fed the cat, I brushed my clothes." (Compare this with "I brushed my clothes after I fed the cat.") A relative clause takes commas if it is non-restrictive, as in "I cut down all the trees, which were over six feet tall." (Without the comma, this would mean that only those trees over six feet tall were cut down.)
In some languages, such as German and Polish, stricter rules apply on comma usage between clauses, with dependent clauses always being set off with commas, and commas being generally proscribed before certain coordinating conjunctions.
The joining of two independent sentences with a comma and no conjunction (as in "It is nearly half past five, we cannot reach town before dark.") is known as a comma splice and is often considered an error in English; in most cases a semicolon should be used instead. A comma splice should not be confused, though, with asyndeton, a literary device used for a specific effect in which coordinating conjunctions are purposely omitted.
Certain adverbs.
Commas are always used to set off certain adverbs at the beginning of a sentence, including "however", "in fact", "therefore", "nevertheless", "moreover", "furthermore", and "still".
If these adverbs appear in the middle of a sentence, they are followed and preceded by a comma. As in the second of the two below examples, if the two sentences are separated by a semicolon and the second sentence starts with a adverb, then it is preceeded by a semicolon and followed by a comma.
Using commas to offset certain adverbs is optional, including "then", "so", "yet", "instead", and "too" (meaning "also").
Before quotes.
A comma is used to set off quoted material that is the grammatical object of an active verb of speaking or writing, as in "Mr. Kershner says, "You should know how to use a comma."" Quotations that follow and support an assertion should be set off by a colon rather than a comma.
In dates.
Month, day, year.
When a date is written as a month followed by a day followed by a year, a comma separates the day from the year: December 19, 1941. This style is common in American English. The comma is necessary because of the otherwise confusing consecutive numbers, compare December 19 1941.
Additionally, most style manuals, including "The Chicago Manual of Style"
and the "AP Stylebook",
recommend that the year be treated as a parenthetical, requiring a second comma after it: ""Feb. 14, 1987, was the target date.""
However, one exception to this general rule is that you do not include a comma after the year where the date is serving as a specifically identifying adjective - almost as a title: "The September 11, 2001 attacks on the WTC brought a renewed feeling of patriotism." 
If just month and year are given, no commas are used: "Her daughter April may return in June 2009 for the reunion."
Day month year.
When the day precedes the month, the month name separates the numeric day and year, so commas are not necessary to separate them: "The Raid on Alexandria was carried out on 19 December 1941."
In geographical names.
Commas are used to separate parts of geographical references, such as city and state ("Dallas, Texas") or city and country ("Kampala, Uganda"). Additionally, most style manuals, including "The Chicago Manual of Style"
and the "AP Stylebook",
recommend that the second element be treated as a parenthetical, requiring a second comma after: ""The plane landed in Kampala, Uganda, that evening.""
The United States Postal Service and Royal Mail recommend writing addresses without any punctuation.
In numbers.
In representing large numbers, English texts usually use commas to separate each group of three digits. This is almost always done for numbers of six or more digits, and often for five or four digits. However, in much of Europe, Southern Africa and Latin America, periods or spaces are used instead; the comma is used as a decimal separator, equivalent to the use in English of the decimal point. In addition, the comma may not be used for this purpose at all in some number systems, e.g. the SI writing style; a space may be used to separate groups of three digits instead.
In names.
Commas are used when writing names that are presented surname first: "Smith, John." They are also used before many titles that follow a name: "John Smith, Ph.D."
Ellipsis.
Commas may be used to indicate that a word has been omitted, as in "The cat was white; the dog, brown." (Here the comma replaces "was".)
Differences between American and British usage.
Use of a comma after the last of a series is also being discontinued, especially in the U.S., even though this may lead to some confusion, as in the quotation: "I thank my parents, the Pope and Sinéad O'Connor".
In his 1963 book "Of Spies and Stratagems", Stanley P. Lovell recalls that, during the Second World War, the British carried the comma over into abbreviations. Specifically, "Special Operations, Executive" was written “S.O.,E.”. Nowadays, even the full stops are frequently discarded.
In other languages.
Punctuation has been added to many languages which originally developed without it, including a number of different comma forms.
European languages like German, French, Italian, Spanish, and Portuguese use the same comma as English with similar spacing.
Japanese punctuation commonly uses the '、' (tōten, 読点, U+3001 IDEOGRAPHIC COMMA) in native text and full-width comma '，' (U+FF0C FULLWIDTH COMMA) when mixing Japanese and Latin alphabet characters.
Chinese punctuation normally uses '，' (U+FF0C FULLWIDTH COMMA) but has the "enumeration comma" '、' (, U+3001 IDEOGRAPHIC COMMA) for lists. The comma is used to join together clauses that deal with a certain topic or line of thinking. As such, what would appear to an English speaker to be a comma splice is very commonly seen in Chinese writing. Often, the entirety of a long paragraph can consist of clauses joined by commas, with the sole period coming only at the end. Unlike in English, a comma is allowed between a subject and its predicate.
Arabic, Urdu, and Persian languages — written from right to left — use a reversed comma '،' (U+060C ARABIC COMMA) unlike other right-to-left languages like Hebrew.
Korean punctuation uses both commas and interpuncts for lists.
Computing.
In the common character encoding systems Unicode and ASCII, character 44 (0x2C) corresponds to the comma symbol. The HTML numeric character reference is codice_1
In many computer languages commas are used to separate arguments to a function, to separate elements in a list, and to perform data designation on multiple variables at once.
In the C programming language the comma symbol is an operator which evaluates its first argument (which may have side-effects) and then returns the value of its evaluated second argument. This is useful in "for" statements and macros.
In Smalltalk, the comma operator is used to concatenate collections, including strings.
The comma-separated values (CSV) format is very commonly used in exchanging text data between database and spreadsheet formats.
Diacritical usage.
The comma is used as a diacritic mark in Romanian under the "s" (, ), and under the "t" (, ). A cedilla is occasionally used instead of it (notably in the Unicode glyph names), but this is technically incorrect. The symbol ("d" with comma below) was used as part of the Romanian transitional alphabet (19th century) to indicate the sounds denoted by the Latin letter "z" or letters "dz", where derived from a Cyrillic "ѕ" (). The comma and the cedilla are both derivative of a small cursive "z" () placed below the letter. From this standpoint alone, "ș", "ț", and "d̦" could potentially be regarded as stand-ins for "sz", "tz", and "dz" respectively.
In Latvian, the comma is used on the letters "ģ", "ķ", "ļ", "ņ", and historically also "ŗ", to indicate palatalization. Because the lowercase letter "g" has a descender, the comma is rotated 180° and placed over the letter. Although their Adobe glyph names are commas, their names in the Unicode Standard are "g", "k", "l", "n", and "r" with a cedilla. They were introduced to the Unicode standard before 1992, and their name cannot be altered. For input "Ģ" use Alt 290 and Alt 291 sequences, for "Ķ" use Alt 310 and Alt 311, for "Ļ" use Alt 315 and Alt 316, for "Ņ" use Alt 325 and Alt 326.
In the Czech and Slovak languages, the diacritics in the characters "ď", "ť", and "ľ" resemble superscript commas, but they are modified carons because they have ascenders. Other ascender letters with carons, such as letters "ȟ" (used in Finnish Romani and Lakota) and "ǩ" (used in Skolt Sami), did not modify their carons to superscript commas.
