The eighth season of Supernatural, an American paranormal dramatic television series created by Eric Kripke, premiered on October 3, 2012, and contains 23 episodes. This is the seventh season to air on the CW television network. It is the first season headed by Jeremy Carver as executive producer and showrunner. It airs on Wednesdays at 9:00 pm EST on the CW.
Episodes.
In this table, the number in the first column refers to the episode's number within the entire series, whereas the number in the second column indicates the episode's number within this particular season. "U.S. viewers in millions" refers to how many Americans watched the episode live or on the day of broadcast.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Production.
It was announced on April 4, 2012, that showrunner Sera Gamble was leaving the show to work on developing other projects. Jeremy Carver, a longtime writer on the series, took over as showrunner for the eighth season. On May 3, 2012 The CW renewed officially "Supernatural" for an eighth season. It airs on Wednesdays at 9:00 pm on the CW. Series star Jensen Ackles directed the first episode to be produced for this season but the third to air. Trial and Error was the thirteenth episode to be produced this season but the fourteenth to air.
Casting.
Ty Olsson was cast as Benny, a dark and dangerous vampire who helps Ackles' character Dean Winchester escape from Purgatory, where he ended up stuck at the end of the seventh season. This is not the first time Olsson has appeared on "Supernatural". In the second season episode "Bloodlust", he guest starred as a vampire named Eli.
Liane Balaban was cast as Amelia, a love interest to Jared Padalecki's character Sam Winchester. Amanda Tapping - best known as Samantha Carter of "Stargate SG-1" and Doctor Helen Magnus of "Sanctuary" - appears in at least two episodes as the angel Naomi, described as being different from any other angel to have appeared in the series so far. Even though Larissa Gomes took the role of Kevin's mother in seventh season, Lauren Tom was cast in the role.
DJ Qualls returned as the hunter Garth in "Southern Comfort", as did Felicia Day as the mastermind hacker Charlie Bradbury in "LARP and the Real Girl". Jon Gries returned as Martin Creaser, a hunter and an old friend of the Winchesters, in "Citizen Fang". The character had appeared in the fifth season episode "Sam, Interrupted".
Writing.
The season features two flashbacks stories in parallel to the episode's main story, one showing Sam's relationship with Amelia and another showing Dean's time in Purgatory. Jeremy Carver said he will keep the "evil always forward" at least for a few more years. Originally, series creator Eric Kripke planned only five seasons, but Carver drew up a plan which would carry the series through a total of ten seasons. With the ending of the Leviathan story arc, the Winchesters brothers will again deal with angels and demons. However, Carver says this approach to angels and demons is completely new. Executive producer Robert Singer described the inspiration for the season as ""Raiders of the Lost Ark"".
