Person of Interest is an American television crime drama broadcasting on CBS. It is based on a screenplay developed by Jonathan Nolan. The series revolves around a former CIA agent (Jim Caviezel) recruited by a mysterious billionaire (Michael Emerson) to prevent violent crimes in New York City. Season two premiered on September 27, 2012.
Plot.
John Reese (Jim Caviezel), a former Green Beret and CIA field officer, is living as a derelict in New York City after the death of the woman he loves, and is presumed dead. He is approached by Harold Finch (Michael Emerson), a reclusive billionaire computer genius who is living under an assumed identity. Finch explains that after September 11, 2001, he built a computer system for the government which uses information gleaned from omnipresent surveillance to predict future terrorist attacks. However, Finch discovered that the computer was predicting ordinary crimes as well. While the government was not interested in these results, Finch is determined to find a way to stop the predicted crimes. He hires Reese to conduct surveillance and intervene as needed, using his repertoire of skills gained in the military and CIA. Through a back door built into the system, Finch receives a Social Security number for someone who will be involved in an imminent crime, at which point he contacts Reese. Without knowing what the crime will be, when it will occur, or even if the person they were alerted to is a victim or perpetrator, Reese and Finch must try to stop the crime from occurring. 
They are helped by NYPD Detectives Lionel Fusco (Kevin Chapman), a corrupt cop Reese coerces into helping them, and Joss Carter (Taraji P. Henson), who had originally been investigating Reese for his vigilante activities. Although Reese arranged for Carter and Fusco to be partners in the NYPD early in the series, for the entirety of the show's first season, neither was aware that the other was also working with Finch and Reese. Periodically, the team also enlists the aid of Zoe Morgan (Paige Turco), a professional "fixer" who applies her skills to particularly difficult tasks. The series features several subplots, including "HR", an organization of corrupt NYPD officers in league with budding mob boss Carl Elias (Enrico Colantoni) in which Fusco is forced to go undercover, as well as Root (Amy Acker), a murderous female hacker who is determined to gain access to the Machine.
The Machine.
The Machine is a mainframe computer programmed to monitor and analyze data from surveillance cameras, electronic communications, and audio input throughout New York. From these data, the Machine is able to accurately predict violent acts. Currently under control of the U.S. Government, its stated job is to foresee terrorist attacks allowing the government to forestall terrorist activity. However, the Machine can detect all future violent acts, not just terrorism. At some point in the development of the Machine, Finch created a routine that would pass on so-called "irrelevant" data to him in the form of social security numbers, via coded messages over a public telephone. Unknown to Finch, Ingram also created a routine called "Contingency" on the eve of the government handoff. It is as yet unknown what this program does, or if it is currently active. 
Over the course of each episode, the viewer periodically sees events from the Machine's point of view, including an on-screen display of data about a character of interest: identification, activities, records, and more as needed. The viewer also sees the Machine's perspective as it monitors New York, including commercial flights outlined by green triangles, red concentric circles indicating no-fly zones around tall buildings, and dashed boxes marking individual people. The Machine classifies the people it watches by color-coding the boxes: white for no threat or an irrelevant threat, red or red-and-white for perceived threats, and yellow for people who know about it, including Finch, Reese, Ingram, Corwin and Root. It is from the white-boxed irrelevant threat targets that Reese and Finch draw the Person of Interest they assist. 
As the series progresses, a wider governmental conspiracy revolving around the development and utilization of the Machine, known as "The Project", begins to emerge. Seemingly lead by an mysterious figure known only as "Control", an unnamed official from the Office of Special Counsel (Jay O. Sanders) begins eliminating key personnel who are aware of the Machine's existence by deploying teams of Intelligence Support Activity (ISA) operatives who believe they are acting to eliminate perceived terrorist threats on the recommendation of a department known as "Research". The members of the elimination teams are classified by the Machine using a blue box.
Characters.
Recurring characters.
The Government.
The following characters are tied to a government conspiracy related to the development and use of the Machine.
HR.
The following characters are involved in the HR storyline, in which a group of corrupt police officers work in collaboration with an up and coming mob boss to control organized crime in New York.
The CIA.
The following characters are part of Reese's backstory relating to his time with the CIA.
Production.
The series was officially picked up by CBS on May 13, 2011, and debuted on September 22, 2011.
It was renewed for a second season on March 14, 2012 by CBS, which premiered on September 27, 2012.
Reception.
According to CBS, "Person of Interest" received the highest test ratings of any drama pilot in 15 years, what one CBS executive called "crazy broad appeal you don't usually see", prompting CBS to move "", which was broadcast on Thursday for over 10 years, to Wednesday, opening up a slot for "Person of Interest". The pilot episode won its time slot, drawing 13.2 million viewers. On October 25, 2011, the show received a 22 episode full season order. The order was later increased to 23 episodes.
Critical reception.
David Wiegand of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said ""Person of Interest" separates itself from the gimmick pack, not only because of superbly nuanced characterization and writing but also because of how it engages a post-9/11 sense of paranoia in its viewers." David Hinckley of the New York "Daily News" gave the pilot four stars out of five, commenting on Caviezel and Emerson's performances, saying Caviezel "brings the right stuff to this role" and Emerson "is fascinating as Mr. Finch". Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" stated, "the notion of preventing crimes rather than solving them is an appealing twist... The surveillance graphics are very cool."
Ratings.
CBS has said that Person of Interest is, ratings-wise, the fastest-growing drama on broadcast television from the 2011-2012 season to the 2012-2013 season, using ratings up to December 2.
International distribution.
The following table lists the countries in which "Person of Interest" airs outside the USA.
Awards.
"Person of Interest" won Favorite New TV Drama at the 2012 People's Choice Awards.
