Life of Pi is a 2012 American 3D adventure drama film based on Yann Martel's 2001 novel of the same name. Directed by Ang Lee, the film is based on an adapted screenplay by David Magee, and stars Suraj Sharma, Irrfan Khan, Gérard Depardieu, Tabu, and Adil Hussain.
The storyline revolves around a 16-year old boy named Piscine Molitor "Pi" Patel, who survives a shipwreck in which his family dies, and is stranded in the Pacific Ocean on a lifeboat with a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker. 
The film had its worldwide premiere as the opening film of the 50th New York Film Festival at both the Walter Reade Theater and Alice Tully Hall in New York City on September 28, 2012.
Upon release, "Life of Pi" became a critical and commercial success, making $564 million worldwide, and has earned eleven Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director, Best Visual Effects, and Best Adapted Screenplay. It was also nominated for three Golden Globe Awards, including Best Picture – Drama and Best Director and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score. It won the Academy Award for Best Director, Best Cinematography, Best Visual Effects, and Best Original Score.
Plot.
A novelist has come to talk to Pi Patel, a middle-aged Indian immigrant from Pondicherry, living in Canada. Pi's father named him Piscine Molitor after a swimming pool in France. As a child he changed his name to "Pi" (the mathematical symbol, ) because he was tired of being called "Pissing Patel". In flashback it was seen that his family owned a zoo, and Pi took great interest in the animals, especially a Bengal tiger named Richard Parker. When Pi tries to feed the tiger in great curiosity, his father runs in and angrily tells him that the tiger is dangerous and not like a human. He forces Pi to witness the tiger killing a goat to prove his point. Pi is raised Hindu and vegetarian, but at 12 years old, he is introduced to Christianity and then Islam, and starts to follow all three religions as he "just wants to love God." 
Pi, who takes drum lessons, is asked by his teacher, who has come down with the flu, to play beats for a Classical Indian Dance class. In this class, Pi meets a girl named Anandi, who becomes his love interest. However, their love does not last long.
When Pi is 16, his father decides to move the family to Winnipeg, Canada, where he intends to settle and sell the zoo animals. They book passage on a Japanese freighter named "Tzimtzum". Pi stands on the deck of the ship, longing for Anandi. When his mother tells him to come down below to eat dinner, he reluctantly obeys. There, Pi's mother asks the cook, in English, for a vegetarian meal, as she and her sons are vegetarian. When Pi's father tells the cook in French, the cook mocks them by telling them that the animals that went into the meal were vegetarian. When Pi's father asks him for something vegetarian again, the cook replies by saying, "I cook for sailors, not curry-eaters" as a racist remark. A fight breaks out between the two men, and is quickly put down by the Japanese sailors. 
One night there is a storm, and Pi asks his brother Ravi to come up on deck to watch. However, Ravi refuses, and Pi goes alone. The ship begins to founder while Pi is on deck. He tries to find his family, but a crew member throws him into a lifeboat. Pi watches helplessly as the ship sinks, killing his family and the crew. After the storm, Pi finds himself in the lifeboat with an injured zebra, and is joined by an orangutan. A spotted hyena emerges from the tarp covering half of the boat. The hyena kills the zebra and then the orangutan. Suddenly the tiger Richard Parker emerges from under the tarp, killing the hyena. Richard Parker then takes numerous swipes at Pi, practically running him off the boat; the tiger then devours the bodies of the other animals at night.
Pi gets out biscuits, water rations, and a hand axe and builds a small raft to stay at a safe distance from the tiger. Pi begins fishing and is able to feed the tiger. He also collects rain water for both to drink. When the tiger jumps off to hunt fish, at first Pi wants to let it drown, then he relents and helps it climb back into the boat. At one point, in a nighttime encounter with a breaching whale, Pi loses much of his supplies. After many days at sea, Pi trains the tiger to accept him in the boat. He also realizes that caring for the tiger is keeping him alive. 
Weeks later and half dead, they reach a floating island of edible plants, supporting a mangrove jungle, fresh water pools, and a large population of meerkats. Both Pi and Richard Parker eat and drink freely and regain strength. But at night the island transforms into a hostile environment: the fresh water turns acidic digesting all the dead fish that died in the pools, Richard Parker returns to the lifeboat, the resident meerkats sleep in the trees, the plants are carnivorous. Pi discovers the island's secrets when he finds a human tooth. The next day, Pi and the tiger leave the island.
The lifeboat eventually reaches the coast of Mexico. Pi is crushed that the tiger does not acknowledge him before disappearing into the jungle. Pi is rescued and carried to a hospital, weeping. Insurance agents for the Japanese freighter come to interview him. They do not believe his story and ask what "really" happened. He tells a less fantastic account of sharing the lifeboat with his mother, a Buddhist sailor with a broken leg, and the cook. The cook kills the sailor in order to eat him and use him as bait. In a later struggle, Pi's mother pushes him to safety on a smaller raft, and the cook stabs her as she falls overboard. Later, Pi returns, takes the knife and kills the cook.
In the present day, the novelist notes the parallels between the two stories: the orangutan was Pi's mother, the zebra was the sailor, the hyena was the cook, and Richard Parker, the tiger, was Pi himself. Pi asks him which story the writer prefers, and the writer chooses the one with the tiger because it "is the better story", to which Pi responds, "And so it goes with God". Glancing at a copy of the insurance report, the writer sees the agents wrote that Pi somehow survived 227 days at sea with a tiger: the insurance agents had also chosen the more fantastic story.
Production.
Development.
"Life of Pi" is directed by Ang Lee and based on a screenplay by David Magee. The screenplay is adapted from the 2001 novel of the same name written by Yann Martel. Before Lee, the project had numerous directors and writers attached, and the "Los Angeles Times" credited Fox 2000 Pictures executive Elizabeth Gabler with keeping the project active. Gabler in February 2003 had acquired the project to adapt "Life of Pi" into a film. She hired the screenwriter Dean Georgaris to write an adapted screenplay. In the following October, Fox 2000 announced a partnership with M. Night Shyamalan to direct the film. Shyamalan was attracted to the novel particularly because its protagonist also comes from Puducherry in India. The partners anticipated for Shyamalan to direct the film adaptation after completing "The Village". Shyamalan also replaced Georgaris as the screenwriter, writing a new screenplay for the film. Ultimately, Shyamalan chose to film "Lady in the Water" after "The Village", and Fox 2000 Pictures decided to find another director. In March 2005, they entered talks with Alfonso Cuarón to become the director. Shyamalan said in 2006, "I was hesitant direct because the book has kind of a twist ending. And I was concerned that as soon as you put my name on it, everybody would have a different experience."
Cuarón decided to direct "Children of Men" instead, and in October 2005, Fox 2000 Pictures hired Jean-Pierre Jeunet to direct the film. Jeunet began writing the adapted screenplay with Guillaume Laurant, and filming was scheduled to begin in mid-2006, partially in India. Jeunet eventually left the project, and in February 2009, Fox 2000 Pictures hired Ang Lee to direct the film. In May 2010, Lee and the producer Gil Netter proposed a reported budget of $120 million, at which the studio balked, placing the project's development on hold for a short time. David Magee was hired to write the screenplay, as Lee began to spend several months looking for someone to cast as Pi.
Lee stated that water was a major inspiration behind making the film in 3-D: "I thought this was a pretty impossible movie to make technically. It's so expensive for what it is. You sort of have to disguise a philosophical book as an adventure story. I thought of 3-D half a year before 'Avatar' was on the screen. I thought water, with its transparency and reflection, the way it comes out to you in 3-D, would create a new theatrical experience and maybe the audience or the studio would open up their minds a little bit to accept something different."
Pre-production.
After 3,000 young men auditioned for the film's lead, in October 2010 Lee chose to cast Suraj Sharma, a 17-year-old student and an acting newcomer. Upon receiving the role, Sharma underwent extensive training in ocean survival, as well as in yoga and meditation practices to prepare for the part. Two months after Sharma was cast, it was announced that Gérard Depardieu would play the role of the Chef, Irrfan Khan would play the adult Pi. It was also announced that Adil Hussain would play Pi's father, while Tabu was in talks to play the role of Pi’s mother.
In April 2011, it was announced that Tobey Maguire would be joining the film in the role originally referred to as "a reporter." However, in September 2012, it was announced that Lee had cut Tobey Maguire from the film. Lee justified the cut by stating that he did it "to be consistent with the other casting choices made for the film, I decided to go with an entirely international cast." Like Shahrukh Khan, Lee described Maguire's presence also as "too jarringly recognizable." He reshot the scenes with Rafe Spall in the role later referred to as the Writer.
Production.
Principal photography for the film began on January 18, 2011 in Puducherry at the Holy Rosary Church in Muthialpet. Filming continued in Puducherry until January 31 and moved to other parts of India, including the popular hill station of Munnar in Kerala, as well as Taiwan. The crew filmed in Taiwan for five and a half months in Taipei Zoo, an airport in Taichung, and Kenting National Park, located in Pingtung County where Lee was born. The ocean scenes of the film were shot at a giant wave tank built by the crew in an abandoned airport. The tank is known as the world’s largest self-generating wave tank, with a capacity of 1.7 million gallons. With production scheduled to last two and a half months at the tank, cinematographer Claudio Miranda assisted in the tank's design in order to get the most out of it for lighting, explaining, "We knew we were going to be inside there shooting for 2.5 months, so it was worth it to be able to do anything we want. On all these kind of scenes, we had an idea of what the weather would be like. In that tank, I can create storm clouds, nightfall. We had curtains that I can block out doors to open and let in real sunlight,” Miranda says. “So lighting-wise, [the movie had a big ebb and flow." After photography was completed in Taiwan, production moved back to India and concluded in Montreal, Canada.
Post-production.
The lead visual effects company for "Life of Pi" is Rhythm & Hues Studios (R&H) which has its corporate headquarters in El Segundo, California. 3D effects for the film were created by a team of artists from all of the R&H divisions, including locations in Mumbai and Hyderabad (India), Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia), Vancouver (Canada), and Kaohsiung (Taiwan). Artist Abdul Rahman in the Malaysian branch underscored the global nature of the effects process, saying that "the special thing about "Life of Pi" is that it was the first time we did something called remote rendering, where we engaged our cloud infrastructure in Taiwan called CAVE (Cloud Animation and Visual Effects)."
The R&H VFX (Visual Effects) Supervisor Bill Westenhofer said that discussions of the project began with Ang Lee in August 2009. Westenhofer noted that Lee "knew we had done the lion in the first . He asked, 'Does a digital character look more or less real in 3D?' We looked at each other and thought that was a pretty good question." He also stated that during these meetings, Lee said, "‘I look forward to making art with you.’ This was really for me one of the most rewarding things I’ve worked on and the first chance to really combine art with VFX. Every shot was artistic exploration, to make the ocean a character and make it interesting we had to strive to make it as visually stunning as possible.” Rhythm & Hues spent a year on research and development, " building upon its already vast knowledge of CG animation" to develop the tiger. The British Film Institute's "Sight & Sound" magazine suggested that, ""Life of Pi" can be seen as the film Rhythm & Hues has been building up to all these years, by taking things they learned from each production from "Cats & Dogs" to "Yogi Bear", integrating their animals in different situations and environments, pushing them to do more, and understanding how all of this can succeed both visually and dramatically."
Additional visual effects studios that worked on the film include MPC, yU+co, Buf, Crazy Horse Effects, Look Effects, Christov Effects, Lola VFX, Reliance Mediaworks, and Stereo D.
The film's musical score was composed by Mychael Danna, who previously wrote the music to Lee's films "The Ice Storm" and "Ride with the Devil". A soundtrack album of the music was released by Sony Music on November 19, 2012. The album features the track "Pi's Lullaby", which was co-written by Danna and Bombay Jayashri, who performs the song in Tamil.
Distribution.
Marketing.
Due to the film's holiday release, "Life of Pi"s financial success had been under review. Dorothy Pomerantz of "Forbes" said, "It looks like chances are very slim that the film will earn back its production and marketing costs let alone turn a profit." Pomerantz attributes this to the fact that film is not led by a big name star and faces other winter blockbusters. John Horn and Ben Fritz of "The Los Angeles Times" compared the film to Martin Scorsese's "Hugo", a large-budget 3D film that opened during the 2011 Thanksgiving week. They said that "Life of Pi" could have ended up like "Hugo" by "failing to connect with moviegoers" and become a "financial failure." Similar speculation had been made by other news sources.
Whether or not Hurricane Sandy would affect the film's publicity was also a question. Because the film includes a massive storm, it was speculated that the recent storm may result in lower box office revenue due to the unintentional overtones of Sandy's devastation. A Fox spokesperson made note that there were no plans to change the film’s marketing approach.
During the marketing campaign for "Life of Pi", the film was promoted as "the next "Avatar"" in trailers and TV spots. James Cameron, the director of "Avatar", later became the subject of two featurettes that focus on the film's 3D and computer-generated imagery. In addition, the original novel was re-released in a movie tie-in edition. This was later followed by the release of "The Making of Life of Pi: A Film, a Journey", a book by Jean-Christophe Castelli that details how "Life of Pi" was brought to the big screen.
Theatrical release.
"Life of Pi" had a wide release in the United States on November 21, 2012 in both traditional and 3D viewing formats. It was originally scheduled to be released on December 14, 2012, but when "" was announced for the same release date, "Life of Pi" was postponed a week. It was then shifted a month in advance.
Home media.
"Life of Pi" will be released on DVD and Blu-ray in North America, on March 12, 2013.
Reception.
Box office.
, "Life of Pi" has grossed an estimated $109,301,901 in North America, and $455,215,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $564,516,901. During its opening on the extended Thanksgiving weekend, the film debuted in 2,902 theaters throughout the United States and Canada and grossed $30,573,101. The film did well internationally and is among one of the few Hollywood films to earn more in China than in the United States. In Chinese mainland, from November 22 to December 24, the film topped the box office for three weeks, and grossed over $91 million. , it had also topped the box office for three weeks in Australia, Chile, and four weeks in Mexico and Peru. It was also the highest Hollywood grosser of 2012 in India.
Critical reception.
"Life of Pi" received widespread critical acclaim. It has an 88% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 213 reviews. On Metacritic, the film had an average score of 79 out of 100, based on 44 reviews, indicating "Generally favorable reviews."
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave "Life of Pi" 4 out of 4 stars, referring to it as "a miraculous achievement of storytelling and a landmark of visual mastery" as well as "one of the best films of the year." He particularly praised the film's use of 3D that he described as "deepen the film's sense of places and events." Comparatively, Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" highlighted the use of 3D in the film suggesting that "like "Hugo", from Martin Scorsese, "Life of Pi" puts 3D in the hands of a worldclass film artist. (Ang) Lee uses 3D with the delicacy and lyricism of a poet. You don't just watch this movie, you live it." Parmita Borah of "Eastern Fare" says, "There is this one scene in particular where the entire ocean is covered with jelly fishes which makes you feel like 'this is what heaven must look like'."
The "Los Angeles Times" critic Betsy Sharkey referred to the film as a "masterpiece," stating that </ref>
In an interview with the "Los Angeles Times", the director James Cameron highlighted the use of 3D in the film stating that
</ref>
According to French journalist Marjolaine Gout, the movie is "a philosophical tale where Noah’s Ark metamorphoses into 'The Raft of the Medusa'". She adds that it is "a visual masterpiece" in which "Ang Lee proves, once again, his talent as a universal storyteller". She also writes about the visual poetry of the movie reminding viewers of the works of classical painters and the symbolic of kolams. The film got 8 out of 10 stars, the readers gave 7 stars.
Yann Martel, the author of the novel on which the film is based, found the film to be a "delightful" adaptation, saying,
</ref>
A. O. Scott of the "The New York Times" was critical of the film's narrative frame, arguing that "the movie invites you to believe in all kinds of marvelous things, but it also may cause you to doubt what you see with your own eyes – or even to wonder if, in the end, you have seen anything at all." Scott further criticized the film for repressing the darker themes of the tale. Nick Schager of "The Village Voice" also panned the film stating "A stacked-deck theological inquiry filtered through a "Titanic"-by-way-of–"Slumdog Millionaire" narrative, Life of Pi manages occasional spiritual wonder through its 3-D visuals but otherwise sinks like a stone." Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" gave the film 2 out of 5 stars, and states "despite some lovely images and those eyepopping effects, it is a shallow and self-important shaggy-dog story – or shaggy-tiger story [...] It deserves every technical prize going."
Richard Corliss of "Time" selected the film as the third-best movie of 2012, as well as calling it the next "Avatar."
On his Twitter page, Actor Russell Crowe has praised the film, calling it "amazing" and a "beautiful film".
In an interview with "People", President Barack Obama said the film "was good – because we had read that book together."
The film has been described as containing a "subtle, artistic warning" about the dangers of increased anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions and ocean acidification, the acidic island Pi and Richard Parker encounter being compared to Castello Aragonese in the Tyrrhenian Sea near Naples and Richard Parker's final dismissive departure representing the "not too pleasant face of Gaia (see Gaia hypothesis)."
Controversies.
A trust named after Carnatic musician Irayimman Thampi has accused Bombay Jayashri's Oscar-nominated song 'Pi's Lullaby' of not being an original composition. The trust has alleged that the first eight lines of the song is a word-by-word translation of composer Thampi's renowned lullaby in Malayalam "Omanathinkal Kidavo". However Jayashri has denied the allegation.
The New York Times reported in 2002 on the similarities between the book by Yann Martel on which the movie is based and "Max and the Cats", by Brazilian writer Moacyr Scliar, published in 1981. The book tells the tale of "a Jewish youth who survives a shipwreck and ends up sharing a lifeboat with a panther".
