The Academy Award for Best Picture is one of the Academy Awards of Merit presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) to artists working in the motion picture industry and is the only category in which every member is eligible to nominate for. Best Picture is considered the most important of the Academy Awards, as it represents all the directing, acting, music composing, writing, editing and other efforts put forth into a film. Consequently, Best Picture is the final award and the conclusion of the annual Academy Awards ceremony and since 1951, has been collected at the podium by the film's producers. The Grand Staircase columns at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles, where the Academy Awards ceremonies have been held since 2002, showcase every film that has won the Best Picture title since the award's inception 85 years ago. 
History.
At the 1st Academy Awards ceremony (for 1927 and 1928), there were two categories that were seen as equally the top award of the night: "Outstanding Picture" and "Unique and Artistic Production", the previous being won by the war epic "Wings", and the latter by the art film "Sunrise". The awards were intended to honor different and equally important aspects of superior filmmaking, and in fact the judges and studio bosses who sought to influence their decisions paid more attention to the latter - MGM head Louis B. Mayer, who had disliked the realism of King Vidor's nominated film "The Crowd" (the third film nominated was "Chang: A Drama of the Wilderness"), pressured the judges not to honor his own studio's film, and to select "Sunrise" instead. The following year, the Academy dropped the "Unique and Artistic Production" award, and decided retroactively that the award won by "Wings" was the highest honor that could be awarded. Though the award kept the name "Outstanding Picture" for the next ceremony, it has since seen various name changes over the years as seen below, the last being in 1962 where the award was permanently named "Best Picture".
As of the 85th Academy Awards ceremony (for 2012), there have been 503 films nominated for the Best Picture award. Invariably, the Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Director have been very closely linked throughout their history. Of the 85 films that have been awarded Best Picture, 62 have also been awarded Best Director. Only four films have won Best Picture without their directors being nominated: "Wings" (1927/28), "Grand Hotel" (1931/32), "Driving Miss Daisy" (1989), and "Argo" (2012). The only two Best Director winners to win for films which did not receive a Best Picture nomination are likewise during the early years: Lewis Milestone for "Two Arabian Knights" (1927/28) and Frank Lloyd for "The Divine Lady" (1928/29).
On June 24, 2009, AMPAS announced that the number of films nominated in the Best Picture award category would increase from five to ten, starting with the 82nd Academy Awards (2009). The expansion was a throwback to the Academy's early years in the 1930s and 1940s, when anywhere between eight and twelve films were nominated. "Having 10 Best Picture nominees is going to allow Academy voters to recognize and include some of the fantastic movies that often show up in the other Oscar categories but have been squeezed out of the race for the top prize," AMPAS President Sid Ganis said in a press conference. "I can't wait to see what that list of 10 looks like when the nominees are announced in February." At the same time, the voting system was switched from first-past-the-post to Alternative Vote (also known as Instant Run-off Vote). Two years after this change, the Academy adjusted the rule again so the number of films nominated per year were instead between 5 and 10 provided that the film earned 5% of first-place votes during the nomination process. Academy Executive Bruce Davis cited "A Best Picture nomination should be an indication of extraordinary merit. If there are only eight pictures that truly earn that honor in a given year, we shouldn't feel an obligation to round out the number."
One point of contention is the lack of consideration of non-English language films for Best Picture. To date, only nine foreign language films have been nominated for the category: "Grand Illusion" (French, 1938); "Z" (French, 1969); "The Emigrants" (Swedish, 1972); "Cries and Whispers" (Swedish, 1973); "Il Postino" (Italian/Spanish, 1995); "Life Is Beautiful" (Italian, 1998); "Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon" (Mandarin Chinese, 2000); "Letters from Iwo Jima" (Japanese, 2006; though was ineligible for Best Foreign Language Film as it was an American production) and "Amour" (French, 2012). Notably, there have also been three partly foreign language films that have won Best Picture: "The Godfather Part II" (English/Sicilian, 1974), "The Last Emperor" (English/Mandarin, 1987) and "Slumdog Millionaire" (English/Hindi, 2008).
Other points of contention include the lack of animated films being nominated (Disney's "Beauty and the Beast" became the 1st film to get nominated, and Disney-Pixar's "Up" and "Toy Story 3" were nominated after the Academy expanded the number of nominees); no science fiction film has won despite a number of successful nominees; and only two comedies ("Shakespeare in Love", 1998; and "The Artist", 2011) have won in the last 30 years. Also to date, there has yet to be a documentary nominated for Best Picture, the closest being "Chang: A Drama of the Wilderness" which was nominated for "Unique and Artistic Production" in the first year of the ceremony's inception.
To date, twelve films exclusively financed outside the United States have won Best Picture; eleven of which were financed, in part or in whole, by the United Kingdom. Those films were, in chronological order: "Hamlet", "The Bridge on the River Kwai", "Lawrence of Arabia", "Tom Jones", "A Man for All Seasons", "Oliver!", "Chariots of Fire", "Gandhi", "The Last Emperor", "Slumdog Millionaire" and "The King's Speech". The twelfth film, "The Artist", was financed by France.
No Best Picture winner has been lost, though a few such as "All Quiet on the Western Front" and "Lawrence of Arabia" exist only in a form altered from their original, award-winning release form, usually due to editing for reissue (and subsequently partly restored by archivists). Other winners and nominees such as "Tom Jones" and "" are widely available only in subsequently altered versions. The 1928 film "The Patriot" is the only Best Picture nominee that is lost; "The Racket" was believed lost for many years but a print existed in producer Howard Hughes' archives and it has since been shown on Turner Classic Movies.
"The Artist" (with the exception of a single scene of dialogue) was the first silent film since "Wings" to win Best Picture, although a part-silent version of "All Quiet on the Western Front" was created for foreign-language release and survives. "The Artist" was also the first silent nominee (other than the silent version of a nominated talkie) since "The Patriot", as well as the first Best Picture winner shot entirely in black-and-white since 1960's "The Apartment". ("Schindler's List", the 1993 winner, was predominantly black-and-white but contained some brief color sequences.)
Winners and nominees.
In the list below, the winner of the award for each year is shown first, followed by the other nominees. Except for the early years (when the Academy used a non-calendar year), the year shown is the one in which the film first premiered in Los Angeles County, California; normally this is also the year of first release, but it may be the year after first release (as with "Casablanca" and, if the film-festival premiere is considered, "Crash"). This is also the year before the ceremony at which the award is given; for example, a film exhibited theatrically during 2005 was eligible for consideration for the 2005 Best Picture Oscar, awarded in 2006. The number of the ceremony (1st, 2nd, etc.) appears in parentheses after the awards year, linked to the article on that ceremony. Each individual entry shows the title followed by the production company, and the producer. Until 1950, the Best Picture award was given to the production company; from 1951 on, it has gone to the producer.
For the first ceremony, three films were nominated for the award. For the following three years, five films were nominated for the award. This was expanded to eight in 1933, to ten in 1934, and to twelve in 1935, before being dropped back to ten in 1937. In 1945 it was further reduced to five. This number remained until 2009, when the limit was raised to ten and later adjusted in 2011, to vary between five and ten.
For the first six ceremonies, the eligibility period spanned two calendar years. For example, the 2nd Academy Awards presented on April 3, 1930, recognized films that were released between August 1, 1928, and July 31, 1929. Starting with the 7th Academy Awards, held in 1935, the period of eligibility became the full previous calendar year from January 1 to December 31.
