Zero Hour (typographically stylized ZERØ HØUR) is an American conspiracy television series created by Paul Scheuring for ABC, starring Anthony Edwards. The first episode aired on February 14, 2013, at 8:00 pm Eastern and 7:00 pm Central. However, in the USA, the pilot became available on Hulu Plus .
Plot.
Hank Galliston (Anthony Edwards), publisher of a paranormal-enthusiast magazine, while trying to save his abducted wife Laila (Jacinda Barrett), learns that he must also save the world from an impending cataclysm.
Production.
"Zero Hour"s pilot and second episode were written by series co-creator and co-executive producer Paul T. Scheuring. The two episodes were directed by co-executive producer Pierre Morel. Lorenzo di Bonaventura and Dan McDermott are also co-executive producers for the series, which is produced by ABC Studios. ABC placed an order for the series in May 2012.
Reception.
Reception for "Zero Hour" has been mixed. On Metacritic, the series received "generally unfavorable reviews", reflected by a Metascore of 39 out of 100, based on 29 reviews. The "Wall Street Journal"s Dorothy Rabinowitz said the first episode was "so awash in multiplying complications manages to maintain its coherence and even a significant measure of suspense." Verne Gay of "Newsday" called it "ambitious and intermittently entertaining," adding ""Zero Hour" — and its celebrated lead [Anthony Edwards — don't quite hit all their marks. But at least the mystery's a hoot." The "New York Daily News" David Hinckley stated the series "dodges several bedrock problems that have torpedoed other recent attempts to make engaging series TV out of mystery thrillers", adding, "The question is whether "Zero Hour" can sustain setup for 13 weeks, because what makes a good two-hour movie doesn't always make for 10 gripping hours of television." Mike Hale of the "New York Times" stated the series "is entirely dispensable, its silliness matched by its comic-book solemnity".
The "Washington Post"s Hank Stuever called the series "rancid", adding "The dialogue is stilted and almost entirely expository. The plot is like receiving a coloring book that's already been colored. The grand mystery here fails to ignite interest."Tim Goodman from "Hollywood Reporter" says the series is, "Worth the Ride!" 
