Benjamin John "Ben" Howard (born 24 April 1987) is a Brit Award winning English singer-songwriter. He self-released his debut EP "Games in the Dark" (2008) followed by two more EPs "These Waters" (2009) and "Old Pine EP" (2010). He is currently signed to Island and Communion. His major debut studio album came in 2010 titled "Every Kingdom" followed by two more EP releases, "Ben Howard Live" (2011) and The Burgh Island" (2012)
Early life.
He was born in West London and moved to Totnes, Devon when he was about eight. He was raised by musical parents who exposed him to their favourite records from singer-songwriter artists from the 1960s and 1970s at an early age, like John Martyn, Van Morrison, Joni Mitchell and Simon & Garfunkel, by whom he was strongly influenced. 
Howard began writing songs when he was around ten or eleven. In an interview with "American Songwriter", he stated that when he was a kid he started playing guitar because he liked to put words together and make stuff up. "I was quite an imaginative little kid I guess. So your standard little love songs turned into your standard adolescent love songs. I think you start getting your own take on things when you’re a late teen. That’s when everything changes." After attending King Edward VI Community College and Torquay Boys' Grammar School and then a short stint studying Journalism at University College Falmouth, Cornwall, Howard decided to focus on making music full-time, making melodic rootsy folk music, with progressively darker lyrics. His reputation grew around Cornwall and Devon, and soon spread to other areas of the UK. After a month of sold-out dates across Europe and the UK Howard was eventually asked to sign for Island Records.
Music career.
2008–11: Early releases.
Before signing to a record label, Howard had already released some material. In 2008 he self-released his debut EP "Games in the Dark". His first major release was "These Waters", an EP featuring six tracks, including "The Wolves". In 2010, Ben Howard released the "Old Pine EP", followed by a number of singles, such as "The Fear" and "Keep Your Head Up". Howard now had enough material to release an album, "Every Kingdom", which would feature a number of his previous singles.
2011–12: "Every Kingdom".
Howard signed to Island Records in 2011, due to the label's history of UK folk singers, including Nick Drake and John Martyn. After singles "Old Pine" and "The Wolves" were released in 2011, Howard recorded his debut album entitled "Every Kingdom", which was released on 6 October 2011. He was nominated to the 2012 "Mercury Prize" for "Breakthrough act".
Howard worked alongside India Bourne and Chris Bond to make "Every Kingdom", with India Bourne playing cello, keyboards, ukulele, bass and contributing vocals and percussion and Chris Bond playing guitars, bass, double bass, drums, percussion, keyboards, accordion and also contributing to vocals. He also toured with India Bourne and Chris Bond on his 2012 Every Kingdom tour, with support from Willy Mason.
In 2012, Howard launched his music in America with "Every Kingdom" being released on 3 April 2012, and appearances at South by Southwest (SXSW) in Texas and a US tour confirmed. His song "Promise" was featured at the end of season 8, episode 12 of TV show "House".
In May 2012, Howard performed "The Wolves" on "Later... with Jools Holland". He played at Pinkpop in the Netherlands on 26 May and Radio 1's Big Weekend in Hackney on 24 June 2012. He also played at the 2012 Bonnaroo Music Festival in Manchester, Tennessee, the 2012 T in the Park music festival in Scotland, as well as Beach Break Live 2012 in South Wales, Bestival 2012 and Splendour in the Grass 2012. Howard also played a slot at the Austin City Limits Music Festival in October 2012.
In November 2012, Howard released a new EP, "The Burgh Island EP", which featured four new tracks. Once again released to critical acclaim, the EP had a darker, more menacing tone than most of Howard's previous work, with Howard also playing electric guitar, rather than his traditional acoustic.
Awards and nominations.
BRIT Awards.
Howard has won both BRIT Awards for which he has been nominated.
Mercury Prize.
Howard has been nominated once for the Mercury Prize.
