The Fast and the Furious is a series of action films which centers on illegal street racing and heists. Produced by Universal Studios, the series was established in 2001 with the eponymous first installment, which has since been followed by four sequels, and two short films that tie into the series.
Films.
"The Fast and the Furious" (2001).
The film is loosely based on a magazine article, titled "Racer X", about street clubs that race Japanese cars late at night. Elite street racer and ex-convict Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) and his crew: Jesse (Chad Lindberg), Leon (Johnny Strong), Vince (Matt Schulze) and Dominic's girlfriend Letty Ortiz (Michelle Rodriguez), are under suspicion of stealing expensive electronic equipment. Brian O'Conner (Paul Walker) is an undercover police officer who attempts to find out who exactly is stealing the equipment, working for FBI agent Bilkins (Thom Barry) and LAPD officer Tanner (Ted Levine).
Falling for Dominic's younger sister, Mia Toretto (Jordana Brewster), Brian later confesses to her his status as an undercover cop and convinces her to come with him to save her brother and his friends from the truck drivers, who have now armed themselves to combat the robberies. He tracks Dominic's location by triangulating his cell phone signal and they arrive at the hijacking in-progress to find Letty, badly injured at the car accident, and Vince critically wounded, having lacerated his arm and been shot by the truck driver. Brian and Mia work together with Dominic, Leon and Letty to rescue Vince. Brian then makes the difficult decision to blow his cover to the crew by phoning in for a medivac. The revelation enrages Dominic, but he contains himself and flees with Leon, Letty and Mia as the medivac arrives for Vince.
Brian follows Dominic to his house and holds him at gunpoint to prevent him from fleeing. Jesse arrives shortly afterwards, apologizing for his actions at Race Wars and pleading for Dominic's help with Johnny Tran (Rick Yune). Moments later, Tran and his cousin Lance Nguyen (Reggie Lee) perform a drive-by shooting, killing Jesse. Brian and Dominic chase them, with Dominic driving his late father's modified 1970 Dodge Charger. Dominic forces Lance's motorcycle off the road, severely injuring him, while Brian shoots and kills Tran. Afterwards, Brian and Dominic engage in an impromptu street race, narrowly avoiding a passing train. Dominic collides with a semi-truck and rolls his car twice, injuring himself, and rendering the Charger un-drivable. Instead of arresting him, Brian hands over the keys to his Supra and lets Dominic escape, using the line "I owe you a ten second car". After the credits, Dominic is seen driving through Baja California, Mexico in a 1970 Chevrolet Chevelle SS.
"2 Fast 2 Furious" (2003).
Watched by Customs Agent Monica Fuentes (Eva Mendes), Brian is caught by the police and is given a deal by agents Bilkins and Markham (James Remar) to go undercover and try to bring down drug lord Carter Verone (Cole Hauser) in exchange for the erasure of his criminal record. Brian agrees but only if he is given permission to choose his partner. Brian heads home to Barstow, California, where he recruits Roman Pearce (Tyrese Gibson), a former friend of Brian who had served jail time and is under house arrest, to help him. Pearce agrees, but only for the same deal Brian was offered, and with the help of Monica, Brian and Roman work together to take down Verone. After being hired by Verone as his drivers, the duo is going to a Customs/FBI hideout, where Roman confronts Markham over the latter's interference with the mission. After the situation is cooled down, Brian tells Bilkins and Markham that Verone plans to smuggle the money into his private jet and fly off, but also suspects something wrong with Monica's role in the mission.
On the day of the mission, Brian and Roman begin transporting duffel bags of Verone's money, with Enrique (Mo Gallini) and Roberto (Roberto Sanchez) riding along. Before the 15-minute window is set, the detective Whitworth (Mark Boone, Jr.) decides to call in the police to move in for the arrest, resulting in a high-speed chase across the city. The duo lead the police to a warehouse, where a scramble by dozens of street racers disorient the police. Following the scramble, police manage to pull over the Evo and the Eclipse, only to find out that they were driven by Tej Parker (Ludacris) and Suki (Devon Aoki), respectively.
As Brian approaches the destination point, Enrique tells him to make a detour away from the airfield. Meanwhile, Roman gets rid of Roberto by using an improvised ejector seat powered by nitrous oxide. At the airfield, Customs Agents have Verone's plane and convoy surrounded, only to discover they are duped into a decoy maneuver while Verone is at a boat yard several miles away. As he knew Monica was an undercover agent, he gave her the wrong information on the destination point. When Brian arrives at the intended drop-off point, Enrique prepares to kill him when Roman suddenly appears, with both of them dispatching Enrique. Verone makes his escape aboard his private yacht, but Brian and Roman use the Camaro and drive off a ramp at high-speed, crashing on top of the yacht. The duo manage to apprehend Verone and save Monica. With their crimes pardoned, Brian and Roman ponder on what to do next other than to settle in Miami when Brian mentions starting a garage. Roman asks how they would afford that and Brian reveals that he took some of the money, as Roman also reveals that his pockets aren't empty, having taken money for himself.
"The Fast and the Furious: Tokyo Drift" (2006).
After totaling his car in an illegal street race, Sean Boswell (Lucas Black) is sent to live with his father, who is stationed as a U.S. Navy officer in Tokyo, Japan, to avoid juvy or even jail. While in school, he befriends Twinkie (Bow Wow), a "military brat", who introduces him to the world of racing in Japan. Though forbidden to drive, he decides to race against Takashi (Brian Tee), the Drift King, who has ties to the yakuza. He borrows a car from Han, now a business partner to Takashi, and loses, totaling the car because of his lack of knowledge of drifting, racing that involves dangerous hairpin turns. To repay his debt for the car he destroyed, Sean must work for Han. Later on, Han becomes friends with Sean and teaches the young racer how to drift. Takashi's uncle Kamata (Sonny Chiba), a yakuza head, admonishes Takashi for allowing Han to steal from him. Takashi confronts Han, Sean and Neela (Nathalie Kelley), whereupon they flee. During the chase, Han is killed and Takashi, Sean and his father become involved in an armed standoff which is resolved by Neela agreeing to leave with Takashi. Twinkie provides his saved money to Sean to make up for Han's stolen money which Sean returns to Kamata. Sean proposes a race against Takashi to determine who must leave Tokyo. Sean and Han's friends then build a car from various spare parts and Sean wins the race. Later, Sean, now the "DK", is challenged to a race by an unnamed driver. This driver turns out to be Dominic.
"Fast & Furious" (2009).
Dominic and his new crew: Letty, Han, Leo, Santos and Cara, are hijacking fuel tankers in the Dominican Republic. Dominic begins to suspect the trail is too hot and leaves Letty behind in order to protect her from harm. Several weeks later, in Panama City, Dominic gets a call from Mia, who tells him that Letty has been murdered by Fenix Calderon (Laz Alonzo), after getting into a near fatal car accident. Dominic heads back to Los Angeles to examine Letty's crash and finds traces of nitromethane. He then goes to the only car mechanic that uses nitromethane and coerces him into giving him the name David Park (Ron Yuan), the man who ordered the fuel.
Meanwhile, F.B.I. agent Brian O'Conner is trying to track down a drug dealer named Arturo Braga (John Ortiz). His search leads him to David Park. Dominic arrives at Park's apartment first and hangs him out of the window by his ankles before letting go. Brian, who was also on his way to Park's place, saves Park and Park becomes the FBI's new informant. Park gets Brian into a street race through Los Angeles. Brian selects a modified Nissan Skyline GT-R R34 from the Impound Lot. Dominic also shows up to race in his modified 1970 Chevrolet Chevelle. Gisele Yashar (Gal Gadot), the liaison for Braga, reveals that the winner will become the last driver on a team that traffics heroin between the United States-Mexico border. Dominic wins by bumping Brian's car, making him lose control. Brian uses his power as an FBI agent to arrest another driver, Dwight Mueller (Greg Cipes), and takes his place on the team.
The following day, the team meets one of the Braga's men. They drive across the border using underground tunnels to avoid detection. Brian had prior knowledge that, after the heroin was delivered, Braga ordered the drivers to be killed. However it was revealed to Dominic from Fenix that he killed Letty and after a tense stand-off, Dominic detonates his car with nitrous to distract Braga's men and Brian hijacks a Hummer with US$60 million worth of heroin. Both Dominic and Brian drive back to Los Angeles and hide the heroin in a police impound lot where Brian picks up a modified Subaru Impreza WRX STI. Later on, Dominic finds out Brian was the last person to contact Letty, which results in him being attacked by Dominic until he learns Letty was working undercover for Brian, tracking down Braga in exchange for clearing Dominic's name. Brian tells his superiors that in exchange for Dominic's pardon, he will lure Braga into a trap, forcing him to personally show up to exchange money for the heroin. At the drop site, however, Ramon Campos (Robert Miano), the man who claims to be "Braga", is revealed as a decoy, and "Campos", the real Braga, escapes and flees to Mexico.
Brian and Dominic travel to Mexico on their own to catch Braga. They find him at a church and apprehend him. As Braga's henchmen come down to rescue their leader, Brian and Dominic drive through the underground tunnels back to the United States. When some of Braga's men are killed, Brian crashes his car and is injured after being T-boned by Fenix at the end of the tunnel. Before Fenix can kill Brian, Dominic, who survived the explosion and exchanged his 1970 Dodge Charger with a 1973 Chevrolet Camaro, drives into and kills Fenix. As police and helicopters start streaming to the crash site on the USA side, Brian tells Dominic to leave, but Dominic refuses, saying he's tired of running. Despite Brian's request for clemency, the judge sentences Dominic to 25 years to life. Dominic boards a prison bus that will take him to Lompoc penitentiary and as the bus drives down the road, Brian and Mia, along with Leo and Santos (who assisted in the Dominican Republic heists), arrive in their cars to intercept it.
"Fast Five" (2011).
Following the events of "Fast & Furious", when Dominic is being transported to a U.S. prison, Mia and Brian lead an assault on the bus, causing it to crash and freeing Dominic. While authorities search for them, the trio escape to Rio de Janiero, Brazil. Awaiting Dominic's arrival, Mia and Brian join their friend Vince and other participants on a job to steal three cars from a train. The job goes awry when Brian and Mia discover the train is carrying DEA agents and that the cars are seized property. When Dominic arrives with the rest of the participants, he realizes that one of them, Zizi (Michael Irby), is only interested in stealing one car: the Ford GT40. Dominic has Mia steal the car herself, while Brian and Dominic fight Zizi and his henchmen, with Zizi killing the DEA agents assigned to the vehicles. Dominic and Brian are captured and brought to crime lord – and owner of the cars – Hernan Reyes (Joaquim de Almeida), Zizi's boss, where he orders the pair be interrogated to discover the location of the car. However, they manage to escape and retreat to their safehouse.
Dominic, Brian, and Mia are blamed for the murder of the DEA agents and U.S. DSS agent Luke Hobbs (Dwayne Johnson) and his team arrive in Rio to capture him. While Brian, Dominic and Mia examine the car to discover its importance, Vince arrives and is revealed to be working for Reyes when he removes a computer chip from the car. Dominic forces Vince to leave and, after investigating the chip, Brian discovers it contains details of Reyes' criminal empire including the locations of $100 million in cash, and plan on stealing Reyes' money to start a new life. The trio organize a team to perform the heist, recruiting Han, Roman, Tej, Leo, Santos, Gisele and Vince. Hobbs and his team eventually find and arrest Dominic, Mia, Brian and Vince. While transporting them to an airport for extradition to the United States, the convoy is attacked by Reyes' men, killing Hobbs' team and Vince. Hobbs is saved by Dominic, Brian and Mia as they fight back against Reyes' men and escape. Wanting revenge for their murdered team, Hobbs and Elena Neves (Elsa Pataky) agree to help with the heist.
The gang breaks into the police station where Reyes' money is kept and tear the vault from the building using their cars, dragging it through the city with police in pursuit. Believing they cannot outrun the police, Dominic makes Brian continue on without him while he attacks the police and the pursuing Reyes, using the vault attached to his car to smash their vehicles. Brian returns to kill Zizi, while Reyes is badly injured by Dominic's assault. Hobbs arrives on the scene and executes Reyes. Hobbs refuses to let the pair go free, but unwilling to arrest the team, agrees to give them a 24-hour head start to escape. The gang split Reyes' money, with Dominic leaving Vince's share to his family, and they go their separate ways. In a post-credits scene, Hobbs is given a special file by USA Customs agent Monica concerning the hijack of a military convoy in Berlin. In the file, Hobbs discovers a recent photo of Letty Ortiz (Michelle Rodriguez), Dominic's presumed-deceased girlfriend, revealing she survived the events of "Fast & Furious"...
"Fast & Furious 6" (2013).
After the events of Fast Five, professional criminal Dominic Toretto and his crew are wealthy, but their criminal records prevent them from returning to their home country. Following his attempts to apprehend them, Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) agent Luke Hobbs offers the crew a deal; he will give them all full pardons for their crimes if they help him take down a lethally skilled mercenary organization led by a criminal mastermind and his ruthless second-in-command, Dominic's thought-dead lover Letty Ortiz.
Short films.
"Turbo-Charged Prelude" (2003).
Brian O'Conner (Paul Walker) packs his bags and leaves Los Angeles, before the LAPD gets a chance to arrest him for letting Dominic Toretto (Vin Diesel) escape. While the FBI launch a national manhunt on him, Brian travels across Arizona, New Mexico and Texas, winning in every street race he participates in with, his red Dodge Stealth. However, he is forced to ditch his car at a motel in Dallas when police officers are notified of his presence. When they collect the car, he manages to hitch a ride from an unknown woman, despite her knowing who he really is. She drops him at a used car lot, with him realizing she knows that he is a wanted man. There, he buys a green Nissan Skyline GT-R R34. Later, collecting money from street races, he modifies the car with new rims and repaints it silver, with blue lightning vinyls on the sides, before traveling eastbound and winning more races on the way. Upon reaching Atlanta, Georgia, Brian heads south toward Miami, Florida, where he sees Slap Jack's Toyota Supra and Orange Julius' Mazda RX-7 (both "2 Fast 2 Furious" characters) before the screen reads "2 be continued…".
"Los Bandoleros" (2009).
Leo Tego (Tego Calderón) is in a prison of the Dominican Republic, ranting about corporations holding back the electric car and starting wars for oil, while, on the streets, Omar Santos (Don Omar) chats to an old man unable to find enough gas. Han Seoul-Oh (Sung Kang) arrives and is collected from the airport by Cara Mirtha (Mirtha Michelle) and Malo (F. Valentino Morales). They drive him back to Santos' house, where his aunt Rubia (Adria Carrasco) is struggling with rising prices linked to the cost of gasoline and Dominic is working on his car. The team then enjoy a welcome meal with the family. After breaking Leo out of prison, they head to a club, where Han and Cara flirt, while Dominic meets up with local politician Elvis (Juan Fernandez), who informs them of a window of opportunity to hijack a gasoline shipment. While relaxing at the club afterwards, Dominic is surprised by the arrival of Letty, who has tracked him from Mexico. The two drive together to the beach, where they rekindle their relationship.
Related films.
Although not officially part of "The Fast and the Furious" film series, Sung Kang plays a character named Han in the film "Better Luck Tomorrow", directed by Justin Lin, who also directed "", "Fast & Furious" and "Fast Five". In "Fast Five", Gisele Yashar attributes Han's constant need to occupy his hands to him being a former smoker, an easter egg reference according to Lin's DVD commentary.
Characters.
List indicator(s)* A dark grey cell indicates the character was not in the film.
Merchandising.
Video games.
The film series has spawned several racing video games for arcades, iOS, PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable. The arcade game "The Fast and the Furious" (known as "Wild Speed" in Japan) was released by Raw Thrills in 2004. In 2006, the video game "The Fast and the Furious" was released for the PlayStation 2 and PlayStation Portable. "Fast and Furious: Pink Slip", "Fast & Furious", "Fast Five", and "Fast & Furious Adrenaline" have all been released for iOS and are available on the iTunes App Store.
Toys and model kits.
Racing Champions released diecast metal replicas of the film's cars in different scales from 1/18 to 1/64. RadioShack sold ZipZaps micro RC versions of the cars in 2002. 1/24 scale plastic model kits of the hero cars were manufactured by AMT Ertl.
