NCIS, formerly known as NCIS: Naval Criminal Investigative Service, is an American police procedural drama television series, revolving around a fictional team of special agents from the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, which conducts criminal investigations involving the U.S. Navy and Marine Corps.
The concept and characters were initially introduced in two episodes of the CBS series "JAG" (season eight episodes "Ice Queen" and "Meltdown"). The show, a spin-off from "JAG", premiered on September 23, 2003, on CBS. To date it has aired for nine full seasons and has gone into syndicated reruns. Donald Bellisario is co-creator, along with Don McGill, as well as executive producer.
"NCIS" was originally referred to as Navy NCIS during season one; "Navy" was later dropped from the title as it was redundant. In season seven, "NCIS" was joined by a spin-off series, "", starring Chris O'Donnell and LL Cool J.
In 2011, "NCIS" was voted America’s favorite television show. On February 1, 2013, CBS renewed "NCIS" for an 11th season.
Premise.
"NCIS" follows a fictional team of Naval Criminal Investigative Service Major Case Response Team (MCRT) special agents headquartered at the Washington Navy Yard in Washington, D.C. It is described by the actors and producers (on special features on DVD releases in the United States) as being distinguished by its comedic elements, ensemble acting, and character-driven plots.
NCIS is the primary law enforcement and counter-intelligence arm of the United States Department of the Navy, which includes the United States Marine Corps. NCIS investigates all major criminal offenses (felonies)—i.e., crimes punishable under the Uniform Code of Military Justice by confinement of more than one year—within the Department of the Navy. The MCRT is frequently assigned to high-profile cases such as the death of the U.S. president's military aide, a bomb situation on a U.S. Navy warship, the death of a celebrity on a reality show set on a US Marine Corps base, terrorist threats involving U.S Naval and Marine weapons and/or Naval or Marine installations, and kidnappings of Navy and Marine Corps personnel.
The MCRT is led by Supervisory Special Agent Leroy Jethro Gibbs (Mark Harmon). Gibbs’ team is composed of Special Agent and Senior Field Agent Anthony "Tony" DiNozzo (Michael Weatherly), Special Agent Timothy McGee (Sean Murray), and Special Agent (former Mossad liaison officer) Ziva David (Cote de Pablo), who replaced Caitlin "Kate" Todd (Sasha Alexander) when she was shot and killed by rogue Mossad agent Ari Haswari (Rudolf Martin) at the end of season two. The team is assisted in their investigations by Chief Medical Examiner Donald "Ducky" Mallard (David McCallum), his assistant Jimmy Palmer (Brian Dietzen), who replaced Gerald Jackson (Pancho Demmings), and Forensic Specialist Abigail "Abby" Sciuto (Pauley Perrette).
It is revealed, through flashbacks, that the head of the MCRT before Gibbs was Special Agent Mike Franks (Muse Watson), who led the unit when it was part of the Naval Investigative Service (NIS), the predecessor agency of the NCIS. Franks recruited Gibbs shortly after Gibbs' retirement from the Marine Corps, eventually retiring himself some years later. After Franks' departure, Gibbs recruited DiNozzo from the Baltimore Police Department's Homicide Section. The two were briefly joined by Vivian Blackadder (Robyn Lively), whom Gibbs recruited from the FBI. In the second part of the NCIS pilot, Blackadder allowed her emotions to nearly derail an anti-terror operation in Spain. Gibbs is noticeably disappointed; Blackadder is not present in the series' first regular episode, replaced by Caitlin Todd, a Secret Service agent who joins Gibbs' team after resigning from the Secret Service. Todd is eventually killed in the line of duty in the season two finale, and is ultimately replaced by Ziva David, who from season three to season seven is the Mossad liaison officer who eventually gains American citizenship and becomes a full agent. McGee first appears as a Field Agent assigned to the Norfolk Field Office. He uses his computer skills to aid the MCRT in subsequent investigations through the rest of season one, until he is officially promoted with his own desk at the Navy Yard in the beginning of season two.
NCIS is currently led by Director Leon Vance (Rocky Carroll). The first director seen in the series, Thomas Morrow (Alan Dale), left after being promoted to Deputy Director of the Department of Homeland Security. Jenny Shepard (Lauren Holly) was appointed director after Morrow in the first episode of season three, the first NCIS director to be in the regular series cast list. After Shepard was killed in a shootout at the end of season five, Vance—who was assistant director of NCIS before her death—was seen as acting director after her death and was promoted to take her place.
Production.
Name.
After its successful first season, the name of the series was shortened to "NCIS".
Filming location.
"NCIS" is set in the Washington, D.C. area but is filmed in Santa Clarita, California. The sound stages are in Santa Clarita. The series is shot throughout southern California.
Crew changes.
It was reported in May 2007 that Donald Bellisario would be stepping down from the show. Due to a disagreement with series star Mark Harmon, Bellisario's duties as showrunner/head writer were to be tasked to long-time show collaborators, including co-executive producer Chas. Floyd Johnson and Shane Brennan, with Bellisario retaining his title as executive producer. In fall 2009, Gary Glasberg joined the crew and became the new "day-to-day" runner of NCIS, as Shane Brennan had to focus on his new show, the spin-off "".
Episodes.
Nine complete seasons of "NCIS" have aired, with the ninth season ending on May 15, 2012. The tenth season premiered on September 25, 2012.
Ratings.
Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of "NCIS".
Home video releases.
The first eight seasons of "NCIS" have been released in Regions 1, 2 and 4. In Germany (Region 2), seasons 1–4 and 6–8 were released in two separate sets for each season. The first season DVD omits the two introductory episodes from season eight of "JAG", though they are featured on the "JAG" season eight DVD.
Other releases.
In 2010, CBS Interactive and GameHouse released a mobile video game, NCIS: The Game for iOS, Android, BlackBerry, Windows Mobile, and BREW/J2ME. The game features five different cases written by the show's writers.
On November 1, 2011, Ubisoft released NCIS, a video game for the PC, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, and Wii. A Nintendo 3DS version was released on March 6, 2012. The video game was deemed as a mockery to the show by reviewers and players alike, and received a 2/10 rating on GameSpot.
Soundtrack.
CBS Records released the show's first soundtrack on February 10, 2009. "The Official TV Soundtrack" is a two-disc, 22-track set that includes brand new songs from top artists featured prominently in upcoming episodes of the series as well as the show’s original theme by Numeriklab (available commercially for the first time) and a remix of the theme by Ministry. The set also includes songs performed by series regulars Pauley Perrette and Cote de Pablo.
A sequel to the soundtrack was released on November 3, 2009. "NCIS: The Official TV Soundtrack; Vol. 2" is a single disc, 12 track set that covers songs (many previously unreleased) featured throughout the seventh season of the show, including one recording titled "Bitter and Blue" by Weatherly, as well as two songs used in previous seasons.
Spin-off.
In 2009, CBS picked up an "NCIS" spin-off series with the title "". Filming began in February 2009, with the characters introduced in a two-part "NCIS" episode titled "Legend" which aired on April 28, 2009 and May 5, 2009. The characters listed were: G. Callen, Lara Macy, Nate "Doc" Getz, Kensi Blye, and Sam Hanna. Crew members include Michael B. Kaplan, Lev L. Spiro, Jerry London, Sheldon Epps, and Mark Saraceni.
Chris O'Donnell plays the lead character of G. Callen. LL Cool J, plays the role of Special Agent Sam Hanna, a former Navy SEAL, who works in the undercover unit of NCIS in Los Angeles, and is also fluent in Arabic and an expert on Middle Eastern culture." Peter Cambor and Daniela Ruah were confirmed to be cast as leads, playing a psychologist (called "Nate") and forensic investigator/undercover agent (called "Kensi") respectively.
Following the shows official pick up, Louise Lombard was not signed for the role of Special Agent Lara Macy, that she had played in the pilot. Linda Hunt and Adam Jamal Craig were confirmed to replace her, playing OSP Manager Henrietta Lange and Special Agent Dom Vail, both starring roles. Craig left the series in episode 21 of season 1, was replaced by Eric Christian Olsen playing Marty Deeks, the LAPD/NCIS Liaison and Kensi's partner.
Characters from "NCIS" have appeared in the spin-off; Leon Vance has a recurring role and Abby Sciuto appeared in the episodes "" and "Killshot".
"NCIS: Los Angeles" is created by Shane Brennan. NCIS creator Donald Bellisario sued CBS over NCIS: Los Angeles in April 2011 because of his "first opportunity" to develop a spin-off, which according to the suit, Bellisario wasn't offered from CBS. In June 2012 a Court judge dismissed Bellisario's suit.
Awards and nominations.
ALMA Award
ASCAP Award
BMI Film & TV Awards
California on Location Awards
Emmy Awards
NAACP Image Awards
People's Choice Awards
Imagen Foundation Awards
Young Artist Awards
