Dark Skies is a 2013 American science fiction horror film directed by Scott Stewart and produced by Jason Blum starring Keri Russell, Josh Hamilton and Dakota Goyo.
The film was released on February 22, 2013.
Plot.
The Barrett family hosts a barbecue and invite their friends the Jessops over. During the dinner, Daniel Barrett (Josh Hamilton) announces his distaste for his eldest son, Jesse's (Dakota Goyo) older friend, Kevin Ratner, whom he calls "Ratface". 
At night, when everyone is in bed, Jesse and his younger brother, Sammy (Kadan Rockett) communicate with each other from their beds via walkie-talkie. Jesse is reading scary stories about the Sandman, which frightens Sammy and prompts him to ask if the Sandman will take his eyes like in the story. Jesse reassures him that if anything, the Sandman would take his own eyes first and that Sammy should get some sleep. 
Lacy (Keri Russell) wakes up during the night and checks on her boys before heading down to the kitchen where she discovers the fridge being wide open with its contents spread out all over the floor, and the backdoor wide open. The next day, her and Daniel believe it to be an animal that broke in, although Lacy questions why the meat wasn't touched but the vegetables were. Daniel joked that it was probably a rabbit. They decided to make sure that all doors are locked before they would go to bed at night.
Daniel has a job interview which doesn't go well and he receives a notice in the mail that their mortgage payment is late. He lies to Lacy and says that the interview went great and he should hear from them by next week. He then asks if they could cut down on cable for a while to save some money. Lacy has a viewing for a foreclosed home. The daughter of the couple has an asthma attack and Lacy relates to the mother because Jesse used to be sick all the time when he was younger. 
That night, Lacy wakes up and heads down to the kitchen. She discovers all of their canned and packaged foods stacked up in towers all over the kitchen counters, floor, and table, and the chandelier above the dinning table projects a strange looking sign on the ceiling. Sammy accidentally scares Lacy and she asks him if he knows who did it. He says he had a bad dream and it was the Sandman who did it. 
She brushes it off as a nightmare and in the morning the police come to check all of the doors and windows to see if there was a break in. The officer believes that either someone has a key or it was a member of the family who did it in their sleep, like a sleepwalker would do. He then recommends that they start up their alarm service once again to be sure no one is coming into their home while they sleep.
That night, the alarm is set off, waking up the entire family. Lacy and Daniel go to investigate and Sammy goes into to Jesse's room in case there is a break in. Daniel shuts off the alarm and notices that all doors and windows are still locked. The alarm company calls and believes it to be a malfunction in the system because it shows that all entry points into the house were breached at the exact same time. Lacy checks the kitchen and living room and discovers that all of the pictures in their picture frames have been removed and disappeared. The alarm company sends over a technician in the morning who determines that nothing was breached and that it was a simple malfunction. The police believe that one of the boys stole the pictures as a cry for attention. 
Lacy and Daniel questions Jesse and Sammy and Lacy realizes that Sammy is still having nightmares and Sammy says that it was the Sandman who stole the pictures. Daniel and Sammy go to the park as a means for Sammy to receive more attention, and Jesse heads off to the foreclosed home to meet up with his friend Ratner and Shelly Jessop. Shelly gives Jesse his first kiss. Meanwhile, Sammy is playing soccer with the other kids when he wets himself and becomes catatonic. Daniel goes to see what's wrong and Sammy begins screaming. Lacy, whose at home witness 3 flocks of birds crashing into their house. 
At night, Lacy is awoken by a sound and hears Sammy talking. She goes to check on him and sees a figure standing over his bed. She screams and turns on the light to find an empty room. Daniel and Lacy run around the house trying to find Sammy, when Daniel sees him in the front yard walking away from the house. The run out to stop him, causing the alarm to go off. Daniel doesn't believe that Lacy saw something and believes that Sammy should start seeing a therapist. The next day, Daniel installs cameras in all of the rooms. When he looks at the footage the next day, he discovers that one by one, the cameras become fuzzy and blurred and then begin functioning again. 
Lacy has a viewing at the same house. As she's pitching the house to the couple, she becomes unable to speak and enters a sort of trance. She walks towards the glass door and begins to bang her head repeatedly on it and then wakes up in her bed. She finds a bruise forming on her forehead and notices that she blacked-out for 6 hours. She also finds a picture that Sammy drew of a boy and three grey figures holding hands beside a house with dead birds on the ground. She begins to search on the internet for answers when Daniel comes home to announce that he found a job. The send Sammy with the Jessop's for the night and Jesse to Ratner's while they have alone time to celebrate. Lacy wakes up at around midnight and finds Daniel standing in the backyard in a catatonic state and his nose begins to bleed heavily. He walks up having no memory of what happened.
Sammy goes to the pool with the Jessop's the next day but refuses to go swimming. Shelly attempts to take off his shirt and discover a strange formation of bruises all over his chest. Jesse and Ratner sneak into the woods behind a golf course where Ratner begins to shoot at Jesse with a pellet gun. Jesse freezes in a standing position and has a seizure with his eyes rolling to the back of his head. At the hospital, the doctors inform Lacy and Daniel that Jesse is covered in strange symbols that had to have been branded onto his body. Sammy is returned and the Jessop's now believe that the Barrett's are abusing their children. 
At night, Daniel finds the camera's to become blurry and fritzing out in Sammy's room. He runs upstairs and finds Sammy with no eyes. He returns to look at the footage of the camera, going frame by frame until he sees 3 dark figures standing over the beds of everyone in the family. He believes Lacy's claim that there is an extraterrestrial force at work. They seek the help of a specialist, Edwin Pollard (J.K. Simmons) who calls the beings "The Greys", that there are 3 of them, and that many have suffered the same fate as the Barrett's, with most cases ending with a child abduction. He informs them that they should be hyper-protective of their child that has been "chosen" and that they must work together in order to save their son. He states that illness and nosebleeds are signs as is the drawing that Lacy discovered. 
Daniel goes out and buys a shotgun and boards up the windows of the house. The door and windows light up and the boards shake, as the Greys come for them and Lacy sends Jesse into his room with Sammy and tells him not to take his eyes off of his brother. She stands outside the door with a knife in hand. The power shuts off but the TV in her bedroom turns on. She walks towards it, unaware of a Grey behind her, and becomes trapped in her room. Daniel fires into the bright light, hoping to hit one of the Greys. He manages to get Jesse and Sammy into his and Lacy's room and they move a dresser in front of the door. They huddle together when Jesse blacks out and finds himself in the foreclosed house where he sees his mother is dead and watches his dad kill himself. He chases after Sammy and reawakens into the upstairs hallway of his house. Daniel, Lacy and Sammy are altogether staring at Jesse with a look of concern. The Greys appear in front of Jesse, a flash of light occurs and then they abduct him. 
Three months later, Lacy and Daniel are suspects in Jesse's disappearance and they've moved into an apartment. Edwin Pollard cuts up a newspaper article about Jesse's disappearance and hangs it on his wall. As Lacy is going through old things, she finds pictures that Jesse drew as a child that involved 3 grey figures holding his hand in front of a house. Lacy realizes that illness was one of the symptoms of the Greys and remembers that Jesse was sick for the longest time as a child. She comes to understand that Jesse was the one at risk, and not Sammy. And as she realizes this, the walkie-talkie begins to go off with feedback and Jesse's voice cutting off, knowing that her son is killed.
Production.
Production commenced on August 3, 2012. Locations for filming included Los Angeles. The film was directed by Scott Stewart and produced by Jason Blum, Jeanette Brill and Couper Samuelson. The film's screenplay was written by Stewart; the original script by Stewart took about six weeks to finish writing.
Release.
"Dark Skies" was released in the United States on February 22, 2013 and subsequently in the United Kingdom on April 5, 2013.
Reception.
"Dark Skies" holds a 34% rotten rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 35 reviews, and a 48% rating on Metacritic based on 13 reviews. Michael O'Sullivan of "The Washington Post" wrote that "he movie builds a moderate, if less than monumental, level of spookiness, regardless of your ignorance. It’s a workmanlike piece of suspense." He gave the film 2 out of 4 stars. Writing for "The New York Times" was Andy Webster, who said that the film was "employed with consummate dexterity">
