Nashville is an American musical drama television series. It was created by Academy Award winner Callie Khouri and produced by R.J. Cutler, Khouri, Dee Johnson, Steve Buchanan and Connie Britton. The series stars Connie Britton as Rayna Jaymes, a legendary country music superstar, whose stardom begins fading, and Hayden Panettiere as rising teen star Juliette Barnes. The series premiere on ABC on October 10, 2012, had more than 8.93 million viewers. The pilot was made available on Hulu, iTunes, and ABC.com before it premiered on television.
The pilot episode received critical acclaim, specifically praising Callie Khouri's writing, casting, and the performances of Connie Britton and Hayden Panettiere. Connie Britton was nominated for the 2012 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Television Series Drama and Hayden Panettiere for Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress, while the series was nominated for Favorite New TV Drama at the 39th People's Choice Awards, for Best Screenplay at 2013 Writers Guild of America Award and four Satellite Awards.
Premise.
Rayna Jaymes (Connie Britton) is the established "Queen of Country" music. However, her latest album is not selling well and her tour is playing to half empty venues. Her record label suggests that she open for Juliette Barnes (Hayden Panettiere), the young and sexy best selling singer of bubble gum country. However, Juliette, seeing Rayna as washed up, purposefully alienates her. Rayna, who dislikes Juliette's style of music, rejects a joint tour out of hand. The two women come into conflict as both try to get guitarist Deacon Claybourne (Charles Esten), Rayna's bandmate and former lover, to sign on to their tour. Rayna's life is further complicated when her estranged father, millionaire businessman Lamar Wyatt (Powers Boothe), convinces her husband, Teddy Conrad (Eric Close), to run for Mayor of Nashville.
Development and production.
ABC bought Callie Khouri's script at the beginning of October 2011, and ordered a pilot on January 27, 2012. The pilot of the show was filmed in March 2012. British actor Sam Palladio became the first actor cast in the pilot on February 14, 2012. Australian actress Clare Bowen was the next addition to the pilot as Scarlett O'Connor in February 17, 2012.
 On February 22, Jonathan Jackson joined as Avery Barkley. The next day Emmy Award winner Powers Boothe joined as Lamar Wyatt. On February 29, it was announced that Hayden Panettiere had landed the role of Juliette Barnes, primary Antagonist of series. On March 5 Eric Close joined the ensemble as Teddy Conrad, Rayna’s husband. On March 6, it was announced that Connie Britton would play leading role of Rayna Jaymes, 40-year-old fading country superstar. The pilot was directed by R.J. Cutler.
The series was picked up by ABC on May 11, 2012, and premiered on the network on October 10, 2012 as part of its 2012–13 television season. On November 12, 2012 the series was picked up for a full season run (nine more episodes).
"Nashville" is filmed on location in Nashville. The Bluebird Cafe, an important local performance arena, is a frequent setting; the show's producers precisely replicated its exterior and interior in a Nashville sound stage.
Nashville began broadcasting in the United Kingdom in February 2013 on More4.
Music.
On October 2, 2012, it was announced that Big Machine Records will release all covers and original songs from the series. Some of the original songs will be written by John Paul White of The Civil Wars, Hillary Lindsey, and Elvis Costello.
On November 13, 2012, Big Machine announced the release of "" Original Soundtrack on December 11, 2012.
Reception.
Critical reception.
Metacritic gave the show a rating of 84 out of 100 or "universal acclaim" based on 32 reviews.
Awards.
In June 2012, "Nashville" was one of five honorees in the "Most Exciting New Series" category at the "Critics' Choice Television Awards", voted by journalists who had seen the television pilots for the 2012-2013 season.
