The grave accent ( ` ) ( or ) is a diacritical mark used in many written languages, including Breton, Catalan, Corsican, Dutch, French, Greek (until 1982; see polytonic orthography), Italian, Macedonian, Mohawk, Norwegian, Occitan, Portuguese, Ligurian, Scottish Gaelic, Vietnamese, Welsh, Romansh and Yoruba.
Uses.
Pitch.
Greek.
The grave accent was first used in the polytonic orthography of Ancient Greek to mark a lower pitch than the high pitch of the acute accent. In modern practice, it is used to replace an acute accent in the last syllable of a word when the word is followed immediately by another word in the sentence.
The grave and circumflex have been replaced with an acute accent in the modern monotonic orthography.
Stress.
The grave accent marks the stressed vowel of a word in Catalan and Italian. 
A general rule is that in Italian, words ending with stressed -a, -i, -o, -u must be marked with a grave accent. Words ending with stressed -e may bear either an acute accent or a grave accent, depending on whether the final 'e' sound is closed or open, respectively. Some examples of words with a final grave accent are: "città" "city", "morì" "died", "virtù" "virtue", "Mosè" "Moses", "portò" "[he/she/it brought, carried". A typist using a keyboard without accented characters who is unfamiliar with input methods for typing accented letters will sometimes use a separate backtick or even an apostrophe instead of the proper accent, though this is an error. This is especially common when typing capital letters, thus "E`" or "E’" instead of "È" "[he/she/it] is". Other mistakes arise from the misunderstanding of truncated and elided words: for example the phrase "un po’", meaning "a little", which is the truncated version of "un poco", is infrequently spelt as "un pò". In Italian there are many pairs of words, one with an accent marked and the other not, with different pronunciation and meaning, such as "pero" "pear tree" and "però" "but", and "Papa" "Pope" and "papà" "dad" (the last example is also valid for Catalan). 
In Bulgarian and Macedonian, the grave is used on the vowels а, о, у, е, и, ъ (Bulgarian only), to mark stress. It is particularly used in books for children or foreigners, or to distinguish between near-homophones: па̀ра "steam, vapour" and пара̀ "cent/penny, money", въ̀лна "wool" and вълна̀ "wave". In a few cases (mostly on the vowels е and и) the stress mark is orthographically required to distinguish words which are homonyms. For example, the Macedonian negation particle не is a homonym with the short-form of the direct object personal pronoun нe – thus нѐ. The grave in these cases forces the stress on the accented word-syllable, instead of having a different syllable in the stress group get accented. In turn, this changes the pronunciation and the whole meaning of the group.
In Ukrainian, Rusyn, Belarusian and Russian, a similar system was in use until the first half of the 20th century. Now the main stress is preferably marked with an acute, and the role of grave is limited to marking secondary stress in compound words (in dictionaries and linguistic literature). 
In the descendants of Serbo-Croatian and in Slovene, the stressed syllable can be short or long, as well as having rising or falling tone. To show this, these languages use (in dictionaries, orthography, and grammar books, for example) four different stress marks (grave, acute, double grave and circumflex). The system is identical both in Latin and Cyrillic scripts.
In modern Church Slavonic, there are three stress marks (acute, grave and circumflex). There is no phonetical distinction between them, only the orthographical one. Grave is typically used when the stressed vowel is the last letter of a multi-letter word.
In Ligurian, the grave accent marks the accented short vowel of a word in "à" (sound ), "è" (sound ), "ì" (sound ) and "ù" (sound ). In the case of "ò", it is used for the short sound of , but it may not be the stressed vowel of the word.
Length.
In Welsh, the accent is used to denote a short vowel sound in a word which would otherwise be pronounced with a long vowel sound, for example "mẁg" "mug" versus "mwg" "smoke".
In Scottish Gaelic, it denotes a long vowelthe use of acute accents is seen in older texts, but is no longer allowed according to the new orthographical conventions.
Tone.
In some tonal languages such as Vietnamese and Mandarin Chinese (when written in Hanyu Pinyin or Zhuyin Fuhao), the grave accent is used to indicate a falling tone. The alternative to the grave accent in Mandarin is the numeral 4 after the syllable: pà = pa4.
In African languages, the grave accent is often used to indicate a low tone, e.g. Nobiin "jàkkàr" "fish-hook", Yoruba "àgbọ̀n" "chin", Hausa "màcè" "woman".
The grave accent is used to represent the low tone in Kanien'kéha or Mohawk.
Other uses.
In Portuguese, the grave accent indicates the contraction of two consecutive vowels in adjacent words (crasis). For example, instead of "a aquela hora" ("at that hour"), one says and writes "àquela hora".
In Hawaiian, the grave accent (alone, not placed over another character) is sometimes encountered as a typographically easier substitute for the ʻokina, e.g. "Hawai`i" instead of "Hawaiʻi".
English.
The grave accent, although not standardly applied to any English words, is sometimes used in poetry and song lyrics to indicate that a vowel usually silent is to be pronounced, in order to fit the rhythm or meter. Most often, it is applied to a word ending with -ed. For instance, the word "looked" is usually pronounced as a single syllable, with the "e" silent; when written as "lookèd", the "e" is pronounced: "look-ed"). It can also be used in this capacity to distinguish certain pairs of identically spelled words like the past tense of learn, "learned" , from the adjective "learnèd" (for example, "a very learnèd man").
Italics, with appropriate accents, are generally applied to foreign terms that are uncommonly used in or have not been assimilated into English: for example, "vis-à-vis", "pièce de résistance" and "crème brûlée".
The layout of some European PC keyboards combined with problematic keyboard driver semantics causes many users to use a grave accent or an acute accent instead of an apostrophe when typing in English (e.g. typing John`s or John´s instead of John's).
Technical notes.
The ISO-8859-1 character encoding includes the letters "à", "è", "ì", "ò", "ù", and their respective capital forms. Dozens more letters with the grave accent are available in Unicode.
In the ASCII character set the grave accent is encoded as character 96, hex 60. Unicode also provides the grave accent as a combining character, encoded as 768, hex 300. Outside the US, character 96 is often replaced by accented letters. In the French ISO 646 standard, the character at this position is "µ". Many older UK computers, such as the ZX Spectrum and BBC Micro, have the £ symbol as character 96, though the British ISO 646 variant ultimately placed this symbol at position 35 instead.
On many computer keyboards, the grave accent occupies a key by itself, and is meant to be combined with vowels as a multi-key combination or as a dead key to modify the following letter.
On a Mac, to get a character such as à, the user must type Option-` and then the vowel. For example, to make à, the user must type Option-` and then 'a', and to make À, the user must type Option-` and then Shift-a.
On a system running the X Window System, to get a character such as à, the user should press compose and ` together, then the vowel. The compose key on modern keyboards is usually mapped to a Windows key or shift+AltGR.
On a US and UK QWERTY keyboard, the grave accent key is placed in the top left corner. In many PC based computer games, the key is used to open the console window, allowing the user to execute commands via a CLI.
Use in programming.
Programmers have used the grave accent symbol as a separate character (i.e., not combined with any letter) for a number of tasks. In this role, it is known as a "backquote" or "backtick".
When using TeX to typeset text, the backtick character is used as a syntax to represent curly opening quotes. For example, codice_1 is rendered as single opening curly quote (‘) and codice_2 is a double curly opening quote (“). It is also used for supplying the numeric ASCII value of an ASCII character wherever a number is expected.
In the Bash shell, the `...` syntax is not recommended by style guides (though it is not formally deprecated), and the alternate syntax $(...) is preferred because it is more readable, especially for nested expressions. The same is true of Z shell.
In Lisp macro systems, the backquote character (called "quasiquote" in Scheme) introduces a quoted expression in which comma-substitution may occur. It is identical to the plain quote, except that symbols prefixed with a comma will be replaced with those symbols' values as variables. This is roughly analogous to the Unix shell's variable interpolation with codice_3 inside double quotes.
In m4, it is used together with an apostrophe to quote strings (to suppress or defer macro expansion).
In MySQL, it is used in queries as a column, table and database classifier.
In Pico, the backquote is used to indicate comments in the programming language.
In Haskell, surrounding a function name by backquotes allows it to be used as an infix operator.
In OCaml, the backquote is used to indicate polymorphic variants.
In Tom, the backquote is used to create a new term or to call an existing term.
In D and Go, the backquote is used to surround a raw string literal.
Windows PowerShell uses the backquote as the escape character. For example, a newline character is denoted codice_4. Most commonly used programming languages use a backslash as the escape character (e.g. codice_5) but because Windows allows the backslash as a path separator, it would have been impractical for PowerShell to use backslash for a different purpose. To get the codice_1 character itself, two backticks are used. For example, the nullable boolean of .NET is specified in PowerShell as codice_7.
Prior to Python 3.0, backticks were used as a synonym for the codice_8 function, which converts its argument to a string suitable for a programmer to view. However, this feature was removed in Python 3.0. Backticks are also used extensively in the reStructuredText plain text markup language (implemented in the Python docutils package).
In Verilog, the grave accent is used to define constants (e.g., after the line codice_9, codice_10 can be used as a synonym for codice_11). By contrast, the apostrophe is used in specifying sized constants (for example, codice_12 is a 5-bit constant with the value 10). Accidental use of an apostrophe instead of a grave accent and vice versa is a source of frequent beginner mistakes in the language.
In Unlambda, the backquote character denotes function application.
In BBC BASIC, the backquote character is valid at the beginning of or within a variable, structure, procedure or function name.
