Criminal Minds is an American police procedural television program that premiered September 22, 2005, on CBS. The series follows a team of profilers from the FBI's Behavioral Analysis Unit (BAU) based in Quantico, Virginia. The BAU is part of the FBI National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime. The show differs from many procedural dramas by focusing on profiling the criminal, rather than the crime itself. The show is produced by The Mark Gordon Company in association with CBS Television Studios (originally Paramount Network Television then CBS Paramount Network Television) and ABC Studios (originally Touchstone Television).
CBS announced in October 2009 that Legacy Interactive would develop a video game based on the show. The game would require players to examine crime scenes for clues to help solve murder mysteries. The interactive puzzle game was released in 2012, but did not feature any of the voices of the show's cast, nor were the cast involved with the project.
On March 14, 2012, CBS renewed "Criminal Minds" for an eighth season, which premiered on September 26, 2012.
Background.
When the series premiered in 2005, it featured FBI Agents Jason Gideon (Mandy Patinkin), Aaron Hotchner (Thomas Gibson), and the rest of the Behavioral Analysis Unit (BAU). For season one, the team was composed of Agents Elle Greenaway (Lola Glaudini), Derek Morgan (Shemar Moore), Dr. Spencer Reid (Matthew Gray Gubler), Jennifer "JJ" Jareau (A.J. Cook), and Technical Analyst Penelope Garcia (Kirsten Vangsness). During season one, Vangsness was not in the regular cast, but instead appeared as a guest star.
Casting has been ever-changing with the coming and going over multiple characters. In season two (2006–07), Elle leaves after episode six and is replaced in episode nine by Emily Prentiss (Paget Brewster), the daughter of an ambassador (Kate Jackson). In season three (2007–08), Jason departs after episode two, but he is replaced several episodes later by David Rossi (Joe Mantegna), a former FBI agent and best-selling author. In season six (2010–11), Jennifer leaves after episode two and is replaced by Ashley Seaver (Rachel Nichols). Later in season six, Emily leaves the show; and Cook returns, as a special guest star, to participate in Prentiss' final episode.
For season seven (2011–12), Cook had signed a two-year contract to return as a series regular at the end of season six and for the beginning of season seven. Brewster also returned as a series regular for season seven. In May 2011, CBS chose not to pick up Nichols' contract for a second season. Moore's and Gibson's contracts were both renewed. Paget Brewster left the show after season seven, and it was later revealed that Jeanne Tripplehorn would join the cast as Brewster's replacement.
Episodes.
Seven complete seasons of "Criminal Minds" have been aired, with the eighth season starting on September 26, 2012. , a total of 177 episodes have aired.
Spin-off.
The spin-off debuted February 16, 2011, on CBS but was canceled after a short 13 episode season due to low ratings.
Critical reception.
Despite the first two seasons receiving largely positive reviews, subsequent reviews have been mixed to negative. The show holds a Metacritic score of 42/100 as of May 11, 2012.
Dorothy Rabinowitz said, in her review for the "Wall Street Journal", that "From the evidence of the first few episodes, "Criminal Minds" may be a hit, and deservedly" and gave particular praise to both Matthew Gray Gubler and Mandy Patinkin's performance.
"The New York Times" was less than positive, saying "The problem with "Criminal Minds" is its many confusing maladies, applied to too many characters" and felt that "as a result, the cast seems like a spilled trunk of broken toys, with which the audience - and perhaps the creators - may quickly become bored."
"The Chicago Tribune" reviewer, Sid Smith, felt that the show "May well be worth a look" though he too criticized the "confusing plots and characters."
"PopMatters" panned the show, saying the show "confuses critical thinking with supernatural abilities" and criticized the "stereotypical characters". The "Los Angeles Times" gave a similar review. However, both reviewers praised Patinkin and Gubler's performances.
American ratings.
Broadcast.
Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of "Criminal Minds".
DVR.
The show ranked number nine in DVR playback (2.35 million viewers), according to Nielsen prime DVR lift data from September 22, 2008 – November 23, 2008.
For the week of October 10, 2010, "Criminal Minds" ranked sixth in DVR playback (2.40 million viewers), and seventh in the demo playback (1.0 demo) according to Nielsen prime DVR lift data.
Syndication.
The series is in syndication on A&E Network and ION Television.
