Honey Singh (also known as Yo Yo Honey Singh) is a Punjabi rapper, music producer, singer and film actor. He started as a session and recording artist, and became a Bhangra producer. He has also begun to produce music for Bollywood films.
Promotion.
Honey Singh and Diljit Dosanjh's song Lak 28 Kudi Da reached No 1 in BBC Asian Download Charts in May 2011. The song was released a promotional track for Diljit Dosanjh's film Lion of Punjab.
Honey Singh has received the ETC award for the Best sound in 2006 for his song Glassi and the PTC award for the Best Folk Pop Award 2009 for Rebirth and PTC Punjab Best Music Director 2011.
It has been reported that he has been paid the highest fee ever for a Bollywood song (as of 2012) of for a song in the films "Cocktail" and "Mastan".
Yo! Yo! Honey Singh tops the chart of trending videos of 2012. He earns two places on YouTube's list of top 10 trending videos of 2012. His song Brown Rang makes it to top spot and High Heels, in collaboration with Jaz Dhami, takes fourth spot.
Early life.
He was born on 15 March 1984 in Hoshiarpur. While in the UK, he studied music at the Trinity School.
Career.
It is reported that Honey Singh prefers to sing in his native language Punjabi rather than English, Spanish and French.
The Punjabi album International Villager was released on 11 November 2011 (11-11-11). The track "Gabru" from International Villager featuring singer J-Star topped Asian music charts (including world iTunes and the official BBC Asian charts)
He has performed at many college festivals including at Ansal Institute of Technology and Ramjas College, Delhi.
Bollywood.
Honey Singh has also become widely popular in Bollywood. He was first noticed after his debut song in a Bollywood film featuring Gagan Sidhu for the film "Shakal Pe Mat Ja". Honey Singh also acted in the Punjabi Movie "Mirza- The Untold Story".
He has also charged Rs.70 lakh for a song in an upcoming film titled "Mastaan" starring Naseeruddin Shah. It is the biggest amount paid to a song artist in Bollywood to date, making Honey Singh the highest-paid musical artist in Bollywood.
Also, a song named "Angreji Beat" from Honey Singh's recently released album "International Villager" featuring Gippy Grewal, was featured in Saif Ali Khan's film "Cocktail".
On 12 December 2012(12-12-12), Honey Singh released his first solo single "Satan" and it premiered on MTV India. The video has been directed by David Zennie and the whole project was presented by Anurag Kashyap.
Controversy.
In the aftermath of the 2012 Delhi gang rape case, the lyrics to some of his songs, which depict violence against women and rape positively have caused controversy. An FIR was lodged against rapper Honey Singh for his offensive lyrics while a group of social activists filed an online petition demanding cancellation of his New Year performance at a Gurgaon hotel. After online campaign Honey Singh's New Year concert cancelled by hotel. Honey Singh denies writing these offensive lyrics
Filmography.
Feature films as Actor
