The Walking Dead is a monthly black-and-white comic book series chronicling the travels of Rick Grimes, his family, and the other survivors of a zombie apocalypse.
First issued in 2003 by publisher Image Comics, the comic was created by writer Robert Kirkman and artist Tony Moore (who was later replaced by Charlie Adlard from issue #7 onward, though Moore continued to do the covers through issue #24.)
"The Walking Dead" received the 2010 Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series at San Diego Comic-Con International. The series was loosely adapted into the AMC television series "The Walking Dead", which premiered in 2010. The television program follows a rather different storyline than that of the comic book, and characters come and leave in a different order. There are also Kirkman-approved full length novels prologuing the comic book's timeline. The series has been translated into numerous languages such as Finnish, Danish, Portuguese, Spanish, Serbian, Swedish, Polish, Turkish, French, Italian, German and Japanese.
Plot.
The prison.
Shortly after leaving Atlanta, Rick and the group traveling with him camp for a single night on the road, where Lori reveals to Rick that she is pregnant. On the road, the group encounters Tyreese, a middle aged former NFL player, his daughter Julie, and her nerdy boyfriend Chris. Rick’s first settlement attempt is a gated condo neighborhood. When settled in, Dale and Andrea engage in a relationship, as do Carol and Tyreese. The settlement attempt proves disastrous, however, as Allen's wife Donna is killed after the survivors realize the neighborhood is infested with zombies. The next morning, during a hunting expedition, Carl is shot by a man named Otis. They are guided to a farm, where the owner, Hershel Greene, invites the group to stay. They take temporary refuge there; Glenn engages in a relationship with Hershel's daughter, Maggie, and Allen struggles with Donna's death. Peace on the farm is maintained until zombies manage to break free from the barn and kill several members of Hershel's family. Hershel's tolerance of the group quickly wears thin when he hears them talking about staying permanently, and he orders Rick at gunpoint to collect everyone and leave. Glenn is permitted to stay because of Maggie's insistence. 
Rick and his group discover an abandoned prison with excellent security, complete with a zombie-proof fence, lookout posts, food and water, and a large supply of ammo and riot gear inside. Also in the prison are four surviving inmates, who are cautiously incorporated into the group. The group invites Hershel and his family to join them at the prison and the offer is accepted, although Otis stays behind to care for the livestock. Days after they settle in, Julie and Chris attempt to execute a suicide pact simultaneously; however, Chris fires too early. Tyreese strangles him to death upon discovering Julie and later mangles Chris' corpse. Rick becomes worried about Tyreese's unexpectedly calm and normal attitude after what had happened. Danger soon comes from within: a psychotic inmate murders Hershel’s two youngest daughters, and Rick kills another inmate during an attempted coup against his group. 
During this time, a mysterious woman, Michonne, follows Otis to the prison and saves him from zombies, which earns her keep inside of the prison. She begins to seduce Tyreese, which Carol eventually witnesses and which leads to Carol's attempted suicide. In the aftermath, Rick and Tyreese's friendship becomes strained and culminates in a brutal argument and fight between the two. Proven to be increasingly erratic and unhinged as he struggles to keep order, Rick is forced to step down as the group’s leader; he is replaced by a committee consisting of Dale, Hershel, Tyreese and himself. 
Conflict with Woodbury.
Rick, Glenn and Michonne later leave the prison to investigate a nearby helicopter crash and eventually stumble upon Woodbury, a walled-off survivor town, formed by, and under the leadership of, a maniacal tyrant called The Governor. The walls have offered protection for months; however, it is revealed that they are slowly beginning to weaken, a matter which seemingly is hidden from the community by The Governor and his top men. As The Governor gives Rick, Glenn, and Michonne a tour of Woodbury, he tells them about a series of tournaments that he holds in which members of the community are put into a field surrounded by detained zombies and fight each other for the entertainment of the rest of Woodbury. It is also revealed that the people in the helicopter were from a news crew, who were killed and fed to the zombies to keep them at bay. When the three refuse to tell him the location of the prison, the Governor imprisons and tortures them, cutting off Rick's right hand and sadistically raping Michonne while forcing Glenn to listen to her agony in the next room. The Governor eventually has one of his men, Martinez, let them go and tail them back home, pretending to help them escape. On her way out of town with the rest, Michonne tortures and mutilates the Governor while he's defenseless inside of his house. Shortly after returning to the prison, Rick catches Martinez in the act of escaping back to Woodbury and, despite the man's pleas that he was only going to gather the 'good' people, strangles him to death.
Dwellers from the prison prepare for a reprisal attack, but slip into complacency and distraction after weeks with no sign of Woodbury forces. Lori gives birth to a baby girl she and Rick name Judith. Hershel, after a long period of distrust towards Glenn, finally gives Glenn his consent, and marries him and Maggie in the prison cafeteria. The concept of pregnancy is at the forefront of their relationship, however, Glenn ultimately agrees with Hershel that its best not to conceive in the new world. Carol gradually descends into insanity, constantly crying during the nights and making advances upon Rick and Lori (hoping to engage in a polygamous relationship/marriage). She seduces Hershel's eighteen-year-old son, and then commits suicide in front of the group by letting a walker devour her neck. There's a brief period of peace and relaxation following Carol's death, only to be interrupted by the sudden arrival of The Governor and his soldiers rolling up to the prison fences in their vehicles.
Despite their better weapons and larger numbers, the Woodbury forces take heavy casualties and initially retreat. Convinced they will return, Glenn, Maggie, Sophia, Dale, Andrea, and the two young boys of the deceased Allen and Donna all flee in the RV. Michonne and Tyreese are captured while attempting a preemptive commando strike on Woodbury. Michonne escapes into the wasteland, but The Governor executes Tyreese outside the prison gate before launching his second assault. The Governor’s forces use a tank to break down the fence and massacre the prison dwellers, killing off half the group (Lori, Judith, Alice, Hershel, Axel, Billy, and Patricia). Zombies pour in through the broken fence and surround the Woodbury forces. A female soldier named Lily becomes horrified when she learns that she shot down Lori and her baby on The Governor's orders. She shoots The Governor in the head before she and the rest of the army run out of ammo and escape inside the prison. They are all presumed dead since it is shown that a horde of walkers followed them inside. Rick and Carl escape on their own and flee to a nearby town.
Alexandria Safe Zone.
After several days of being alone, the two soon reunite with Michonne. The group of 3 eventually meet up with Glenn and Maggie, who guide them back to the farm where everyone else who fled in the RV is now staying. Sophia during this time attempts to block her memory of Carol and she pretends that Maggie and Glenn are her parents, a role they gladly embrace to fill the void of having no child of their own. Dale's distrust in Rick, which had been steadily increasing over the past days and weeks, reaches its strongest, leaving Andrea to wonder whose side she is really on. A trio headed to Washington, D.C. stumbles upon them at the farm. One of them, Eugene, claims to be a government scientist in radio contact with survivors in the capital.
Maggie continues to struggle to get through the depression over her father and brother's death and unsuccessfully attempts suicide. Her relationship with the people around her, especially Glenn, becomes strained due to her increasing self-consciousness. Rick and Abraham — a U.S. Army sergeant traveling with Eugene — bond during a supply run to Rick's hometown as they confess the killings they’ve each committed to survive. They pick up Morgan where Rick had last seen him, his son, Duane, a zombie now, and himself a mental wreck, and bring him back with them to the camp. A lone reverend shows up to greet this growing group and offers to guide them to his church. Before they move, a minor zombie attack occurs. Dale, hiding the fact that he's been bitten, sneaks into the forest to die alone, but is kidnapped by a group of cannibals, who eat his infected leg. Rick, Andrea, Michonne and Abraham find, kill and mutilate the cannibals. The reverend is the only person among them appalled by their brutality. Dale later dies back at the church, devastating Andrea who eventually has to take him out.
On the outskirts of Washington, Eugene admits his deceit about being a scientist and having contact with the government, a matter which greatly lessens the hope of everyone. Washington is soon revealed to be overrun like other cities, however, they are approached by a recruiter for a peaceful walled-off town of about 40, named the Alexandria Safe Zone.
This man, Aaron, leads Rick's entire group to Alexandria where Rick meets Douglas (the person who runs the town). Worried the Alexandrians have forgotten the dangers of the wasteland, Rick gradually asserts his authority. As town constable, he secretly carries a gun and disobeys Alexandria's leader, Douglas, to intervene in a domestic dispute. After the newcomers help defeat a bandit attack on Alexandria, Douglas admits Rick is a better leader and steps down.
The gunfire during this bandit attack attracts a herd of zombies, who surround and break through Alexandria’s wall, killing several minor characters. The surviving residents retreat to their houses while zombies flood the town. Rick begins a romantic relationship with Alexandria resident Jessie during this period, however, this is short-lived when Jessie is swarmed and killed by walkers after an escape attempt with her son. When Rick and Carl are surrounded by zombies after the failed escape attempt, Douglas tries to help them, but accidentally shoots Carl in the eye before he is killed and eaten himself. Rick carries Carl to Alexandria’s surgeon (Denise), then returns outside and — with Michonne and other residents — destroys the entire herd. The victory convinces Rick that zombies are a manageable threat, and he resolves to rebuild civilization at Alexandria.
Carl wakes from a coma with memory loss and begins to piece together the past few years. Rick quashes a small rebellion but forgives the transgressors. Andrea confesses her love for Rick, but he is quick to spurn her advances.
The Saviors.
A man who calls himself Jesus offers to trade supplies with Alexandria, claiming to represent The Hilltop, a nearby community of about 200 survivors which trades with several other survivor groups in the area. Fearing a trap, Rick imprisons Jesus and prepares Alexandria to defend against an attack. But he soon has a change of heart and decides to go with Jesus to trade with his group. The two groups eventually make a deal in which Rick's group has to defeat The Saviors, a hostile gang that has been terrorizing Jesus's community, The Hilltop, for months.
On their way back, a group of Saviors ambush Rick's group. All but one of the attackers are killed. Rick sends him back with demands for half of The Saviors' supplies.
While on a supply run with Eugene, Abraham is killed by The Saviors. They hold Eugene hostage and demand entry to Alexandria, but fail and retreat, leaving Eugene unharmed. Meanwhile, Rick and Andrea have become intimate. Rick decides to go to The Hilltop to explain what happened with The Saviors, and Glenn and Maggie tag along, wanting to live at The Hilltop and raise Sophia and their new baby there. Carl, Michonne, and Heath also go with the group.
On their way to The Hilltop, the group is ambushed by fifty Saviors. Because Rick's people have killed so many Saviors, their leader, Negan, wants to kill one of them, and he beats Glenn to death with a barbed-wire-wrapped baseball bat. Before leaving them, he says he will come take half their camp's supplies in a week.
At The Hilltop, the group explains what happened. Rick punches The Hilltop's leader for not warning them. Glenn is buried. Maggie and Sophia stay, as they had decided.
Rick and the group return to Alexandria to see a failed Savior attack on the town, and find that Alexandria managed to capture a Savior, Dwight. Rick has them let Dwight go free, but has Jesus follow him back to The Saviors' base.
As Negan arrives at Alexandria to collect his half of their supplies, Jesus arrives at The Saviors' base. He is immediately captured, but quickly escapes. Negan returns with the gathered supplies. Carl manages to sneak into the Savior's base by hiding in the supply truck from Alexandria and shoots six Saviors with Abraham's rifle until he runs out of ammo. Negan takes him prisoner, then has him watch Negan torture a Savior who had slept with one of Negan’s wives.
Back at Alexandria, Jesus tells Rick's group where the base is. Rick, Jesus, Andrea, and Michonne drive out to go rescue Carl, but Negan's truck intercepts them to tell them what he ultimately did with Carl.
"The Walking Dead Weekly".
Due to the popularity of the TV show, in October 2010 Image Comics announced "The Walking Dead Weekly". Starting on January 5, 2011, the series is being reprinted in order with one issue a week being released. The series ended with the 52nd issue being reprinted.
Reception.
The series received critical acclaim, winning the Eisner Award for Best Continuing Series in 2010 and prompting Eric Sunde of IGN comics to call it "one of the best monthly comics available". Max Brooks told Kirkman that he read "The Walking Dead" and liked it.
IGN ranked main protagonist Rick Grimes as the 26th Greatest Comic Book Hero of All Time in 2011, stating that Kirkman "has an endless supply of to run Rick through." IGN ranked Michonne, another protagonist, as the 86th Greatest Comic Book Hero of All Time the same year. It ranked the Governor as the 86th Greatest Comic Book Villain of All Time in 2009, describing him as "a sadistic evil that 'The Road Warrior' forgot." "Wizard" magazine ranked The Governor as the 131st greatest comic book character of all time.
Lawsuit.
On February 9, 2012, Tony Moore filed a lawsuit alleging that Kirkman, in 2005, had deceitfully engineered him into surrendering his rights to "The Walking Dead" comic book and eventual TV series in exchange for payments that never materialized. Kirkman said in a statement the following day that he and Moore "each had legal representation seven years ago and now he is violating the same contract he initiated and approved and he wants to misrepresent the fees he was paid and continues to be paid for the work he was hired to do." Kirkman in turn sued Moore. On September 24, 2012, the two released a joint statement saying they had reached a settlement "to everyone's mutual satisfaction."
Collected editions.
Trade paperbacks.
The trade paperbacks collect six issues each, but contain only the story and none of the original cover art from the comics. Each paperback follows the convention of having a three-word title.
Hardcovers.
All hardcovers contain the contents of the comics, including the covers, and in some cases bonus material. The books' trim size is larger than the paperbacks. Each hardcover contains two story arcs from the series. Signed versions of the books are available, each limited to 310 pieces.
Omnibus editions.
Limited omnibus editions collect 24 issues in a slipcase with several extras. For each edition a separate very limited Signed and Numbered edition (S&N) has been released signed by Robert Kirkman. Typically the print run has been limited to 3000 for the standard edition and 300 for the signed and numbered edition.
The Limited Edition Retailer Giveaway is a limited hardcover of the softcover Volume 1, with black faux-leather cover and red foil highlights.
Compendium editions.
These are 48-issue paperback editions. The massive volume contains over 1000 pages but includes no cover art. Compendium One was also released as a limited edition hardcover in 2012 at the Emerald City Comicon and San Diego Comicon with 1000 pieces available.
