The third season of Pretty Little Liars, based on the books of the same name by Sara Shepard, premiered on June 5, 2012 on ABC Family. Filming of the season began on April 2, 2012.
Plot.
This season of Pretty Little Liars takes place five months following the discovery that Mona Vanderwaal (Janel Parrish) was the elusive "A" that had been creatively and relentlessly tormenting the four main characters, Aria Montgomery (Lucy Hale), Spencer Hastings (Troian Bellisario), Hanna Marin (Ashley Benson), and Emily Fields (Shay Mitchell) for the past year. It addresses the issue of whether or not Garrett Reynolds (Yani Gellman) actually killed or was involved in the murder of the girls' former friend and queen bee, Alison DiLaurentis (Sasha Pieterse).
Casting.
Tyler Blackburn and Janel Parrish have been promoted to series regular for the roles as Caleb Rivers and Mona Vanderwaal.
On July 21, 2012, it was announced that singer Adam Lambert will appear on the Halloween episode of the season, airing October 23, 2012.
However, as of Maya St. Germain's death in the Second Season finale, Maya St. Germain portrayed by Bianca Lawson will return as a special guest star, to appear in videos she made.
Storylines.
Season 3 takes place five months after the Liars learn that Hanna's best friend, Mona Vanderwaal, is the infamous "A". When returning for their senior year, Spencer, Hanna, Aria and Emily continue to face the on-going mystery regarding Alison's death. A new "A" also rises after the downfall of Mona's revelation. The new "A" is revealed to be a team of people who are expected to follow specific orders given by a blonde woman wearing a red coat. The first half of the season focuses on the unexpected exhumation of Alison's body, the investigation regarding Maya's death and uncovering who the Black Swan from the masquerade ball. Hanna attempts to find answers by visiting Mona at Radley Sanitarium while Aria is introduced to Maggie, Ezra's ex-girlfriend whom he had a child with. Emily comes face to face with Maya's killer and Spencer begins to feel betrayed by her own family when her Mother agrees to take Garrett's side for his upcoming trial. After Toby is revealed as the second "A" team member, the second half of the season shifts focus to the mystery surrounding the woman in the red coat. Spencer quickly becomes withdrawn from her friends after finding out Toby's secret and Aria begins to suspect that her father might have been involved in Alison's death. Meanwhile, Hanna attempts to reconnect Caleb with his biological father and Emily is more motivated than ever to figure out who murdered Alison after it is revealed that she spent the summer before being buried alive in Cape May with Cece and Detective Wilden.
Spencer Hastings.
When Spencer learns that her mother, Veronica is taking Garrett's side for his upcoming trial, she begins to feel betrayed by her own family. Along with her friends, Spencer continues to investigate the ongoing mystery of Alison's death, especially after her dead body is dug up and stolen by the new "A". As Season 3 continues, Spencer continues to maintain a relationship with Toby and tries her best to keep him safe from "A". In "Birds of a Feather", Spencer, along with the rest of the liars, are shocked to discover that Melissa Hastings (Spencer's sister) was the Black Swan during the masquerade ball. During the Halloween Special, "This Is A Dark Ride", Garrett confronts Spencer and explains to her what he saw on the night of Alison's death. She discovers that Alison had a heated conversation with Byron Montgomery before being buried alive. In "Misery Loves Company", Spencer discovers that Toby is part of the A team but keeps it a secret from the other girls. She begins to become emotionally withdrawn from her friends, and starts becoming more angry and starts to realize that "A" isn't messing around-and she wants to prove that she isn't either.
Hanna Marin.
After being betrayed by her best friend, Mona Vanderwaal for being the elusive "A", Hanna seeks comfort with Caleb, as they continue to hold a relationship together. However, Caleb soon breaks up with her after he finds out that Hanna has been keeping more secrets from him. The new "A" attempts to frame Hanna by obtaining her blood as well as threatening her after she escapes from the Kahn's cabin in "What Lies Beneath". As the season progresses, Caleb eventually discovers that Hanna and her friends are still being victimized by "A". This leads him to protect Hanna by continuing a secret relationship with her. During the episode, "The Lady Killer", Hanna is distraught after she realizes that Caleb has been shot for protecting Emily.
Aria Montgomery.
During the first half of season 3, we learn that Aria's parents, Byron and Ella have gotten a divorce due to Byron's act of adultery towards Meredith. Along with the rest of the liars, Aria is determined to resolve the mystery surrounding the deaths of Alison and Maya. As the season progresses, we learn more about Aria's history with Alison where it is revealed that the two of them vandalized Byron's office after finding earrings that presumably belonged to Meredith. However, Aria's story line disconnects from the rest of the liars after she crosses paths with Maggie, a woman from Ezra's past. During the Halloween special, "This Is A Dark Ride", Aria is physically tormented by the A-Team for the first time as they trap her in a wooden crate with Garrett's corpse.
Emily Fields.
With Maya's disappearance and Alison's murder still unsolved, Emily faces her senior year with anger and more motivation than ever to keep Garrett behind bars. Things quickly worsen for Emily though after she is drugged and wakes up at Alison's grave, where her body has been stolen. Emily is also introduced to Maya's cousin, Nate, where they quickly develop a trusting friendship and eventually kiss. However, Emily soon feels betrayed by her own friends after they feed her stories about Paige's unsettling history with Alison. With the rest of the liars convinced that Paige is "A", Emily runs off with Nate in "The Lady Killer", only to find out that he is actually Maya's Ex-boyfriend, and that his real name is Lyndon. Emily finds herself in a violent situation after Porter blames her for his sisters death, as she succeeds in killing Lyndon in self- defense. In "Dead to Me" Emily is still attempting to recover from the events that happened in the lighthouse. After being reunited with Dr. Sullivan, she eventually uncovers a crucial memory linking back to the night that Alison's grave was dug up. She remembers seeing a blonde woman wearing a red coat, and after telling the Liars, it is suggested that Alison could in fact be Big "A".
A TEAM.
It is revealed that another person "A" has been targeting the girls. Big "A" is possibly a female character (as revealed in "Misery Loves Company"), responsible for the creation of "A" and the A-Team. Little information is known about this person, who only makes appearances wearing a red trench coat. Big "A" is considered to be the main "A" and the leader of the A-Team, as she is the one calling the shots, and telling her workers (aka minor "A's") what to do. Though this character is considered to be the main "A," she has little to no physical involvement with the Liars since she orders her team members to actually do the things that A has been known to do to the liars. We have only seen Big "A" three times. The first time is at the end of the season two finale, UnmAsked, where she visits Mona after being revealed as an A-Team member and the second time is at the end of the Season 3 episode of "Blood Is The New Black", where she is seen buying black hoodies and gloves for her workers. The third time is at the end of "Out of the Frying Pan, Into the Inferno" where she takes a blow-torch and fires it at a doll of Hanna at her head. The fourth time you see Big "A" is during the episode, "Dead to Me" in a vision Emily remembered from ' That Night' in which she has blonde hair. During the mid-season finale, "The Lady Killer", Toby was revealed to be part of the "A" Team working alongside Mona who managed to escape from Radley Sanitarium. Up to this point it has been confirmed that there are at least two members who are part of the "A" Team: Mona and Toby. Those two are the only official members so far in the series.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
