Kate Mara (born February 27, 1983) is an American television, stage and film actress. She moved from the stage to her first film, "Random Hearts", in 1999. Other roles include appearances in "Brokeback Mountain" (2005), and on the Fox television series "24", as computer analyst . She appeared in such feature films as "We Are Marshall" (2006), "Shooter" (2007), "Transsiberian" (2008), "Stone of Destiny" (2008) and "The Open Road" (2009).
Kate is the older sister of actress Rooney Mara.
Early life.
Mara was born and raised in Bedford, Westchester County, New York, to Timothy Christopher Mara, a scout and the vice president of player evaluation for the New York Giants and his wife, Kathleen McNulty (née Rooney). Her sister, Rooney Mara, is also an actress. 
She is of Italian (from her maternal grandmother) and Irish descent. Her paternal grandfather, Wellington Mara, was the long-time co-owner of the Giants, succeeded by her uncle, John Mara. Her maternal grandfather, Timothy James "Tim" Rooney, has run Yonkers Raceway in Yonkers, New York since 1972. She is a great-granddaughter of both New York Giants founder Tim Mara and Pittsburgh Steelers founder Art Rooney, Sr. Her great-uncle, Dan Rooney, is chairman of the Steelers, the United States Ambassador to Ireland and the co-founder of The Ireland Funds charitable organization. An uncle, Art Rooney II, is the current President and co-owner of the Steelers. She has three siblings: Daniel, (Patricia) Rooney (also an actress), and Conor.
Mara began acting at the age of nine in a school musical, attended several youth theater-arts schools and appeared in community theater and in school plays. Mara described herself to "Esquire" magazine as "painfully shy" while growing up and said she only had one friend. Her first audition was for the television drama "". She did not get the role, but knew from then on that she just wanted to act. Mara was accepted into the Tisch School of the Arts at New York University to study musical theater and graduated from Fox Lane High School a year early. She was getting work as an actress, so she deferred college before deciding not to go. 
Television and stage roles.
Her first television role was in the drama "Law & Order" in 1997. She went on to guest star on numerous television series, including "Madigan Men", "Ed" and '. Mara landed two recurring roles in 2003, as Kate on "Everwood", an 18-year-old who is impregnated by her piano teacher and then gets an abortion and as Vanessa on "Nip/Tuck", a bisexual cheerleader involved in a love triangle with her boyfriend Matt McNamara (John Hensley) and another cheerleader (Sophia Bush). Mara also appeared on "Cold Case", "Boston Public", ' and "" that same year. 
Mara was cast as the lead in the 2004 WB pilot "Prodigy", about a teenage child prodigy. She had a recurring role on the WB's "Jack & Bobby" in 2005 and a 5 episode arc on the Fox series "24" in 2006, playing computer analyst . Mara joined the cast of the HBO series "Entourage" for the series' sixth season in 2009. She played Brittany, Eric "E" Murphy (Kevin Connolly)'s assistant at his talent-management company and a potential love interest. Mara filmed four episodes for the series in 2009. In 2011, she guest starred on the FX television series, "American Horror Story", as Hayden McClaine, Dr. Ben Harmon (Dylan McDermott)'s dead mistress, a spirit trapped in the Harmon house. Mara was offered the role by Ryan Murphy, her former producer on "Nip/Tuck".
Mara joined the cast of "House of Cards", the first original series from Netflix. The political drama stars Kevin Spacey and is based on a novel by Michael Dobbs and the 1990 British television series, "House of Cards". David Fincher directed the pilot episode. Mara stars as Zoe Barnes, a reporter from Washington, D.C., alongside Robin Wright and Kristen Connolly.
She made her stage debut in 2003 at the Williamstown Theatre Festival in John Guare’s "Landscape of the Body" with Lili Taylor. Mara starred in "The Alice Complex", a play by Peter Barr Nickowitz, at Dixon Place in New York City in 2005 and at the Blank Theatre in Los Angeles in 2006. The production co-starred Tony Award-winner Harriet Harris. She later told WFAN radio in 2006 that doing more theater work is a "dream" because it was "all I really wanted to do as a kid. I didn't care about movies or tv, I just wanted to do Broadway".
Film career.
Mara's film debut was in "Random Hearts", with Harrison Ford in 1999, directed by Sydney Pollack. She played Jessica Chandler, the daughter of a congresswoman (Kristin Scott Thomas). She next appeared in the Sundance Film Festival award-winning films "Joe the King" (1999) and "Tadpole" (2002), alongside Sigourney Weaver. Mara co-starred in "Peoples" (2004), a drama and coming of age story filmed in Louisville, Kentucky. She starred in the direct-to-video horror film "" and appeared with Noah Wyle and Illeana Douglas in "The Californians" in 2005. Her supporting role as the daughter of Heath Ledger's character in the Academy Award-winning "Brokeback Mountain" that year which brought her more widespread critical notice.
Mara signed with the William Morris Agency, and was included on the "New York Daily News" list of "10 young actors who have a shot at making it big" at the start of 2006. She appeared in "Zoom" that year as Summer Jones (aka Wonder), a 16-year-old girl with telekinetic and empathic abilities. She next appeared in "We Are Marshall", starring Matthew McConaughey, which recalled the aftermath of the 1970 Marshall University plane crash that took the lives of most of the football team. Mara played cheerleader Annie Cantrell.
In 2007, she appeared in the comedy "Full of It" with Ryan Pinkston for New Line Cinema. The film later aired on television as "Big Liar on Campus". Mara was also featured in an advertising campaign for clothing retailer Gap called, "khakis with attitude." She appeared in "Shooter", a thriller about a master sniper starring Mark Wahlberg lured out of retirement to prevent an assassination. Mara played a Kentucky widow, Sarah Fenn, adopting a southern dialect for the role.
In 2007, she finished her work in the film "Transsiberian" by Brad Anderson, which takes place on the Trans-Siberian Railway that runs from China to Moscow. She spent three months shooting the thriller in Vilnius, Lithuania, starting in December 2006. The film also shot on location in Beijing and Russia. Mara played Abby, a 20-year-old runaway from Seattle. "Transsiberian" premiered at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival in January 2008.
Mara starred in the 2008 film "Stone of Destiny", written and directed by Charles Martin Smith, about the theft of the Stone of Scone on Christmas Day, 1950. Mara played Kay Matheson, one of four students that removed the stone in a Scottish nationalist plot. The period adventure-comedy co-starred Billy Boyd, Robert Carlyle and Charlie Cox. Filming began in June 2007 in locations around Glasgow. She employed a Scottish accent for the role, which she found very difficult to master. Mara felt lucky and proud to play a role that was important to people's heritage. She stayed near the Botanic Gardens in the city's West End while filming, attending the film premiere at the Edinburgh International Film Festival on June 21, 2008. The film closed the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival on September 13, 2008.
In December 2008, Mara appeared in "T Takes: Brooklyn 09", a series of 6 improvised short films directed by Brody Baker. She starred in "The Open Road" as Lucy. Filming began in Hammond, Louisiana in February 2008, and continued in Memphis, Tennessee and elsewhere in the South.
In 2009, Mara filmed the independent comedy "Peep World", starring Michael C. Hall, Sarah Silverman and Rainn Wilson, and joined the cast of Marvel's "Iron Man 2", making a cameo appearance as a U.S. marshal. Mara shot the ensemble romantic comedy "happythankyoumoreplease" in New York City in July 2009. She plays a waitress and aspiring singer named Mississippi, in a story about six single New Yorkers in their 20s. The film was written and directed by actor Josh Radnor ("How I Met Your Mother"). The film won the U.S. Dramatic Audience Award at the 2010 Sundance Film Festival. In 2010, Mara appeared in the survival drama "127 Hours", directed by Danny Boyle, playing a hiker, a true story about Aron Ralston, a climber trapped while mountaineering in Utah. 
Mara appeared in "Ironclad" (2011), which tells the story of the siege of Rochester Castle by King John in the year 1215. It is her first film where she speaks in an English accent. Mara appeared in the short film "Ten Year", produced by Channing Tatum to attract financing for a feature film. The full-length feature went into production in Albuquerque in January 2010, with Mara starring in a large ensemble cast film about a 10-year high school reunion. As of May 2011, Mara was shooting "Deadfall" in Montreal. In 2013, she starred as Zoe Barnes, in the highly acclaimed Netflix original series "House of Cards".
Personal life.
Mara has stated she comes from a "huge" family. Her father is one of 11 children. She has 22 aunts and uncles and 40 cousins. She lives in Los Angeles, having resided there on and off since around 2003. Her younger sister, actress Rooney, lived with her temporarily after relocating to Los Angeles in 2007. Mara travels back to New York when her schedule allows and has stated, "If I could live in New York, I would", specifying that she likes "the cold... the rain" and "missit". She has been dating actor Max Minghella since 2010.
NFL ties.
As a descendant of the Giants' Tim and Wellington Mara as well as the Steelers' Art Rooney, she is a fan of both teams and the relationship contributed to her being cast in "We Are Marshall". Mara has sung at both teams' games and, after missing the Steelers' victory at Super Bowl XL due to work, her contracts state that if either team goes to the Super Bowl, she can attend. She was in attendance for the Giants' victory in Super Bowl XLII, for the Steelers' victory the next year in Super Bowl XLIII and for the Giants' victory in Super Bowl XLVI.
