The Harry Potter film series is a British-American film series based on the "Harry Potter" novels by the British author J. K. Rowling. The series is distributed by Warner Bros. and consists of eight fantasy films beginning with "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone" (2001) and culminating with "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" (2011). It is the highest-grossing film series of all-time in inflation unadjusted dollars, with $7.7 billion in worldwide receipts. Each film is in the list of fifty highest-grossing films of all-time in inflation unadjusted dollars and is a critical success.
The series was produced by David Heyman and stars Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint and Emma Watson as the three leading characters, Harry Potter, Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger. Four directors worked on the series: Chris Columbus, Alfonso Cuarón, Mike Newell, and David Yates. Production took over ten years to complete, with the main story arc following Harry Potter's quest to overcome his conflict with Lord Voldemort.
"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", the seventh and final novel in the series, was adapted into two feature-length parts. "Part 1" was released in November 2010 and "Part 2" was released in July 2011.
Origins.
Late in 1997, film producer David Heyman's London offices received a copy of the first book in what would become Rowling's series of seven "Harry Potter" novels. The book, "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone", was relegated to a low-priority bookshelf, where it was discovered by a secretary who read it and gave it to Heyman with a positive review. Consequently Heyman, who had originally disliked "the rubbish title", read the book himself. Highly impressed by Rowling's work, he began the process that led to one of the most successful cinematic franchises of all time.
Heyman's enthusiasm led to Rowling's 1999 sale of the film rights for the first four "Harry Potter" books to Warner Bros. for a reported £1 million (US$2,000,000). A demand Rowling made was that the principal cast be kept strictly British, allowing nevertheless for the inclusion of many Irish actors such as Richard Harris as Dumbledore, and for casting of French and Eastern European actors in "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire" where characters from the book are specified as such. Rowling was hesitant to sell the rights because she "didn't want to give them control over the rest of the story" by selling the rights to the characters, which would have enabled Warner Bros. to make non-author-written sequels.
Although Steven Spielberg initially negotiated to direct the first film, he declined the offer. Spielberg wanted the adaptation to be an animated film, with American actor Haley Joel Osment to provide Harry Potter's voice. Spielberg contended that, in his opinion, there was every expectation of profit in making the film, and that making money would have been like "shooting ducks in a barrel. It's just a slam dunk. It's just like withdrawing a billion dollars and putting it into your personal bank accounts. There's no challenge". In the Rubbish Bin section of her website, Rowling maintains that she has no role in choosing directors for the films, writing "Anyone who thinks I could (or would) have 'veto-ed' him needs their Quick-Quotes Quill serviced." After Spielberg left, talks began with other directors, including: Chris Columbus, Terry Gilliam, Jonathan Demme, Mike Newell, Alan Parker, Wolfgang Petersen, Rob Reiner, Tim Robbins, Brad Silberling, and Peter Weir. Petersen and Reiner both pulled out of the running in March 2000. It was then narrowed down to Silberling, Columbus, Parker and Gilliam. Rowling's first choice was Terry Gilliam. However on 28 March 2000 Columbus was appointed as director of the film, with Warner Bros. citing his work on other family films such as "Home Alone" and "Mrs Doubtfire" as influences for their decision.
Steve Kloves was selected to write the screenplay for the first film. He described adapting the book as "tough", as it did not "lend itself to adaptation as well as the next two books." Kloves was sent a "raft" of synopses of books proposed as film adaptations, with "Harry Potter" being the only one that jumped out at him. He went out and bought the book, and became an instant fan. When speaking to Warner Bros. he stated that the film had to be British, and had to be true to the characters. David Heyman was confirmed to produce the film. Rowling received a large amount of creative control for the film, an arrangement that Columbus did not mind.
Warner Bros. had initially planned to release the first film over the 4 July 2001 weekend, making for such a short production window that several of the originally proposed directors had withdrawn themselves from contention. Eventually, due to time constraints, the date was put back to 16 November 2001.
Casting the roles of Harry, Ron and Hermione.
In 2000, after a seven month search, lead actor Daniel Radcliffe was discovered by producer David Heyman and writer Steve Kloves seated just behind them in a theatre. In Heyman's own words, ""There sitting behind me was this boy with these big blue eyes. It was Dan Radcliffe. I remember my first impressions: He was curious and funny and so energetic. There was real generosity too, and sweetness. But at the same time he was really voracious and with hunger for knowledge of whatever kind.""
Radcliffe had already established himself as an actor in the 1999 BBC television production of "David Copperfield" in which he played the title role's childhood years. Heyman convinced Radcliffe's parents to allow him to audition for the part of Harry Potter, which involved Radcliffe being filmed. (This screen test footage was released via the first set of Ultimate Editions in 2009.) Rowling was enthusiastic after viewing Radcliffe's filmed test, saying she didn't think there was a better choice for the part of Harry Potter.
Also in 2000, the then unknown British actors Emma Watson and Rupert Grint were selected from thousands of auditioning children to play the roles of Hermione Granger and Ron Weasley, respectively. Prior to them being chosen, their only previous acting experience was in school plays. Grint was eleven years old and Watson ten at the time they were cast.
"Los Angeles Times" writer Geoff Boucher, who conducted the above-mentioned interview with Heyman, added that the casting of the three major roles ""is especially impressive in hindsight. The trio's selection was arguably one of the best show-business decisions over the past decade... they have shown admirable grace and steadiness in the face of teen superstardom.""
Production.
Filming of the series began at Leavesden Studios in September 2000 and ended in December 2010, with post-production on the final film lasting until Summer 2011. Leavesden Studios was the main base for filming "Harry Potter" and it opened to the public as a studio tour in 2012 (renamed as Warner Bros. Studios, Leavesden). 
David Heyman has produced all the films in the series with his company Heyday Films, while David Barron joined the series as an executive producer on "Chamber of Secrets" and "Goblet of Fire". He was later appointed producer on the last three adaptations. Chris Columbus was an executive producer on the first two films alongside Mark Radcliffe and Michael Barnathan, but became a producer on the third film alongside Heyman and Radcliffe. Other executive producers include Tanya Seghatchian and Lionel Wigram. J. K. Rowling, author of the series, was asked to become a producer on "Goblet of Fire", but declined. However, she accepted the role on the two-part "Deathly Hallows". Heyday Films and Columbus' company 1492 Pictures collaborated with Duncan Henderson Productions in 2001, Miracle Productions in 2002 and P of A Productions in 2004. Even though "Prisoner of Azkaban" was the final film produced by 1492 Pictures, Heyday Films continued with the franchise and collaborated with Patalex IV Productions in 2005. The sixth film in the series, "Half-Blood Prince", was the most expensive film to produce as of 2009. Warner Bros. split the seventh and final novel in the series, "Deathly Hallows", into two cinematic parts. The two parts were filmed back-to-back from early 2009 to summer 2010, with the completion of reshoots taking place on 21 December 2010; this marked the end of filming "Harry Potter". Heyman stated that "Deathly Hallows" was "shot as one film", but was released in two feature-length parts. 
Tim Burke, the visual effects supervisor of the series, said of the production on "Harry Potter", "It was this huge family; I think there were over 700 people working at Leavesden, an industry in itself." David Heyman said, "When the first film opened, no way did I think we'd make eight films. That didn't seem feasible until after we'd done the fourth." Nisha Parti, the production consultant on the first film, said that Heyman "made the first film very much the way he felt the studio Bros. wanted to make it." After the film's success, Heyman was given "more freedom".
One of the aims of the filmmakers from the beginning of production was to develop the maturity of the films. Chris Columbus stated, "We realised that these movies would get progressively darker. Again, we didn't know "how" dark but we realised that as the kids get older, the movies get a little edgier and darker." This transpired with the succeeding three directors who would work on the series in the following years, with the films beginning to deal with issues such as death, betrayal, prejudice, and political corruption as the series developed narratively and thematically.
Directors.
After Chris Columbus had finished working on "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone", he was hired to direct the second film, "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets". The production started within a week after the release of the first film. Columbus was set to direct all entries in the series, however he did not want to return for the third film, "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban", as he claimed he was "burned out". He moved to the position of producer, while Alfonso Cuarón was approached for the role of director. He was initially nervous about directing the instalment as he had not read any of the books or seen the films. After reading the series, he changed his mind and signed on to direct as he had immediately connected to the story. 
Because Cuarón decided not to direct the fourth instalment, "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire", a new director had to be selected. Mike Newell was chosen to direct the film, but declined to direct the next film, "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix", which was given to David Yates, who also directed "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince" and "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", becoming the only director to helm more than one film since Chris Columbus.
Chris Columbus said his vision of the first two films was of a "golden storybook, an old-fashioned look", while Alfonso Cuarón changed the tone of the series, desaturated the colour palette, and expanded the landscape around Hogwarts. Mike Newell decided to direct the fourth film as a "paranoid thriller", while David Yates wanted to "bring a sense of jeopardy and character to the world". Cuarón, Newell and Yates have said that the challenge was striking a balance between making the films according to their individual vision, while working within a cinematic world already established by Columbus. 
David Heyman commented on the "generosity of the directors" by revealing that "Chris spent time with Alfonso, Alfonso spent time with Mike and Mike spent time with David, showing him an early cut of the film, talking through what it means to be a director and how they went about the films."
David Heyman also said, "I suppose Chris Columbus was the most conservative choice from the studio's point of view. But he expressed real passion." Producer Tanya Seghatchian said they were "more adventurous" in choosing a director for the third film and went straight to Alfonso Cuarón. Mike Newell became the first British director of the series when he was chosen for the fourth film; Newell was considered to direct the first film before he dropped out. David Yates directed the final films after David Heyman thought him capable of handling the edgy, emotional, and political material of the later novels. 
All the directors have been supportive of each other. Chris Columbus praised the character development in the films, while Alfonso Cuarón admired the "quiet poetry" of David Yates' films. Mike Newell noted that each director had a different heroism and David Yates views the first four films "respectfully and enjoy them." Daniel Radcliffe said Yates "took the charm of the films that Chris made and the visual flair of everything that Alfonso did and the thoroughly British, bombastic nature of the film directed by Mike Newell" and added "his own sense" of realism.
Scripts.
Steve Kloves wrote the screenplays for all but the fifth film, which was penned by Michael Goldenberg. Kloves had direct assistance of J. K. Rowling, though she allowed him what he described as "tremendous elbow room". Rowling once asked Kloves to keep being faithful to the spirit of the books, thus the plot and tone of each film and its corresponding book are virtually the same, albeit with some changes and omissions for purposes of cinematic style, time and budget constraints. Michael Goldenberg also received input from Rowling during his adaptation of the fifth novel; Goldenberg was originally considered to adapt the first novel before the studio chose Kloves.
David Heyman briefly explained the book-to-film transition. He commented on Rowling's involvement in the series, stating that she understands that "books and films are different" and is "the best support" a producer could have. Rowling had overall approval on the scripts, which were viewed and discussed by the director and the producers. Heyman also said that Kloves was the "key voice" in the process of adapting the novels and that certain aspects from the books needed to have been excluded from the scripts due to the filmmakers' decision to keep the main focus on Harry's journey as a character, which would ultimately give the films a defined structure. Heyman mentioned that some fans "don't necessarily understand the adaptation process" and that the filmmakers would love to "have everything" from the books in the films, but noted that it is not possible as they had "neither time nor cinematic structure" to do so. He finished by saying that adapting a novel to the screen is "a really considered process."
Due to the fact that the films were being made as the novels were being published, the filmmakers had no idea of the story's outcome until the release of the final novel in 2007. Kloves spoke of his relationship with Rowling when adapting the novels by saying, "The thing is about Jo, which is remarkable for someone who had no experience with the filmmaking process, was her intuition. We had a conversation the very first day I met her where she said, 'I know the movies can't be the books... because I know what's coming and it's impossible to fully dramatise on screen what I'm going to write. But I just ask you to be true to the characters, that's all I care about.'" Kloves also said, "I don't know what compelled me to say this Rowling but I said, 'I've just got to warn you my favourite character is not Harry. My favourite character is Hermione.' And I think for some weird reason, from that moment on, she sort of trusted me."
Cast and crew.
Aside from the three lead actors, other notable cast members include Robbie Coltrane as Rubeus Hagrid, Alan Rickman as Severus Snape, Maggie Smith as Minerva McGonagall, and Tom Felton as Draco Malfoy. Richard Harris, who played the role of Professor Albus Dumbledore, passed away on 25 October 2002 causing the role to be re-cast for the third installment, "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban". David Heyman and director Alfonso Cuarón chose Michael Gambon to portray the character of Dumbledore, which he did for all succeeding films. Notable recurring cast members include Helena Bonham Carter as Bellatrix Lestrange, Warwick Davis as Filius Flitwick, Ralph Fiennes as Lord Voldemort, Brendan Gleeson as Alastor Moody, Richard Griffiths as Vernon Dursley, Jason Isaacs as Lucius Malfoy, Gary Oldman as Sirius Black, Fiona Shaw as Petunia Dursley, Timothy Spall as Peter Pettigrew, David Thewlis as Remus Lupin, Emma Thompson as Sybill Trelawney, and Julie Walters as Molly Weasley.
The series has seen many returning crew members from various departments, including: Nick Dudman, make-up and creature effects designer; Amanda Knight, make-up designer; Jany Temime, costume designer; Fiona Weir, casting director; Tim Burke, visual effects supervisor; Peter Doyle, digital film colourist; Greg Powell, stunt coordinator; and David Holmes, stunt double.
Set design.
The production designer for all eight films is Stuart Craig. Assisted by Stephanie McMillan, Craig has created iconic sets pieces including the Ministry of Magic, the Chamber of Secrets, Malfoy Manor and the layout for the CGI Horcrux Cave. Due to the fact that the novels were being published as the films were being made, Craig was required to rebuild some sets for future films and alter the design of Hogwarts. He said, "In the early days, every time you saw the exterior of Hogwarts, it was a physical miniature" which was made by craftsmen and occupied a large sound stage. "We ended up with a profile of how Hogwarts looked, a skyline that actually I didn’t design, and it wasn’t always satisfactory, and as all the novels got written and movies got made there were new requirements buildings. The Tower definitely wasn’t there originally and so we were able to add that substantial piece. And in the last film, we needed an arena for the battle for Hogwarts – the big courtyard outside doubled in size and if you look at the first movie it wasn’t there at all. There were quite some liberties taken with the continuity of Hogwarts." In the last film, Craig used a digital model instead of a miniature to "embrace the latest technology".
On the method of creating the sets, Craig said he often started by sketching ideas onto a blank sheet of paper. Stephanie McMillan also said that "each film always had plenty of new challenges", citing the changes in visual style between directors and cinematographers as an example, along with the developing story in the novels. Due to J. K. Rowling's descriptions of various settings in the novels, Craig noted his "responsibility was to place it together". 
Craig commented on his experience working in the studio environment, "I’m the production designer, but on a big movie like "Harry Potter" I may be responsible for 30 to 35 people; from the supervising art director, and a team of art directors and assistants, to draughtsmen and junior draughtsmen, and then on to model makers, sculptors and scenic artists." He said, "Ten years go, all the "Harry Potter" drawings were done in pencil. I would take my roughs and plans and sections and give them to a professional architectural illustrator, who would create concept art using pencil and colour wash on watercolour paper." He said the process changed slightly throughout the years due to, what he called, the "digital revolution" of making films.
When filming of the series was completed, some of Craig's sets had to be rebuilt or transported for them to be displayed at the Warner Bros. studio tour.
Cinematography.
There have been six different directors of photography in the franchise: John Seale worked on the first film; Roger Pratt on the second and fourth; Michael Seresin on the third; Sławomir Idziak on the fifth; Bruno Delbonnel on the sixth; and Eduardo Serra on the seventh and eighth. Delbonnel was considered to return for both parts of "Deathly Hallows", however he declined and stated that he was "scared of repeating" himself. Delbonnel's cinematography in "Half-Blood Prince" gained the series its only Academy Award nomination for Best Cinematography. As the series progressed, each cinematographer faced the challenge of shooting and lighting older sets (which had been around since the first few films) in unique and different ways. Chris Columbus said the series' vivid colouring decreased as each film was made, reflecting a more real world.
Michael Seresin commented on the change of visual style from the first two films in "Prisoner of Azkaban": "The lighting is moodier, with more shadowing and cross-lighting." Seresin and Alfonso Cuarón moved away from the strongly coloured and brightly lit cinematography of the first two films and set the stage for the succeeding five films, with the lighting becoming dimmer and the colour palette more muted with Roger Pratt's work on the fourth film. Sławomir Idziak provided the fifth film with a cold, blue tint which mirrored the bleakness of the story and, after comparing a range of digital cameras with 35 mm film, Bruno Delbonnel decided to shoot the sixth movie, "Half-Blood Prince", on film rather than the increasingly popular digital format; this decision was kept for the two-part "Deathly Hallows" with Eduardo Serra, who said that he preferred to work with film because it was "more technically accurate and dependable".
Because the majority of "Deathly Hallows" takes place in various settings away from Hogwarts, David Yates wanted to "shake things up" by using different photographic techniques such as using hand-held cameras and very wide camera lenses. Eduardo Serra said, "Sometimes we are combining elements shot by the main unit, a second unit, and the visual effects unit. You have to know what is being captured – colours, contrast, et cetera – with mathematical precision." He noted that with Stuart Craig's "amazing sets and the story", the filmmakers could not "stray too far from the look of the previous "Harry Potter" films."
Editing.
Along with continuous changes in cinematographers, there have been five film editors to work in post-production on the series: Richard Francis-Bruce edited the first instalment; Peter Honess did the second; Steven Weisberg edited the third, Mick Audsley did the fourth; and Mark Day edited films five to eight.
Music.
The "Harry Potter" series has had four composers. John Williams was the first composer to enter the series and is known for creating "Hedwig's Theme", which is heard at the start of each film. Williams scored the first three films: "Philosopher's Stone", "Chamber of Secrets", and "Prisoner of Azkaban". However, the second entry was adapted and conducted by William Ross due to Williams' conflicting commitments.
After Williams left the series to pursue other projects, Patrick Doyle scored the fourth entry, "Goblet of Fire", which was directed by Mike Newell with whom Doyle had worked with previously. In 2006, Nicholas Hooper started work on the soundtrack to "Order of the Phoenix" by reuniting with old friend director David Yates. Hooper also composed the soundtrack to "Half-Blood Prince" but decided not to return for the final films.
In January 2010, Alexandre Desplat was confirmed to compose the score for "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1". The film's orchestration started in the summer with Conrad Pope, the orchestrator on the first three "Harry Potter" films, collaborating with Desplat. Pope commented that the music "reminds one of the old days." Desplat returned to score "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" in 2011. 
Director David Yates stated that he wanted John Williams to return to the series for the final instalment, but their schedules did not align due to the urgent demand of a rough cut of the film sooner than was possible. The final recording sessions of "Harry Potter" took place on 27 May 2011 at Abbey Road Studios with the London Symphony Orchestra, orchestrator Conrad Pope and composer Alexandre Desplat. 
Doyle, Hooper and Desplat introduced their own personal themes to their respective soundtracks, while keeping a few of John Williams' themes.
Visual effects.
There have been many visual effects companies to work on the "Harry Potter" series. Some of these include Rising Sun Pictures, Double Negative, Cinesite, Framestore and Industrial Light & Magic. The latter three have worked on all the films in the series, while Double Negative and Rising Sun Pictures began their commitments with "Prisoner of Azkaban" and "Goblet of Fire" respectively. Framestore contributed by developing many memorable creatures and sequences to the series. Cinesite were involved in producing both miniature and digital effects for the films. Producer David Barron said that ""Harry Potter" created the UK effects industry as we know it. On the first film, all the complicated visual effects were done on the west coast. But on the second, we took a leap of faith and gave much of what would normally be given to Californian vendors to UK ones. They came up trumps." Tim Burke, the visual effects supervisor, said many studios "are bringing their work to UK effects companies. Every facility is fully booked, and that wasn't the case before "Harry Potter". That's really significant."
Final filming.
On 12 June 2010, filming of the "Deathly Hallows – Part 1" and "Deathly Hallows – Part 2" was completed with actor Warwick Davis stating on his Twitter account, "The end of an Era – today is officially the last day of principal photography on 'Harry Potter' – ever. I feel honoured to be here as the director shouts cut for the very last time. Farewell Harry & Hogwarts, it's been magic!". However, reshoots of the epilogue scene were confirmed to begin in the winter of 2010. The filming was completed on 21 December 2010, marking the official closure of filming the "Harry Potter" franchise. Exactly four years ago on that day, author J. K. Rowling's official website revealed the title of the final novel in the series – "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows".
Plot.
"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone" (2001).
Harry Potter is an orphaned boy brought up by his unfriendly aunt and uncle. At the age of eleven, half-giant Rubeus Hagrid informs him that he is actually a wizard and that his parents were murdered by an evil wizard named Lord Voldemort. Voldemort also attempted to kill one-year old Harry on the same night, but his killing curse mysteriously rebounded and reduced him to a weak and helpless form. Harry became extremely famous in the Wizarding World as a result. Harry begins his first year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and learns about magic. During the year, Harry and his friends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger become entangled in the mystery of the Philosopher's Stone which is being kept within the school.
"Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets" (2002).
Harry, Ron, and Hermione return to Hogwarts for their second year, which proves to be more challenging than the last. The Chamber of Secrets has been opened, leaving students and ghosts petrified by an unleashed monster. Harry must face up to claims that he is the heir of Salazar Slytherin (founder of the Chamber), learn that he can speak Parseltongue, and also discover the properties of a mysterious diary only to find himself trapped within the Chamber of Secrets itself.
"Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" (2004).
Harry Potter's third year sees the boy wizard, along with his friends, attending Hogwarts School once again. Professor R. J. Lupin joins the staff as Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, while convicted murderer Sirius Black escapes from Azkaban Prison. The Ministry of Magic entrusts the Dementors of Azkaban to guard Hogwarts from Black. Harry learns more about his past and his connection with the escaped prisoner.
"Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire" (2005).
During Harry's fourth year, the Dark Mark appears in the sky after a Death Eater attack at the Quidditch World Cup, Hogwarts plays host to a legendary event: the Triwizard Tournament, there is a new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor Alastor Moody and frequent nightmares bother Harry all year. Three European schools participate in the tournament, with three 'champions' representing each school in the deadly tasks. The Goblet of Fire chooses Fleur Delacour, Viktor Krum and Cedric Diggory to compete against each other. However, curiously, Harry's name is also produced from the Goblet making him a fourth champion, which results in a terrifying encounter with a reborn Lord Voldemort.
"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" (2007).
Harry's fifth year begins with him being attacked by Dementors in Little Whinging. Later, he finds out that the Ministry of Magic is in denial of Lord Voldemort's return. Harry is also beset by disturbing and realistic nightmares, while Professor Umbridge, a representative of Minister for Magic Cornelius Fudge, is the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. Harry becomes aware that Voldemort is after a prophecy which reveals: "neither can live while the other survives". Therefore, the rebellion involving the students of Hogwarts, secret organisation Order of the Phoenix, the Ministry of Magic, and the Death Eaters begins.
"Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince" (2009).
In Harry's sixth year at Hogwarts, Lord Voldemort and his Death Eaters are increasing their terror upon the Wizarding and Muggle worlds. Headmaster Albus Dumbledore persuades his old friend Horace Slughorn to return to Hogwarts as a professor as there is a vacancy to fill. There is a more important reason, however, for Slughorn's return. While in a Potions lesson, Harry takes possession of a strangely annotated school textbook, inscribed 'This is the property of the Half-Blood Prince'. As romance and hormones lurk within the castle's walls all year, Draco Malfoy struggles to carry out a deed presented to him by Voldemort. Meanwhile, Dumbledore and Harry secretly work together to discover the method on how to destroy the Dark Lord once and for all.
"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1" (2010).
After unexpected events at the end of the previous year, Harry, Ron, and Hermione are entrusted with a quest to find and destroy Lord Voldemort's secret to immortality – the Horcruxes. It is supposed to be their final year at Hogwarts, but the collapse of the Ministry of Magic and Voldemort's rise to power prevents them from attending. The trio undergo a long adventure with many obstacles in their path including Death Eaters, Snatchers, the mysterious Deathly Hallows and Harry's connection with the Dark Lord's mind becoming ever stronger.
"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" (2011).
After destroying one Horcrux and discovering the significance of the three Deathly Hallows, Harry, Ron and Hermione continue to seek the other Horcruxes in an attempt to destroy Voldemort, who has now obtained the Elder Wand. The Dark Lord discovers Harry's hunt for Horcruxes and launches an attack on Hogwarts School, where the trio return for one last stand against the dark forces that threaten to rid the Wizarding World of non-magical heritage to achieve pure-blood dominance.
Release.
The rights for the first four novels in the series were sold to Warner Bros. for £1,000,000 by J. K. Rowling. After the release of the fourth book in July 2000, the first film, "Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone", was released on 16 November 2001. The film grossed $90 million in the United States alone which set a record opening worldwide. The succeeding three motion picture adaptations followed suit in financial success, while garnering positive reviews from fans and critics. The fifth film, "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" was released by Warner Bros. on 11 July 2007 in English-speaking countries, except for the UK and Ireland which released the movie on 12 July. The sixth, "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince", was released on 15 July 2009 to critical acclaim and finished its theatrical run ranked as the number two grossing film of 2009 on the worldwide charts. The final novel, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows", was split into two cinematic parts: Part 1 was released on 19 November 2010 and Part 2, the conclusion to both the final film and the series, was released on 15 July 2011. Part 1 was originally scheduled to be released in 3D and 2D, but due to a delay in the 3D conversion process, Warner Bros. released the film only in 2D and IMAX cinemas. However, Part 2 was released in 2D and 3D cinemas as originally planned.
Reaction.
Critical response.
All the films have been a success financially and critically, making the franchise one of the major Hollywood tent-poles akin to "James Bond", "Star Wars", "Indiana Jones" and "Pirates of the Caribbean". The series is noted by audiences for growing visually darker and more mature as each film was released. However, opinions of the films generally divide book fans, with some preferring the more faithful approach of the first two films, and others preferring the more stylised character-driven approach of the later films. Some also feel the series has a "disjointed" feel due to the changes in directors, as well as Michael Gambon's interpretation of Albus Dumbledore differing from that of Richard Harris'. Author J. K. Rowling has been constantly supportive of the films, and evaluated "Deathly Hallows" as her favourite one in the series. She wrote on her website of the changes in the book-to-film transition, "It is simply impossible to incorporate every one of my storylines into a film that has to be kept under four hours long. Obviously films have restrictions – novels do not have constraints of time and budget; I can create dazzling effects relying on nothing but the interaction of my own and my readers' imaginations".
Review aggregate results.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
Accolades.
At the 64th British Academy Film Awards in February 2011, J. K. Rowling, David Heyman, David Barron, David Yates, Alfonso Cuarón, Mike Newell, Rupert Grint and Emma Watson collected the Michael Balcon Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema for the series. "Harry Potter" was also recognised by the BAFTA Los Angeles Britannia Awards, as David Yates won the Britannia Award for Artistic Excellence in Directing for his four "Harry Potter" films. Though the series did not win any Academy Awards, six of the eight films were nominated for a total of 12 Oscars.
Some critics, fans and general audiences have expressed disappointment that the series has not gained any Academy Awards for its achievements. Despite this, the series has gained success in many other award ceremonies including the annual Saturn Awards, Art Directors Guild Awards and Grammy Awards. The series has also gained a total of 30 nominations at the British Academy Film Awards presented at the annual BAFTAs.
"Philosopher's Stone" achieved seven BAFTA Award nominations including Best British Film and Best Supporting Actor for Robbie Coltrane. The film was also nominated for eight Saturn Awards and won for its costumes design. It was also nominated at the Art Directors Guild Awards for its production design and received the Broadcast Film Critics Award for Best Live Action Family Film along with gaining two other nominations. "Chamber of Secrets" won the award for Best Live Action Family Film in the Phoenix Film Critics Society. It was nominated for seven Saturn Awards including Best Director and Best Fantasy Film. The film was nominated for four BAFTA Awards and a Grammy Award for John Williams' score. "Prisoner of Azkaban" won an Audience Award at the BAFTA Awards, as well as Best Feature Film. The film also won a BMI Film Music award along with being nominated at the Grammy Awards, Visual Effect Society Awards and the Amanda Awards. "Goblet of Fire" won a BAFTA award for Best Production Design as well as being nominated at the Saturn Awards, Critic's Choice Awards and the Visual Effects Society Awards.
"Order of the Phoenix" picked up three awards at the inaugural ITV National Movie Awards. At the Empire Awards, David Yates won Best Director. Composer Nicholas Hooper received a nomination for a World Soundtrack Discovery Award. The film was nominated at the BAFTA Awards, but did not win for Best Production Design or Best Special Visual Effects. "Half-Blood Prince" was nominated for BAFTA Awards in Production Design and Visual Effects, and was in the longlists for several other categories, including Best Supporting Actor for Alan Rickman. Amongst other nominations and wins, the film also achieved Best Family Movie at the National Movie Awards as well as Best Live Action Family Film at the Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards, along with being nominated for Best Motion Picture at the Satellite Awards. "Deathly Hallows – Part 1" gained two nominations at the BAFTA Awards for Best Make-Up and Hair and Best Visual Effects, along with receiving nominations for the same categories at the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards. Eduardo Serra's cinematography and Stuart Craig's production design were also nominated in various award ceremonies and David Yates attained his second win at the Empire Awards, this time for Best Fantasy Film. He also obtained another Best Director nomination at the annual Saturn Awards, which also saw the film gain a Best Fantasy Film nomination. "Deathly Hallows – Part 2" was released to critical acclaim, gaining a mix of audience awards. Part 2 of "Deathly Hallows" was also recognised at the Saturn Awards as well as the BAFTA Awards where the film achieved a win for Best Special Visual Effects.
Box office.
, the "Harry Potter" film franchise is the highest grossing film franchise of all time, with the eight films released grossing over $7.7 billion worldwide. Without adjusting for inflation, this is higher than the first 22 "James Bond" films and the six films in the "Star Wars" franchise. Chris Columbus' "Philosopher's Stone" became the highest-grossing "Harry Potter" film worldwide upon completing its theatrical run in 2002, but it was eventually topped by David Yates' "Deathly Hallows – Part 2", while Alfonso Cuarón's "Prisoner of Azkaban" grossed the least.
