Two and a Half Men is an American television sitcom that was first broadcast on CBS on September 22, 2003. Starring Charlie Sheen, Jon Cryer, and Angus T. Jones, the show was originally about a hedonistic jingle writer, Charlie Harper; his uptight brother, Alan; and Alan's growing son, Jake. After Alan gets divorced, he moves with his son to share Charlie's beach-front Malibu house and complicate his free-wheeling life. 
In 2010, CBS and Warner Bros. Television reached a multi-year broadcast agreement for the series, renewing it through at least the 2011–12 season. But, on February 24, 2011, CBS and Warner Bros. decided to end production for the rest of the eighth season after Sheen's entering drug rehabilitation and making "disparaging comments" about the show's creator and executive producer, Chuck Lorre. Sheen was dismissed from the show on March 7. 
The ninth season premiere, "Nice to Meet You, Walden Schmidt", killed off Sheen's character and introduced Ashton Kutcher as Walden Schmidt, his replacement. Alan is shown moving on with his life after the death of Charlie. He has a new best friend and housemate, Walden Schmidt (Ashton Kutcher), who is dealing with his own troubles following a bad divorce. Alan, Walden, and Jake eventually bond, becoming close friends and forming a surrogate family unit.
In 2011, a blog hosted by "The New York Times" referred to "Two and a Half Men" as the "biggest hit comedy of the last decade". On May 12, 2012, CBS Broadcasting Inc. (CBS) renewed "Two and a Half Men" for a tenth season, following the announcement that CBS had closed a one-year deal with stars Ashton Kutcher, Jon Cryer, and Angus T. Jones.
Overview.
The series revolved initially around the life of the Harper brothers: Charlie (Charlie Sheen) and Alan (Jon Cryer) and Alan's son, Jake (Angus T. Jones). Charlie is a bachelor who writes commercial jingles for a living while leading a hedonistic lifestyle. When Alan's wife Judith (Marin Hinkle) decides to divorce him, he moves into Charlie's Malibu beach house, with Jake periodically coming to stay. Charlie's housekeeper is Berta (Conchata Ferrell), a sharp-tongued woman who initially resists the change to the household but grudgingly accepts it.
The first five seasons find Charlie in casual sexual relationships with numerous women until the sixth season, when he becomes engaged to Chelsea (Jennifer Bini Taylor). However, the relationship does not last after Charlie flies to Paris in the eighth season finale in pursuit of Rose (Melanie Lynskey). She was first introduced as his stalker in the pilot episode. 
In the ninth season premiere, introducing a revamped show, it is revealed that Charlie died when he fell in front of a subway train in Paris. There are suggestions that Rose did it after learning Charlie had cheated on her. 
Alan's experiences are somewhat different. Throughout the series, Alan continues to deal with his son Jake's growing up, and the aftermath of his divorce, when he has little success with women. His marriage to Kandi (April Bowlby) at the end of the third season was short-lived. In the fourth season, Alan is back at the beach house paying alimony to two women out of his meager earnings as a chiropractor. 
In the seventh season, he begins a relationship with Lyndsey McElroy (Courtney Thorne-Smith), the mother of one of Jake's friends. Their relationship is temporarily suspended when Alan accidentally burns down her house and cheats on her, but the relationship eventually resumes.
In the ninth season premiere (after Charlie's death), the beach house is sold to Walden Schmidt (Ashton Kutcher), an Internet billionaire going through a divorce from Bridget (Judy Greer). Alan leaves to live with his mother Evelyn (Holland Taylor) when the house is sold, but Walden invites both Alan and Jake back to live in the beach house. He needs friends and the three form a tightknit surrogate family. 
At the end of the ninth season, Jake joined the army; he appears occasionally during season ten. In the tenth season, Walden proposed to his English girlfriend Zoey (Sophie Winkleman) to be turned down and discovering she had another man. He becomes depressed. Meanwhile, Alan gets engaged to his girlfriend Lyndsey, while Judith leaves her second husband Herb Melnick (Ryan Stiles) after being married since the fourth season, after he cheated on her with his receptionist.
Production.
Sheen's firing and replacement.
Following a February 2010 announcement that Sheen was entering drug rehabilitation, filming of the show was put on hiatus, but resumed the following month. On April 1, 2010, "People" reported that after seven seasons, Sheen announced he was considering leaving the show. According to one source, Sheen quit the show after filming the final episode of season 7, purportedly due to his rejection of CBS's offer of $1 million per episode as too low. Sheen eventually stated that he would be back for two more seasons. On May 18, 2010, the New Zealand website stuff.co.nz reported that a press release issued by Sheen's publicist confirmed that Sheen had signed a new contract for two years at $1.78 million per episode. "To put a fitting end on the two and one-half months of whirlwind speculation, I'm looking forward to returning to my CBS home on Monday nights," Sheen was quoted as saying.
On January 28, 2011, Sheen entered a rehabilitation center voluntarily for the third time in 12 months. According to Warner Bros. Television and CBS, the show was put on hiatus for an unknown amount of time. 
The following month, after Sheen's verbal attacks against Chuck Lorre during a radio interview with Alex Jones and an online interview with TMZ.com, CBS announced that "Two and a Half Men" would cease production for the rest of its eighth season. This affected an estimated 200 employees, and caused Warner Bros., Lorre, Sheen, and other profit participants a loss of an estimated $10 million due to expected revenue from the unmade eight remaining episodes. Afterward, Sheen was interviewed on ABC's "20/20", NBC's "Today", and CNN's "Piers Morgan Tonight", where he continued to criticize Lorre and CBS. On March 7, CBS and Warner Bros. Television jointly announced that Sheen had been fired from "Two and a Half Men", citing "moral turpitude" as a main cause of separation. No decision about the future of the show was announced at that time.
Cast members Marin Hinkle and Holland Taylor expressed sadness at Sheen's departure and personal problems. Jon Cryer did not publicly comment on the matter and in response, Sheen called him "a turncoat, a traitor, a troll" in an E! Online interview, although he later issued a "half-apology" to Cryer for the remarks. Sheen sued Lorre and Warner Bros. Television for $100 million, claiming that he had filed the lawsuit on behalf of himself and "Two and a Half Men"'s cast and crew; however, only Sheen was named as a plaintiff in court documents.
In April 2011, Sheen mentioned during a radio interview after his tour's stop in Boston that he and CBS were talking about a possible return to the show. Lorre announced that same month that he had developed an idea for a "Two and a Half Men" reboot that would exclude Sheen and have Cryer in a key role alongside a new character. On May 13, CBS announced that Ashton Kutcher would join the cast. Kutcher was quoted as saying, "I can't replace Charlie Sheen but I'm going to work my ass off to entertain the hell out of people!"
On August 2, 2011 it was reported that the season nine premiere would begin with Sheen's character having been killed off and his ex-girlfriends attending his funeral. Afterward, Charlie's Malibu home would be put up for sale and interested buyers would include celebrities from Lorre's other sitcoms and John Stamos, as well as Kutcher's character, Walden Schmidt, "an Internet billionaire with a broken heart." Critics compared this situation to what happened in 1987 to Valerie Harper, who was fired from the sitcom, "Valerie" (later titled "Valerie's Family: The Hogans" and then "The Hogan Family"). Her character was killed off-screen, and she was replaced the following season.
Sheen said he would watch his "fake funeral attended by fake ex-girlfriends, from [his very, very real movie theater, with very real hotties in tow." Sheen's response to the season 9 premiere was very positive. He reportedly felt Charlie Harper's funeral was "eerie but fun". Sheen also felt that the reveal of Kutcher's character in a cloud of his own character's ashes was particularly enjoyable.
The attention "Two and a Half Men" due to the change in characters gave the series a boost. Average total viewers during the 2011–2012 season rose 13% to 15 million, and the 5.2 rating in the 18–49 demographic rose by 27%. Kutcher's debut as the character Walden Schmidt, in the episode entitled "Nice to Meet You, Walden Schmidt", was seen by 28.7 million people on September 19, 2011. The Nielsen ratings company reported that figure was higher than for any episode in the show's first eight seasons, when the series starred Sheen starred in it. At the 2012 Emmys, "Two and a Half Men" was nominated for four awards and won three of them, the most Emmys the show has won in a single year since it began. In 2012 Kutcher replaced Sheen as the highest-paid U.S. actor, receiving $700,000 per episode. For Kutcher's second season, the show moved to the 8:30pm Thursday time slot, replacing "Rules of Engagement." "Two and a Half Men" improved ratings for this time slot, which were up from the previous year.
Comments by Angus T. Jones.
In a November 2012 interview with a Christian website, the actor Angus T. Jones (who has played Jake all this time) said he had recently converted to the Seventh-day Adventist Church. He attacked the show as "filth" that contradicts his moral values and said that he was sick of being a part of it. He also begged fans to stop watching the show. Producers have explained that Jones is not expected back on the set until 2013, as his character is not scheduled to appear in the final two episodes before the winter hiatus. In response to the controversy, Charlie Sheen issued a public statement claiming that "Jones' outburst isn’t an isolated incident but rather a symptom of the toxic environment surrounding the show" and blamed Chuck Lorre for the outburst. The following day, Jones issued a public apology for his remarks, and explained that he "cannot address everything that has been said or right every misstatement or misunderstanding."
Cast and characters.
Guest stars.
As part of a crossover from the writers and executive producer of "", George Eads made a brief cameo appearance on the May 5, 2008 episode.
Charlie Sheen's real-life brother Emilio Estevez has guest-starred as an old friend of Charlie's; his father Martin Sheen has appeared as Rose's father. Sam Sheen, the real-life daughter of Denise Richards and Charlie Sheen, has appeared as Lisa's daughter on November 22, 2004.
Broadcast.
Episodes.
Each episode's title is a dialogue fragment from the episode itself, usually offering no clue to the episode's actual plotline. The show's 100th episode ("City of Great Racks") aired on October 15, 2007. To celebrate this, a casino-inspired party was held at West Hollywood's Pacific Design Center. Warner Brothers Television also distributed blue Micargi Rover bicycles adorned with the "Two and a Half Men" logo along with the words "100 Episodes." Each bicycle came with a note saying, "You've made us very proud. Here's to a long ride together." The cast also gave the crew sterling silver key rings from Tiffany & Co. The key rings were attached to small pendants with "100" inscribed on one side and "Two and a Half Men" on the other.
All seasons except 5, 7 and 8 consist of 24 episodes. Season 5 was narrowed down to 19 episodes due to 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike. Due to Sheen's personal life problems, Season 7 was narrowed down to 22 episodes. Season 8 premiered on September 20, 2010, at 9:00 p.m. ET. CBS initially ordered 24 episodes for the season, but due to Sheen's personal life, the show was put on hiatus after 16 episodes were produced, with production scheduled to resume on February 28. After a series of comments made by Sheen on February 24, 2011, CBS and Warner Bros. cancelled the remainder of the season (episodes 17–24).
On May 13, 2011, it was widely reported that actor Ashton Kutcher would be replacing Charlie Sheen as the lead on the show. The show's ninth season premiered on September 19, 2011. The first episode, "Nice to Meet You, Walden Schmidt", begins with Charlie Harper's funeral, and introduces Kutcher as billionaire Walden Schmidt, who buys Harper's house. On May 12, 2012, CBS renewed "Two and a Half Men" for a tenth season, moving it to Thursday nights at 8:30pm, following "The Big Bang Theory".
Syndication.
"Two and a Half Men" entered local United States broadcast syndication in 2007, with the first eight seasons available to local stations (largely CW affiliates in the major U.S. TV markets through major deals with Tribune Broadcasting and the Sinclair Broadcast Group). On September 6, 2010, FX began airing the series daily on cable television nationwide.
Syndicated shows are sold in multi-year cycles, with the first cycle the most expensive. "Two and a Half Men"'s first cycle is nine years in length. If there had been no ninth season because of Sheen's departure, due to the first cycle's premature end Warner Bros. would not have received about $80 million in license fees. While local stations would prefer to have as many episodes as possible available to them, an early start to the second cycle would lower the cost of the show for them.
Crossovers and other appearances.
"CSI: Crime Scene Investigation".
In 2007, "Two and a Half Men" creator Chuck Lorre contacted "" executive producer Carol Mendelsohn about a crossover. At first, the idea seemed unlikely to receive approval; however, it resurfaced when Mendelsohn and Lorre were at the World Television Festival in Canada and they decided to get approval and run with it. When Mendelsohn was giving a talk, she accidentally mentioned the crossover, that same day "Variety Magazine" was already inquiring about the crossover episodes. Mendelsohn later stated: "We're all used to being in control and in charge of our own shows and even though this was a freelance-type situation ... there was an expectation and also a desire on all of our parts to really have a true collaboration. You have to give a little. It was sort of a life lesson, I think."
"The biggest challenge for us was doing a comedy with a murder in it. Generally our stories are a little lighter," stated Lorre in an interview. "Would our audience go with a dead body in it? There was a moment where it could have gone either way. I think the results were spectacular. It turned out to be a really funny episode."
The "Two and a Half Men" episode "Fish in a Drawer" was the first part of the crossover to air, on May 5, 2008, written by "CSI" writers Sarah Goldfinger, Evan Dunsky, Carol Mendelsohn and Naren Shankar. George Eads is the only "CSI: Crime Scene Investigation" cast member to make a cameo in this episode.
Three days later the second part of the crossover aired, the "CSI" episode "Two and a Half Deaths". Gil Grissom (William Petersen) investigated the murder of a sitcom diva named Annabelle (Katey Sagal), who was found murdered while she was filming her show in Las Vegas. The episode was written by "Two and a Half Men" creators Lorre and Aronsohn; Sheen, Cryer, and Jones all make uncredited cameos in this episode as themselves, in the same clothes their characters were wearing in "Fish in a Drawer".
"Due Date".
At the end of 2010 film "Due Date", a scene from "Two and a Half Men" is shown, in which Charlie Sheen, Jon Cryer, and Angus T. Jones appear as their characters, while Ethan Chase (played by Zach Galifianakis in the movie) plays Stu, Jake's tutor.
Reception.
The "New York Daily News" has described the sitcom as "solid, well-acted and occasionally funny." Conversely Graeme Blundell, writing for "The Australian", described it as a "sometimes creepy, misogynistic comedy". Ashton Kutcher's debut was met with mixed reviews, and reviews for season 9 were also mixed.
The show has received multiple award nominations. It was nominated for 30 Primetime Emmy Awards (winning four technical awards and two for Jon Cryer as Alan Harper), and has also received two Golden Globe nominations. The show won the "Favorite TV Comedy" award at the 35th People's Choice Awards.
Ratings.
American television ratings.
Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of "Two and a Half Men" on CBS.
"Note: Each U.S. network television season starts in late September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps."
