Priyanka Chopra (; born 18 July 1982) is an Indian film actress, singer and songwriter. She won Miss India and Miss World in 2000 before beginning her acting career. Chopra has received various awards for her performances, including a National Film Award and Filmfare Awards in four categories, and has established herself as a leading contemporary actress of Hindi cinema.
Chopra made her acting debut in 2002 with the Tamil film "Thamizhan". The following year, she starred in "", her first Bollywood release, and followed it with the box office hit "Andaaz". She earned critical acclaim for her portrayal of a seductress in the 2004 thriller "Aitraaz", and subsequently played the lead female role in several commercially successful films. Her portrayal of a troubled model in the 2008 drama "Fashion" earned her wide critical acclaim, and won her the National and Filmfare Awards for Best Actress. She was later noted for her versatility in portraying challenging and character driven roles.
Chopra is regarded as one of the most popular, attractive and fashionable celebrities in India. She has performed in television and stage shows, has written columns in India's national newspapers, is active in charity work, and has many endorsement deals. In 2011, she signed a worldwide recording contract with Universal Music Group and DesiHits to record and release her first studio album. Her debut single, "In My City", was released in September 2012 and was commercially successful in India.
Early life and pageantry.
Priyanka Chopra was born on 18 July 1982, in Jamshedpur, Bihar (now in Jharkhand), to Ashok Chopra and Madhu Chopra, both physicians in the Indian Army. Her brother Siddharth is seven years younger, and the actress Parineeti Chopra is her cousin. Because of her parents' occupations, Chopra's family frequently relocated to various Indian cities, including Jamshedpur, Delhi, Pune, Lucknow, Bareilly, Ladakh, Chandigarh and Ambala. In an interview with "Daily News and Analysis", Chopra said that she did not mind travelling regularly and changing schools; she welcomed it as a new experience and a way to discover India's multicultural society. She considers Bareilly as her home town and maintains strong connections there. Chopra studied at La Martiniere Girls' School in Lucknow and at St. Maria Goretti College in Bareilly. The family moved to the US when she was 13. She attended schools in Newton, Massachusetts and Cedar Rapids, Iowa, where she found the difference in cultures between India and the US shocking. While in Boston, she participated in several theatre productions and studied Western classical music; chorus and choral singing; and Kathak dance.
Chopra returned to India and finished her high school education at the Army Public School in Bareilly. During this period she won a local beauty pageant called "May Queen". She had enrolled in college to study either engineering or psychology, but left after winning the Miss World pageant. Chopra's mother enrolled her for the Femina Miss India contest of 2000, in which she came second, winning the Femina Miss India World title. She was sent to the Miss World pageant and was crowned Miss World 2000 and Miss World Continental Queen of BeautyAsia & Oceania. Chopra was the fifth Indian to win Miss World, and the fourth to do so in a span of seven years. Chopra said that the Miss World title brought her recognition and fame, and then she began receiving offers for film roles.
Acting career.
Debut and breakthrough (2002–04).
Chopra was scheduled to make her film debut in 2002 in Abbas-Mustan's romantic thriller "Humraaz", but she opted out because of her work and pageantry commitments. She started getting film offers right after Miss India and before Miss World. Although the directors of "Humraaz" were willing to delay the film for her, they later dropped her as she signed for some other projects. Later that year, she debuted in the Tamil film "Thamizhan" as the love interest of the protagonist played by Vijay. The film was praised for its wit and dialogue, although Chopra's character was seen as lacking depth. A reviewer from Rediff.com said that Chopra "shows no promise."
In 2003, Chopra made her Bollywood film debut as the second female lead opposite Sunny Deol and Preity Zinta in Anil Sharma's "". Her acting got her recognised by critics. Derek Elley of "Variety" wrote, "Mega-looker Chopra (Miss World 2000) makes a solid screen debut as a modern urban miss." The film was one of the highest-grossing Bollywood films that year and received mixed reviews from critics. Later in 2003, she appeared in Raj Kanwar's box office success "Andaaz" alongside Akshay Kumar and Lara Dutta. Her performance in the film earned her the Filmfare Best Female Debut Award and a nomination for the Filmfare Best Supporting Actress Award. Ashish Magotra writing for Rediff.com said, "Priyanka Chopra alone clicks with the audience, thanks to her skimpy outfits."
Chopra's first three releases in 2004—"Plan", "Kismat", and "Asambhav"—performed poorly. She was criticised by reviewers as merely a prop in these films. Later that year she starred opposite Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar in David Dhawan's romantic comedy "Mujhse Shaadi Karogi", which was a major commercial success with worldwide gross earnings of over , and was the third-highest grossing film of the year. She then starred with Kumar again, and Kareena Kapoor in Abbas-Mustan's thriller "Aitraaz", her first negative role. The film was a moderate success at the Indian box office, and Chopra's performance was critically acclaimed. Film critic Subhash K. Jha wrote, "A star is born! As the predatory social-climbing seductress who can go to any length to satiate her lust for life, Priyanka Chopra rocks the scene like never before. The film is undoubtedly a triumph for Priyanka Chopra. With half a smile, a twitch of her lip and a movement of her eyebrow she seems to slip into her man-eater's role with captivating ease." She earned a Filmfare Award for Best Performance in a Negative Role (also known as the Best Villain Award), becoming the second and final actress to win the award after Kajol; the category has been discontinued since 2008. She also received a second nomination for the Filmfare Best Supporting Actress Award for the role.
Early success and setbacks (2005–07).
In 2005, Chopra appeared in six films. Three of them—"Blackmail", "Karam" and "Yakeen"—were commercially unsuccessful in India. Her performance in "Yakeen" was generally well received. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama wrote that Chopra "is bound to win laurels yet again ... the actor is emerging as one of the finest talents in these fast-changing times." She then starred in Vipul Amrutlal Shah's family drama "" alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Akshay Kumar, and Shefali Shah. The film was a moderate box office success. Her next film release was Suneel Darshan's "Barsaat", co-starring Bobby Deol and Bipasha Basu. The film was a critical failure grossing below average takings at the box office, and Taran Adarsh called Chopra's performance "mechanical". Later that year, Rohan Sippy cast her alongside Abhishek Bachchan, Ritesh Deshmukh and Nana Patekar in the comedy "Bluffmaster!", which was a moderate commercial success. Chopra played the role of Simran Saxena, Bachchan's love interest. According to film critic Subhash K. Jha, "Chopra has little to do. But she does it with eye-catching aplomb."
Aside from three special appearances, Chopra started off 2006 by starring in Rakesh Roshan's superhero film "Krrish", a sequel to the 2003 science-fiction film "Koi... Mil Gaya". Co-starring with Hrithik Roshan, Rekha and Naseeruddin Shah, Chopra played the role of Priya, a young television journalist. The film was a major box office success, earned worldwide, and was the second highest grossing film of the year. Her next film was Dharmesh Darshan's romantic comedy, "Aap Ki Khatir". Co-starring alongside Akshaye Khanna, Ameesha Patel and Dino Morea, Chopra played a London-based Indian expatriate (Khanna's love interest). The film was a commercial failure in India. Her final release of 2006 was Farhan Akhtar's action-thriller "Don", a remake of the 1978 film of the same name, alongside Shahrukh Khan. Upon release, the film was declared a box office success in India and overseas, with revenues of . Chopra portrayed Roma, a character played by Zeenat Aman in the original film. Chopra underwent martial arts training for her role in the movie and performed all the stunts herself. Raja Sen of Rediff.com wrote that Chopra "is the film's big surprise. Stepping into Zeenat Aman's shoes is a tough ask, but she doesn't really waste time pretending to be the stunner's successor. Chopra handles her role with efficiency, looking every bit the competent woman of action".
In 2007, Chopra had two films and one special appearance. First was Nikhil Advani's ensemble piece "". Despite a promising opening, the movie was a financial failure. She was criticised for her performance in the film, with Lidia Ostepeev of Planet Bollywood calling it "forced and unnecessarily exaggerated." Her other release, the much-delayed "Big Brother", also failed at the box office.
Critical acclaim (2008–11).
The year 2008 saw Chopra acting in six films; her first four—"Love Story 2050", "God Tussi Great Ho", "Chamku" and "Drona"—were critical and commercial failures. Her performances in them generated mixed to negative reviews. For example, Rajeev Masand said that in "Love Story 2050", Chopra shares no chemistry with her co-star and "fails to inspire either affection or sympathy." After six failed films in a row, critics were starting to write her off. Later that year however, Chopra starred in Madhur Bhandarkar's "Fashion", a drama revolving around the fashion industry as seen by Chopra's protagonist character Meghna Mathur, an ambitious model. The film and her performance were appreciated by the critics, earning her several awards for Best Actress including the National Film Award for Best Actress, the Filmfare Award for Best Actress, the IIFA Award for Best Actress, the Screen Award for Best Actress, and the Apsara Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role. Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN wrote, "Priyanka Chopra turns in a respectable performance, one that will inevitably go down as her best." "Fashion" was later called her coming of age film, and was a turning point in her career. Chopra said, "I think actually "Fashion" kick started ... the process of female dominated films. Today you have so many other films, which have done well with female leads". Her final film of 2008 was Tarun Mansukhani's romantic comedy "Dostana" with Abhishek Bachchan and John Abraham. Produced by Dharma Productions, the film was a financial success with a worldwide revenue of over . Chopra received positive reviews for her performance and her beauty in the film. Khalid Mohammed found her "pretty convincing"; Gaurav Malani of "Indiatimes" wrote, "Priyanka Chopra looks gorgeous and is perfectly poised in her performance."
The following year, Chopra played a feisty Marathi woman named Sweety in Vishal Bhardwaj's caper thriller "Kaminey" co-starring Shahid Kapoor, which was a critical and commercial success, earning worldwide. Her performance received positive reviews; Taran Adarsh described it as "first-rate" and wrote, "She's so much in sync with her character ...  gets the Maharashtrian accent perfect." Her role earned her several awards and nominations including a second Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination and an Apsara Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role, her second consecutive award in that category. Chopra subsequently appeared in Ashutosh Gowariker's romantic comedy "What's Your Raashee?", for which she was considered for inclusion in the "Guinness World Records" book for being the first film actress to portray 12 distinct characters in one film. Reaction to the film was lukewarm, but Chopra's performance was praised by critics. Sukanya Verma in a review for Rediff.com wrote, "Priyanka Chopra transforms into 12 new skins with astonishing distinction, voice and spirit. The actress reinvents herself into this unique individual every single time ranging from batty, bashful and boisterous. This is simply her show." Chopra's heavy workloadfilming for several productions, travelling for endorsements and performing at live shows including the Miss India pageanttook its toll and she fainted during filming and was admitted to hospital.
In 2010, Chopra starred opposite Uday Chopra in Jugal Hansraj's romantic comedy "Pyaar Impossible!", in which she portrayed Alisha Merchant, a beautiful college girl who falls in love with a nerdy boy. The film was a commercial and critical failure. Later that year, she co-starred with Ranbir Kapoor in Siddharth Anand's romantic comedy, "Anjaana Anjaani". A moderate commercial success, the film and her performance received mixed reviews. Sarita Tanwar of "Mid Day" wrote, "Priyanka Chopra is at her casual and spontaneous best. She embraces the character completely and makes it totally believable", while Anupama Chopra dismissed her acting as "artificial".
Chopra's first film of 2011 was Vishal Bhardwaj's black comedy "7 Khoon Maaf", based on Ruskin Bond's short story "Susanna's Seven Husbands". Chopra portrayed Susanna Anna-Marie Johannes, an Anglo-Indian woman who murders her seven husbands in an unending quest for love. The film premiered at the 61st Berlin International Film Festival. "7 Khoon Maaf" was a commercial failure and received mixed response from critics, but Chopra's performance was praised. Nikhat Kazmi of "The Times of India" remarked, ""7 Khoon Maaf" would undoubtedly end up as a milestone in Priyanka Chopra's career graph. The actor displays exquisite command over a complex character that is definitely a first in Indian cinema." Chopra's performance earned her the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress and a third Filmfare Award for Best Actress nomination. Chopra turned down the role of Phaedra in Tarsem Singh's 2011 Hollywood fantasy film "Immortals" because of the film's conflicting shooting schedule.
Lastly that year was Farhan Akhtar's action-thriller "Don 2", which is a sequel to "Don" and received mixed reviews. Chopra reprised the role of Roma, which received positive feedback from critics. According to "The Express Tribune", "Chopra pulls of her role with aplomb and seems to be the perfect choice for an action heroine. As you watch her effortlessly beat up some thugs in the movie, you come to the realisation that she may be the first proper female action hero in Bollywood." A review by "Divanee Magazine" said that Chopra surprises with a demeanor like that of "Tomb Raider"'s Lara Croft. "Don 2" was a major success in India and overseas, earning over worldwide. It broke multiple box office records, including the highest grossing Bollywood movie overseas in 2011. "Don 2" was showcased at the 62nd Berlin International Film Festival and along with "Don" at the 2012 International Film Festival of Marrakech in Morocco.
Recent work (2012–present).
Chopra's first release of 2012 was Karan Malhotra's action drama "Agneepath", in which she starred alongside Hrithik Roshan, Sanjay Dutt and Rishi Kapoor. Produced by Dharma Productions, the action drama is a remake of the 1990 classic of the same name. Chopra's "lehenga", a traditional skirt, caught fire while shooting for an elaborate Ganpati festival song called "Deva Shree Ganesha". Upon release, the film broke Bollywood's highest opening day collections record and became a critical and commercial success with a worldwide gross of . Her performance as Kaali Gawde, Roshan's loquacious love interest, was appreciated by critics; Mayank Shekhar wrote that Chopra stood out in a male-dominated movie. "Agneepath" was later screened at the International Film Festival of Marrakech.
In her next release, she co-starred with Shahid Kapoor in Kunal Kohli's "Teri Meri Kahaani", a love story set in three different eras. The film opened to mixed reactions from critics and Chopra's performance was generally well received. Sonia Chopra of Sify wrote, "Priyanka delivers a superb performance easily slipping in-and-out of the layered characters with dexterity." The film did not perform well at the Indian box office but was a moderate success overseas.
Anurag Basu's "Barfi!" was her final appearance of 2012, alongside Ranbir Kapoor and Ileana D'Cruz. She was cast as Jhilmil Chatterjee, an autistic woman who falls in love with a deaf and mute man. While preparing for her role, Chopra visited several mental institutions and spent time with autistic people. She said, "I had to research a little for the role because in India awareness about a condition such as autism is very low." The film opened to wide critical acclaim and was a major commercial success, earning worldwide. Chopra received unanimous praise for her portrayal, which several reviewers regarded as her best performance to date. The Indo-Asian News Service review said, "Priyanka Chopra as the autistic Jhilmil steals the show from Ranbir, if that's possible. Her inherent glamorous personality simply disappears into her character. We don't see the actress on screen at all! We see only Jhilmil who reminds us in a very pleasant way of Sridevi in "Sadma". This is one of the most flawless interpretations of a physical-psychological disability seen on celluloid." Chopra received another nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress. The film was screened at the Busan International Film Festival, Marrakech International Film Festival and was chosen as India’s official entry to the Oscars for the 85th Academy Awards.
Chopra's first film of 2013 was K. C. Bokadia's much-delayed film "Deewana Main Deewana", shot over four years earlier. She has several other projects in various stages of development. She will reprise her role of Priya in Rakesh Roshan's "Krrish 3"a sequel to the 2006 superhero film "Krrish"alongside Hrithik Roshan, Vivek Oberoi and Kangna Ranaut. She is filming Apoorva Lakhia's "Zanjeer", a remake of the 1973 film of the same name, alongside Ram Charan Teja, and is also filming Ali Abbas Zafar's "Gunday", co-starring Ranveer Singh, Arjun Kapoor and produced by Yash Raj Films. Chopra has been signed on for Ekta Kapoor's next production "Milan Talkies"to be directed by Tigmanshu Dhulia. She will also star in the lead role in Sanjay Leela Bhansali's biopic of World Boxing Champion and Olympic bronze medalist Mary Kom. To prepare for her role, she will spend time with Kom and undergo four months of boxing training.
Other ventures.
Music career.
Chopra credited her fondness of singing to her father and used her singing talent early in her pageantry career. Her first recording was the song "Ullathai Killadhe" in the Tamil film "Thamizhan" (2002), after her director and co-star heard her singing on the sets. She declined to sing playback for "Tinka Tinka" in her film "Karam" (2005), as she wanted to concentrate on her acting career, but later sang the song live on the television programme "Sa Re Ga Ma Pa". Chopra recorded a song for the film "Bluffmaster!" (2005), but it was never released. In August 2011, Universal Music Group signed Chopra for a worldwide recording agreement with DesiHits. Troy Carter, CEO of Atom Factory who also manages Lady Gaga, was signed by Chopra to manage her music career. Her first studio album will be released by Interscope Records in North America and by Island Records elsewhere.
Travelling to Los Angeles to work on her album, she collaborated with Sam Watters, Matthew Koma, and Jay Sean. The album is produced by RedOne and is scheduled for release in early 2013. Her first single, "In My City", debuted in America on 13 September 2012 on the NFL Network's Thursday Night Football, 12 hours after it was released in India. "In My City" features rapper Will.i.am, was produced by RedOne, and was inspired by Chopra's unsettled childhood, and her journey from a small-town girl to a celebrity. "In My City" trended at number one on Twitter a few minutes after release. The song was a commercial success, selling more than 130,000 copies in the first week after its release, and was certified triple platinum in India.
The 2012 World Music Awards acknowledged her with three nominations, including Best Female Artist, Best Song, and Best Video for "In My City". In October 2012, the single won her the Best International Debut award at the People's Choice Awards India. In 2012, Chopra recorded an electronic dance music track with the American disc jockey and producer duo The Chainsmokers called "Erase" as a featured artist; the song was released to iTunes Store on 4 December 2012 for digital download. In 2012, Chopra became the first Bollywood star to be signed by Creative Artists Agency (CAA), a prominent entertainment and sports agency. She said, "This is a great follow-up the Universal Music Group/Desi Hits! signing. Basically, I am an actor so it did make sense to have representation in terms of movies or entertainment in any way."
Television and stage performances.
In 2010, Chopra became a television host with the reality show "", replacing Akshay Kumar, on the Colors channel. She performed most of the stunts herself. The show eventually beat the opening ratings of the previous two seasons. Her show was praised by critics and earned her the Indian Telly Award for Most Impactful Debut on Television. She visited Jawan troops in Tenga in eastern India for a special episode on the NDTV show, "Jai Jawan", celebrating the 60th anniversary of India's independence. In 2007, Chopra judged the Miss India pageant. She stated, "Miss India will always remain special. That's where it all started for me. And maybe that's where it would've ended if I hadn't won the crown." She performed at Miss India 2009 and judged Miss World 2009.
Chopra is a regular stage performer and has participated in various concerts and award ceremonies. She took part in a concert tour titled Temptations 2004 and performed alongside other Bollywood actors, including Shahrukh Khan, Saif Ali Khan, Rani Mukerji, Preity Zinta and Arjun Rampal in nineteen stage shows worldwide. In 2011, Chopra participated in a concert along with Shahid Kapoor and Shahrukh Khan, celebrating 150 years of the India-South Africa friendship in Durban, South Africa. In 2012, Chopra performed at the opening ceremony of the fifth edition of Indian Premier League alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Salman Khan, Kareena Kapoor, and international pop star Katy Perry, held in M. A. Chidambaram Stadium, Chennai. She also performed alongside many other Bollywood divas in the opening ceremony of a new IPL franchisee at the Sahara Stadium. In October 2012, she performed a tribute to filmmaker Yash Chopra at the People's Choice Awards India. In December 2012, she performed in Dubai Festival City's Ahlan Bollywood Concert alongside Salman Khan, Zarine Khan, Sophie Choudry, Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and Sohail Khan.
Column writing.
Chopra started writing an opinion column titled "The Priyanka Chopra Column" for "Hindustan Times" in 2009. She said after her first year of writing it, "I’m a private person and never thought that I could express my feelings. But strangely enough, whenever I sat down to write this column, my inner most thoughts came to the fore." In March 2009 she decided to meet some readers who had sent feedback on her weekly column. she was still writing sporadically for newspapers. In August 2012, she wrote a column titled, "No woman in Mumbai feels safe any longer", published by "The Times of India", in which she discussed the death of 25-year-old Pallavi Purkayastha, whom she had met while working on "Don". Chopra expressed her opinions about the safety of women in the city.
Endorsements.
Chopra has a number of endorsements and in this respect she is one of the highest paid Bollywood actresses. A survey conducted by AdEx India declared her as the queen of brand endorsements, ranking second on the list of brand ambassadors of 2008 after Shah Rukh Khan. Manish Porwal of Alchemist Talent Solutions said “Priyanka is a bigger and more stable brand than before. A lot of what she signed over the years was 'different' when she signed it, but became a norm later. Many clients have renewed their association with her year after year, leaving the competition only hoping and waiting." Chopra has represented brands including Pepsi, Nokia, Garnier, Nestle, and many others.
Philanthropy.
Chopra often supports and speaks out for women's issues, against female infanticide and foeticide, and in support of education for girls. In 2006, a day with Chopra was auctioned on eBay, proceeds of which were donated to an NGO called Nanhi Kali which helps to educate girls in India. In 2010, she was one of several celebrities who created promotional messages for Pearls Wave Trust, that campaigns against violence towards and abuse of women and girls. She also appeared at the launch of a campaign called "Save Girl Child", aiming to change Indians' mindset towards girls. She has been working with UNICEF since 2008, during which time she has recorded public service announcements and participated in media panel discussions to promote children's rights and the education of girls, and was appointed as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in 2010. In 2012, Chopra spoke at the launch of Awakening Youth, an anti-addiction program.
The star is also a supporter of environmental charities including NDTV's Greenathon, an initiative to support eco-friendliness and investigate poor electricity supplies in rural villages. She featured in an animated video with children to support the cause and removed refuse from the banks of the Yamuna river in Agra in a symbolic gesture to promote a campaign to raise awareness for environmental issues. Chopra adopted a tigress named Durga at the Birsa biological park for the year 2011–12, and then a lioness named Sundari for 2012–13 from the same zoo. She sent a to the zoo authorities for the lioness' upkeep.
Chopra has made various appearances to support other charities, such as the 2005 HELP! Telethon Concert to help raise money for the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake. In 2009, she shot a documentary for the organization Alert India to spread awareness about leprosy. She modelled for designer Manish Malhotra and Shaina NC's charity fashion show to raise funds for NGO Cancer Patients Aid Association (CPAA). Chopra pledged to donate her organs after death to promote organ donation, and was the co-keynote speaker at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center's Bollywood themed 20th anniversary celebration of its Liver Transplant Program in 2012.
Influences.
In a 2012 interview with "The Times of India", Chopra described the biggest influences in her acting career. She said, "I have always wanted to be the sum of more than just my movies. I want to be a persona like Amitabh Bachchan, Shah Rukh Khan, Salman Khan, Aishwarya Rai Bachchan. I imbibe from people I work with and I want to be like them." When it comes to her influences in style and fashion, she said, "In Hindi films I always used to like Mumtaz and in Hollywood films I always loved Marilyn Monroe and Audrey Hepburn. I really liked them a lot."
Chopra's parents exposed her to an eclectic range of musicians, including Mohammad Rafi, The Beatles, Metallica, The Doors, and 50 Cent. Musically, Chopra's main influence was her father, whom she said is "an incredible singer". She was also influenced by international musicians Michael Jackson, Madonna, Mariah Carey, Beyonce, The Notorious B.I.G, U2, Lady Gaga, and Rihanna, and by Indian singers Lata Mangeshkar, Asha Bhosle, Shaan, Shreya Ghoshal, and Sunidhi Chauhan. Expressing her fondness for the music of Lady Gaga and Rihanna, she said, "I love their music and their style ... they have an individuality that shines through in their music. They make the kind of music I like!"
Public image and personal life.
Chopra is considered one of the most popular Bollywood celebrities in India, has a reputation as one of the most desirable women in India, and has been described as a sex symbol and a style icon. Designers Falguni and Shane Peacock wrote, "She is comfortable in her own skin and looks ravishing in whatever she wears, be it a bikini, short or long dress or even a saree." Chopra's figure, eye colour, and especially her "bee-stung" lips have been cited by the media as her characteristic distinctive physical features. She is often referred to as "Piggy Chops", a nickname given to her by co-stars on the set of the film "Bluffmaster!" in 2005. Chopra does not come from a film background and announces herself as a self-made woman. In an interview with "The Express Tribune" she said that her journey had been a learning experience as she entered the film industry without knowing anyone.
Concerning her image, Chopra often ranks high on lists of most powerful, popular, or attractive Indian celebrities. In 2006 and 2012, the UK magazine "Eastern Eye" ranked her first on their list of "World's Sexiest Asian Women". Chopra was featured on "Verve"'s list of most powerful women in 2009 and 2010. In the "Times of India"s list of the 50 most desirable women, she was ranked first in 2008, and in the top four the following three years. In 2011, Chopra was named by "People" as "India's Best Dressed Woman of the year", and "Maxim" named her the "Hottest Girl of the year". In 2012, she was declared as the topmost influential Indian in the social media circuit by a survey conducted by Pinstorm India. Chopra has often featured on Rediff.com's annual listing of "Bollywood's Best Actress". She was ranked second in 2006 and 2008, and number one in 2009; she also placed fifth on their list of "Top 10 Actresses of 2000–2010".
Chopra has said that she is very close to her family and is grateful for their sacrifices; her mother, a well-established gynaecologist in Bareilly, gave up her own career to help Chopra with hers. Her relationship with her family has always been Chopra's top priority, especially that with her younger brother Siddharth. Although known for her media-friendly attitude, Chopra is evasive about her personal life. She said about her presence on Twitter, "One thing that I haven't done and never will is talking about my personal life." She added that when there is an announcement worth making, she would be loquacious about it. Her personal website, iampriyankachopra.com, was opened in August 2010. Chopra lives with her family and Brando, her dog. Chopra has a tattoo on her wrist that reads "Daddy's lil girl", referring to her loving relationship with her father.
Awards and honours.
Among the film awards that Chopra has received are one National Film Award for Best Actress for "Fashion" (2008), and four different Filmfare Awards; Best Female Debut for "Andaaz" (2003), Best Performance in a Negative Role for "Aitraaz" (2004), Best Actress for "Fashion", and Critics Award for Best Actress for "7 Khoon Maaf" (2011).
Chopra has also received various honours. She appeared on the cover of the inaugural issue of India's edition of "Maxim". She and three other Bollywood actors, Shah Rukh Khan, Kajol, and Hrithik Roshan, had their likenesses made into a series of miniature dolls launched by Hasbro and UK-based Bollywood Legends Corporation. In 2009, Chopra became the first Indian actress to cast her foot impression at the Salvatore Ferragamo Museum in Florence, Italy, and she received her own custom-designed shoes from the Ferragamo house. With this honour, Chopra joined several Hollywood celebrities. She received the Trailblazer Award from the South Asians in Media, Marketing and Entertainment Association "for her blazing trails in the U.S. for Indian entertainers as the first Bollywood actor to win a major record deal in the U.S., and her ongoing commitment and passion for continuous creative/artistic/personal achievement."
