"Grey's Anatomy" is an American television medical drama that premiered on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), as a mid-season replacement for "Boston Legal" on March 27, 2005. The series has aired for nine seasons, and focuses on the fictional lives of surgical interns and residents, as they gradually evolve into seasoned doctors, while trying to maintain personal lives. The show's premise originated with Shonda Rhimes, who serves as an executive producer, along with Marti Noxon, Betsy Beers, Mark Gordon, Krista Vernoff, Rob Corn, Mark Wilding, and Allan Heinberg. The series was created to be racially diverse, utilizing a color-blind casting technique. It is primarily filmed in Los Angeles, California.
Episodes have been broadcast on Thursdays at 9:00 pm Eastern Standard Time (EST), since the show's third season. The first two seasons aired after "Desperate Housewives" in the Sunday 10:00 pm EST time-slot. All episodes are approximately forty-three minutes, without commercials, and are broadcast in both high-definition and standard. The series' episodes are also available for download at the iTunes Store in standard and high-definition qualities, and Amazon Instant Video, with new episodes appearing the day after their live airing. ABC Video on demand also releases episodes of the show, typically one to two days after their premiere. Recent episodes are available at ABC's official "Grey's Anatomy" website, and on Hulu. In 2009, ABC signed a deal allowing "Grey's Anatomy" episodes to be streamed on Netflix.
"Grey's Anatomy" was among the top-ten rated shows in the United States from its first through fourth seasons. The show's episodes have won a number of awards, including a Golden Globe Award for Best Drama Series, a People's Choice Award for Favorite TV Drama, and multiple NAACP Image Awards for Outstanding Drama Series. Since its premiere, Buena Vista Home Entertainment has distributed all seasons onto DVD. The series has aired several specials recapping events from previous episodes, as well as released two series of webisodes. On May 11, 2012, the series was renewed for a ninth season, which premiered on September 27. As of December 13, 2012, a total of original episodes have aired.
References.
General
Specific
