Jennifer Lynn Muñiz (née Lopez; born July 24, 1969) is an American actress, dancer, entrepreneur, fashion designer, film producer, philanthropist and singer. She became interested in pursuing a career in the entertainment industry following a minor role in the 1986 film "My Little Girl", to the dismay of her Puerto Rican parents, who believed that it was an unrealistic career route for a Hispanic. Following a move from The Bronx to Manhattan, Lopez performed in regional stage productions, before touring with musicals in Europe and Japan. She gained her first regular high-profile job as a Fly Girl dancer on "In Living Color" in 1991, where she remained a regular until she decided to pursue an acting career in 1993. Lopez received her first leading role in the Selena biopic of the same name in 1997. Following subsequent roles in the films "Anaconda" (1997) and "Out of Sight" (1998), she ventured into the music industry in 1999 with her debut studio album "On the 6", joining a select few in successfully converting from a film to music.
With the simultaneous release of her second studio album "J.Lo" and her film "The Wedding Planner" in 2001, Lopez became the first person to have a number one album and film in the same week. Her 2002 remix album, "J to tha L–O! The Remixes", was the first in history to debut at number one on the US "Billboard" 200. Between the release of her third and fourth studio albums—"This Is Me... Then" (2002) and "Rebirth" (2005)—Lopez took a break from her music career to focus on acting, starring in the films: "Maid in Manhattan" (2002) and "Shall We Dance?" (2004). Her fifth studio album, "Como Ama una Mujer" (2007), received the highest first-week sales for a Spanish album in the United States. Lopez's commercial success was severely damaged after the release of her sixth studio album, "Brave" (2007). The album failed to attain the success of her previous efforts and removed her from the music scene until 2011, when she became a judge on the singing competition "American Idol". This venture allowed her to regain media attention and improved her success on the music charts, with her single "On the Floor", from her seventh studio album "Love?", showcased and released during this timespan, becoming her best-selling single to date.
Lopez's public image and personal relationships have attracted worldwide media attention. Her marriage to actor Ojani Noa was proceeded by a series of lawsuits by Lopez, resulting from Noa's attempts to sell private details of Lopez and their relationship. Following her marriage to Noa, Lopez dated Sean Combs, who accompanied Lopez to the 42nd Grammy Awards in 2000, where she wore her infamous Green Versace dress. Lopez became romantically involved with actor Ben Affleck, while still married to her second husband Cris Judd, during shooting of "Gigli" (2003), a film that is considered one of the worst of all time. Lopez wed long-time friend Marc Anthony in 2004. Lopez gave birth to twins, Emme and Maximilian, in February 2008. "People" paid a reported $6 million for the first photographs of the twins, which became the most expensive celebrity picture at the time.
Biography.
Childhood and early career (1969–96).
Jennifer Lynn Lopez was born on July 24, 1969, in the Castle Hill neighborhood of The Bronx, New York. The middle child of Puerto Rican parents Guadalupe Rodriguez and David Lopez, she has an elder sister, Leslie, and a younger sister, Lynda. David worked the night shift at the Guardian Insurance Company, before becoming a computer technician at the firm, while Guadalupe was a homemaker. When Lopez was born, the family was living in a small apartment. A few years later, her parents had saved up enough money to be able to purchase a two-story house, which was considered a big deal for the relatively poor family.
At the age of five, Lopez began taking singing and dancing lessons. She toured New York with her school when she was seven years old. Her parents stressed the importance of work ethic and being able to speak English. They encouraged their three daughters to put on performances at home; singing and dancing in front of each other and their friends so that they would stay "out of trouble". Lopez spent her entire academic career in Catholic schools, finishing at Preston High School. In school, Lopez did gymnastics, ran track on a national level and was a member of the school's softball team. She excelled athletically rather than academically, competing in national track championships. In 1984, at the age of fifteen, she began dating David Cruz, her first boyfriend.
While attending her final year of high school, Lopez learned about a film casting that was seeking several teenage girls for small roles. She auditioned and was cast in "My Little Girl" (1986), a low-budget film co-written and directed by Connie Kaiserman. Lopez acted as Myra, a young woman at a center for troubled girls. After she finished filming her role in the film, Lopez realized that she wanted to become a "famous movie star".
To please her parents, though, she enrolled in Baruch College, only to drop out after one semester. She told her parents her dream of becoming a movie star, but they ensisted that it was a "really stupid" idea and that "no Latinos did that". The differences in opinions led Lopez to move out of their family home and into an apartment in Manhattan. During this period, Lopez performed in regional productions of the musicals: "Jesus Christ", "Superstar!" and "Oklahoma". From there, she was hired for the chorus in a "Golden Musicals of Broadway", which toured Europe for five months. She was unhappy with the role, as she was the only member of the chorus to not have a solo. She later got a job on the show "Synchronicity" in Japan, where she acted as a dancer, singer and a choreographer.
Lopez was selected as a backup dancer for the New Kids on the Block in 1991 and performed with them during their performance of "Games" at the 8th Annual American Music Awards. Shortly after, Lopez gained her first regular high-profile job as a Fly Girl dancer on the television program "In Living Color". She applied for the job after one of the cast members was unavailable to continue with the show. Out of 2,000 applicants, Lopez made it to the finals. She was the runner-up, but eventually received the role when the winner was unable to accept the job. She moved with Cruz to Los Angeles to film the series and remained a regular cast member until 1993 when she decided to pursue a full-time acting career. Prior to leaving the show, Lopez briefly worked as a backup dancer for American recording artist Janet Jackson. Lopez was set to tour with Jackson on her Janet World Tour in late 1993, but backed out as she wanted to do her "own thing."
Lopez received her first professional acting gig in the direct-to-video drama film "Lost in the Wild" (1993), co-starring alongside Lindsay Wagner and Robert Loggia. Later in 1993 Lopez signed a deal with CBS to co-star in the television series "Second Chances". The show was cancelled after airing only six episodes, due to its set being destroyed by the 1994 Northridge earthquake. A spin-off of the series, entitled "Hotel Malibu" was launched later that same year. It also ran for only a brief period of time and, like "Second Chances", received negative reviews.
Lopez received her first major big-screen role in Gregory Nava's 1995 drama "My Family", portraying Young Maria. The film, which stars Esai Morales, Jimmy Smits and Edward James Olmos, was critically acclaimed. Although her role was uncredited, Lopez received an Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Female nomination for her performance. In November, Lopez starred in "Money Train" alongside Wesley Snipes and Woody Harrelson, as New York City transit cops. The film faced negative reviews and is considered to be a box office bomb; with a budget of $68 million, the film grossed a total of $77 million worldwide. In August 1996, Lopez had a supporting role in the comedy "Jack". With a budget of $45 million, the film grossed a total of $59 domestically. The film received generally negative reviews.
Film breakthrough and music career launch (1997–2000).
Lopez married Cuban actor Ojani Noa in February 1997. That same month, she starred alongside Jack Nicholson and Stephen Dorff in the neo-noir thriller "Blood and Wine". It was a commercial failure; the $26 million production budget was matched with a domestic gross of $1 million at the box office. The film received generally positive reviews from critics. Lopez starred as the title role of the Selena biopic of the same name in March. Despite having previously worked with the film's director on "My Family", Lopez was subjected to an intense auditioning process before she was cast in the film. With a production budget of $20 million, the film grossed a total of $35 million domestically.
Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" stated that even in the "forgettable films" "Money Train" and "Jack", Lopez's "presence and ability made her seem just one role away from stardom" and with "Selena" she's "seized the opportunity and turned in an incandescent presentation that is especially strong during the film's numerous musical numbers". He concluded by calling the film not just a celebration of Selena's life, but also of the actress who portrayed her. After filming "Selena", Lopez was "really feeling Latin roots" and cut a demo in Spanish. Lopez's manager then sent the song, entitled "Vivir Sin Ti", to Sony Music Entertainment's Work Group, who showed an interest in signing Lopez. Tommy Mottola, the head of the label suggested to her that she sing in English instead.
In April, Lopez starred in the horror film "Anaconda" alongside Ice Cube and Jon Voight. With a production budget of $45 million, the film grossed a total of $137 million worldwide, becoming a commercial success. Lopez starred alongside Sean Penn and Billy Bob Thornton in the crime film "U Turn" in October. The film, which is based on the novel "Stray Dogs" by John Ridley, received generally positive reception from critics. After being married for less than a year, Lopez and Noa were divorced in January 1998.
In June, Lopez starred opposite George Clooney in "Out of Sight", Steven Soderbergh's adaptation of Elmore Leonard's novel of the same name (1996). Cast as a deputy federal marshal who falls for a charming criminal, Lopez won rave reviews for her performance and became the first Latina actress to earn over $1 million for a role. With a production budget of $48 million, the film grossed a total of $78 million worldwide, becoming a moderate commercial success. Lopez provided the voice of Azteca in the computer-animated film "Antz" in October. With a production budget of $105 million, the film grossed a total of $172 million worldwide.
Lopez's debut single, "If You Had My Love", was released in May 1999. It has been cited as being one of 1999's most "infectious singles". Lopez became the first artist to top the "Billboard" Hot 100 with their debut single since Britney Spears did so with her single, "...Baby One More Time", four months prior. During production of her debut album "On the 6", Lopez was aware that she received her recording contract on the premise of her looks and having an already established name in the entertainment industry, and wanted to prove she had musical talent. Prior to the debut of her music, critics wondered why she would take the risk of launching a music career. It was noted that: "If the album was a flop, not only would it embarrass Lopez, but it might even damage her career."
"Waiting for Tonight", the third single from "On the 6", is widely considered to be Lopez's best song. The song was used frequently as a celebratory anthem for the dawn of the new millennium. Lopez's musical success came as a surprise to critics; its launch made the "popular actor even more popular". Both the music industry and the public became intrigued by "this woman who seemed to have so many different talents". By the end of 1999, Lopez successfully converted herself from a film star to a pop star. She joined a select few in achieving this feat, becoming the first since Vanessa Williams (1992) and Martika (1989).
Lopez, accompanied by then-boyfriend Sean Combs, wore a plunging exotic green Versace silk chiffon dress on the red carpet of the 42nd Grammy Awards on February 22, 2000. The dress "had a low-cut neck that extended several inches below her navel, where it was loosely fastened with a sparkly brooch and then opened out again," exposing her midriff and then as cut along the front of the legs like a bath robe. The dress generated controversy and media attention, with images of Lopez in the dress being downloaded from the Grammy website over half a million times 24 hours after the event. Lopez was surprised by the enormous media coverage, declaring that she had no idea "it was going to become such a big deal".
Lopez returned to the big-screen in August, starring in the psychological thriller "The Cell" opposite Vincent D'Onofrio. With a production budget of $33 million, the film grossed a total of $104 million worldwide. The film received mixed reviews from critics, who stated that although it offers "disturbing, stunning eye candy", it is "undermined by a weak and shallow plotline that offers nothing new".
International success and Bennifer (2001–03).
While working on her second studio album, Lopez felt that it was important for her to "stay fresh" and innovate the music industry. This led her to alter her image by dying her hair and renaming herself J.Lo, a nickname she was given by her fans. She then aptly titled the album "J.Lo", and it was released on January 22, 2001 in the United States. The album was a commercial success, having debuted atop the "Billboard" 200—the same week her romantic comedy film "The Wedding Planner" led box office receipts—making Lopez the first female to have a film and album number one at the same time. "J.Lo" spawned the "Billboard" Hot 100 top-ten single "Love Don't Cost a Thing" and the number-one hit "I'm Real", as well as other moderately performing singles, "Play" and "Ain't It Funny". Audiences were not receptive of the original "I'm Real", which led Lopez to team up with Murder, Inc. records to produce a Murder remix version of the song, which features Ja Rule. The remix was an instant success, and introduced her to prominence within the world of hip-hop music. However, the original version of "I'm Real" generated controversy for its use of an unaccredited sample from Yellow Magic Orchestra's song "Firecracker" (1978). Recording artist Mariah Carey had planned to use the sample for her single, "Loverboy". It was later revealed that Carey's ex-husband Tommy Mottola, a music executive from Sony, had interfered in the situation by arranging for the sample to go to Lopez. 
In May 2001, Lopez starred in the romantic drama film, "Angel Eyes", which was a box office disappointment that generated mixed reviews. On September 29, 2001, she was married a second time, to her former back-up dancer Cris Judd The following month, Lopez was featured on the charitable song "What's Going On" with multiple artists, which was created to benefit the AIDS foundation in Africa, as well as the American Red Cross after the September 11 attacks. That month, she was also featured on the song "El Ultimo Adios (The Last Goodbye)" along with 60 other Latin artists, in memory of the September 11 attacks to help raise money for families and charities involved or affected.
Lopez's first remix album, "J to tha L-O! The Remixes", was released on February 5, 2002. It debuted at the summit of the "Billboard" 200, making it the first remix album in history to do so. It also became the third-highest-selling remix album in history, after Michael Jackson's "" and Madonna's "You Can Dance". The album spawned two commercially successful singles; the murder remix version of "Ain't it Funny" featuring Ja Rule reached number one, followed by the Track Masters remix version of "I'm Gonna Be Alright", which peaked at ten. Another single written by Lopez and her then-husband Cris Judd, "Alive", served as the album's third single. 
In May 2002, Lopez starred in the thriller film "Enough" as Slim, a woman abused by her husband who goes on the run. With a production budget of $38 million, the film grossed $52 million at the box office worldwide. While dubbed as a "kick-butt, female empowerment" movie, the film's reviews were negative, although a fight scene between Slim and her husband at the film's conclusion was praised. During the production of "Enough", which required her to practice Krav Maga, Lopez became overworked in the middle of filming and recording music, and suffered a nervous breakdown. She suffered from a lack of sleep and froze up in her trailer; years later, she confessed: "I was like – I don't want to move, I don't want to talk, I don't want to do anything." That June, Lopez filed for divorce from Judd and began publicly dating actor Ben Affleck. In November, Affleck proposed to Lopez and the couple became engaged. The media began to refer to them as "Bennifer" and they became a prominent supercouple in the media and popular culture. Bennifer became a popular term, which was eventually entered into urban dictionaries and neologism dictionaries as notable, and the name blend started the trend of other celebrity couples being referred to by the combination of each other's first names. In September, Lopez released her first fragrance, Glow by JLo. It performed strongly despite predictions that it would fail, and became America's top-selling fragrance. Lopez was credited with bringing back celebrity endorsement of fragrances and setting the trend of other celebrities endorsing them.
Lopez's third studio album "This Is Me... Then" was released on November 25. The album's content reflected upon her relationship with Affleck; a song entitled "Dear Ben" detailed her relationship with the actor. The album was proceeded by the release of lead single "Jenny from the Block". The next two singles released from "This Is Me... Then" were "I'm Glad" and "Baby I Love U!". Both failed to attain the success of her previous singles. The video for "I'm Glad" recreated scenes from the 1983 film "Flashdance", leading to a lawsuit over copyright infringement, which was later dismissed. "This Is Me... Then" has sold 2.6 million copies in the United States and has been certified double platinum by RIAA. In December, Lopez starred opposite Ralph Fiennes in the romantic comedy film "Maid in Manhattan". She played Marisa Ventura, a struggling single mother who lives in the Bronx and makes her living cleaning rooms in a super-luxurious Manhattan hotel. Marisa gets mistaken for a socialite by a princely politician, who she falls in love with. With a production budget of $55 million, the film grossed $155 million at the box office worldwide. "The New York Times" compared the film's storyline to her song "Jenny from the Block".
Lopez starred opposite Affleck in the romantic comedy "Gigli" in August 2003. With a production budget of $54 million, the film grossed a total of $7 million worldwide, becoming a box office bomb. The film received universally negative reviews from film critics, who deemed it to be "bizarre and clumsily plotted". "Gilgi" is often considered to be one of the worst films of all time. The couple postponed their nuptials indefinitely a day prior to the planned ceremony on September 14, citing the media's interference with the event as the reason.
Decline in popularity, motherhood and hiatus (2004–09).
In March 2004, Lopez had a minor role in the film "Jersey Girl", alongside Affleck. Her character, Gertrude Steiney, dies during childbirth within the first 15 minutes of the film. From the intense media scrutiny following the couple's break-up, it was noted that "they may need to put Lopez in a coffin on the poster if they want anyone to come". With a production budget of $35 million, the film was a commercial failure, earning a total of $36 million at the box office. The film, however, received generally positive reviews from critics, despite being "full of cloyingly sentimental cliches".
Following her break-up with Affleck in January, Lopez began dating long-time friend Anthony. The couple wed on June 5 at her Beverly Hills mansion, one week after Anthony's divorce from Dayanara Torres was finalized. Two men attempted to ransom a private wedding video which was stolen from the couple for one million dollars; however they were arraigned in Manhattan Criminal Court on charges of conspiracy, attempted grand larceny and possession of stolen property. In October, Lopez co-starred alongside Richard Gere in the drama "Shall We Dance?", a re-make of the 1996 Japanese film of the same title. With a production budget of $50 million, the film grossed a total of $170 million worldwide. It received generally positive reviews from critics, although it was noted that it "loses the nuances of the original", with the loss of cultural context and the addition of high-profile celebrities.
In 2004, during low-key visits to the Children's Hospital Los Angeles, which Lopez is an avid support of, she befriended eleven-year-old cancer patient Paige Patterson. Patterson attended the inaugural Noche de Niños gala for the hospital in which Lopez was presented with an award, however the morning after became even more sick and died in November 2004. Lopez has stated that Patterson made her realize why her charity work is important. Lopez dedicated "Rebirth", her fourth studio album, to Patterson. According to Lopez, "Rebirth" "came about because I was on such a roller-coaster ride, that was my career from my first album to my last album, and I did a bunch of movie projects in between. I finally took some time just for myself, and I came back, this was the first project I did. I felt like it was a new beginning for me, like I was, in a way, reborn. I was where I was when I made my first album". Tracy Hopkins of NBC's Today Music noted that after "fawning" over Affleck on "This Is Me... Then"", Lopez "wisely keeps her love life out of the spotlight" on "Rebirth" and only references her relationship with Anthony on a few tracks.
In May, Lopez starred alongside Jane Fonda in the romantic comedy "Monster-in-Law". She received $15 million for her role as Charlie, an artist who is pitted against her fiance's mother when she does not accept her as being the right woman for her son. With a production budget of $43 million, the film grossed a total of $155 million worldwide. The film received generally negative reviews from film critics, who stated although Fonda "steals the show" in her "return to the screen", the "tired" script and "flimsy performances" make "Monster-in-Law" fall "flat". In August, Lopez starred alongside Robert Redford and Morgan Freeman in "An Unfinished Life", a drama film based on the novel of the same name. The film was a commercial failure, only grossing $18 million worldwide with its production budget of $30 million.
Lopez sued to prevent Noa from publishing a book containing personal details about their marriage in April 2006, contending it violated their confidentiality agreement. In August 2007, a court-appointed arbitrator issued a permanent injunction forbidding Noa from "criticizing, denigrating, casting in a negative light or otherwise disparaging" Lopez. She was awarded $545,000 in compensatory damages and Noa was ordered to hand over all copies of materials related to the book to Lopez or her attorney. "Bordertown", a film based on the Female homicides in Ciudad Juárez, made its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival on May 18. Lopez, who also acts as the film's producer, stars as Lauren Adrian, an American news reporter for the Chicago Sentinel who wants to be assigned to the Iraq front-lines to cover the war. The film received a limited release in theaters throughout Europe in 2007 and a direct-to-video release in many other countries in 2008, including the United States. "Bordertown" was a commercial failure, grossing a total of $8 million worldwide, with its $21 million production budget.
"DanceLife", a reality series following the lives of seven dancers trying to break into the world of professional dance, aired on MTV from January 15 to March 5, 2007. Lopez produced, created and was featured in the show. According to the album's co-producer Estéfano, Lopez's fifth studio album "Como Ama una Mujer" would "prove critics wrong" with its "big songs that require a voice"; referring to the criticism of Lopez having a "limited" vocal tone. The album received the highest first-week sales in the United States for a Spanish album and the highest digital sales. Lopez and Anthony launched their co-headlining North American concert tour on September 28. The tour grossed an estimated $10 million, with one dollar from each ticket sold being donated to Run for Something Better—a charitable organization supporting physical fitness programs for children.
Lopez's sixth studio album "Brave", released in October, become her lowest-charting album worldwide. A five-part miniseries, "", based on the lyrics of "Como Ama una Mujer" aired on Univision from October 30 to November 27, 2007. On November 7, during the final night of their tour, Lopez and Anthony officially confirmed that they were expecting their first child together. The announcement ended months of speculation over the pregnancy, which was deemed by the media to be the worst kept secret of the year. It was revealed on February 6, 2008 that the couple were expecting twins. Her father announced the news, revealing that it runs in the family: "My sister also had twins, so it's a hereditary thing". Lopez gave birth to a son, Maximilian David, and a daughter, Emme Maribel, in Long Island, New York on February 22. The twins were introduced in the March 11, 2008 issue of "People", for which the magazine paid a reported $6 million—the photographs of the twins became the most expensive celebrity picture ever taken at the time.
Return to prominence (2010–12).
Lopez parted ways with Epic Records in February 2010, citing that she had fulfilled her contractual obligations and now wished to release her seventh studio album "Love?" under a new label. Her departure from the label temporarily halted production on the album, which commenced in 2009. Upon signing a new contract with Island Records, recording resumed on the album. The "New York Daily News" revealed that Lopez would be taking some of the records recorded under Sony Music Entertainment to her new label so that they could be included on the album. In April, Lopez starred in the romantic comedy "The Back-up Plan", her first theatrical role in three years. With a $35 million production budget, the film grossed $77 million worldwide. While Lopez's acting in the film was praised, the film was criticized for its "unrelatable characters" and "predictable plot". 
In June, following the departure of Ellen DeGeneres from "American Idol", it was reported that Lopez was in talks to join season ten's judging panel. During this same time, Lopez and Anthony were being considered for a role on "The X Factor" for their appeal to Latin and International markets. It was officially announced in September that Lopez would be joining the tenth season of "American Idol". MTV stated that the deal was "mutually beneficial to all those involved", while CNN reported that Lopez was viewing it as a decision to revive her career, while "American Idol" producers believed that Lopez and Steven Tyler's appointments would strengthen viewing figures. In October, Lopez released her fourteenth fragrance, Love and Glamour. The perfume was inspired by Lopez's forthcoming "return to the spotlight".
L'Oreal Paris named Lopez their new Global Ambassador and the face of their brands, including EverPure hair care, Preference hair color and Youth Code skin care. Her EverSleek hair care ads made their debut in early 2011, to coincide with the release of "Love?" and her debut as a judge on "America Idol". To further promote her comeback, in February, Venus chose Lopez as their new Global Ambassador. Lopez's comeback single "On the Floor" was released later that same month. The song topped the charts across the globe, becoming one of the most successful singles of the year. The song also became her highest charting single commercial single as a lead artist, as well as her most successful airplay hit on contemporary hit radio, since "Jenny from the Block". "Love?", which was released in May, was a moderate commercial success, and was viewed as a humble comeback from Lopez, as many had considered her recording career over.
Lopez launched Love and Light in July, exclusively on HSN. 51,000 bottles of the fragrance were sold at its premiere, becoming Lopez's most successful fragrance launch to date, making over $2.9 million. In September, Lopez launched the Jennifer Lopez Collection, a clothing and accessories line for Kohl's with Tommy Hilfiger. In addition to the clothing line, she also launched the Jennifer Lopez Home Collection, featuring bedding, towels and luggage. Later that same month Fiat, an Italian automobile manufacturer, enlisted Lopez to promote their products, including the 2012 Fiat 500 Cabrio. Olivier Francois, the Chrysler chief marketing officer, said in a statement that: "Jennifer fits perfectly with the brand not because of who she is but because of what she is — authentic, passionate, modern and a fighter determined to stand out from the rest".
In January 2012, Lopez returned as judge on the eleventh season of "American Idol", earning a reported $20 million. Later that same month, a new talent show, "¡Q'Viva! The Chosen", created by Simon Fuller premiered on Univision and was a hit for the channel. It followed Lopez, Anthony and director-choeographer Jamie King as they travelled across 21 countries in Latin America to find new talent for a Las Vegas show. On May 18, Lopez returned to the big screen starring alongside an ensemble cast consisting of Cameron Diaz, Elizabeth Banks, Matthew Morrison and Dennis Quaid in the film "What to Expect When You're Expecting". Based on the novel of the same name, Lopez plays Holly, a woman who adopts a baby from abroad with her husband after difficulty conceiving. With a budget of $40 million, the film grossed a total of $84 million worldwide, becoming a moderate commercial success. The film, however, received generally negative reviews from film critics. In late May, Lopez released her fragrance Glowing by JLo, which she described as an "evolution" of Glow by JLo.
Lopez launched the Dance Again World Tour, her first headlining concert tour, on June 14. On July 12, Lopez launched Teeology, a luxury T-shirt e-commerce. Lopez voiced Shira, a saber tooth tiger, in the animated film, "", the fourth film in the "Ice Age" franchise. The film debuted at number one at the US box office, having grossed $46 million in its opening weekend, becoming Lopez's highest opening weekend figure. With a $95 million production budget, the film has since grossed $875 million worldwide.
Lopez's first greatest hits album, "Dance Again... the Hits", was released on July 24, 2012 in the United States. It was released by Epic Records, as Lopez owed them one final album to end her contract, despite previously announcing that she had fulfilled her contract with the label. Lopez, who was going through a divorce with Anthony and the "breakup of a family", felt as if the album's sole single, "Dance Again", had come to her at the "perfect moment". "Dance Again" and "Goin' In", a single from the soundtrack of the dance film "Step Up Revolution", both reached the top of the "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Songs, giving Lopez her twelfth and thirteenth number one on that chart, respectively. Additionally, "Goin' In" became her tenth consecutive number one on the chart, tying Katy Perry for having the most consecutive numbers ones on the chart.
nuvoTV announced in September its premier partnership with Lopez, that will see her work on the creative side of the network, managing marketing and program production with her production company, Nuyorican Productions, as well as periodically appearing in network programming. In December, Lopez held a charity drive, asking her social media followers to donate to her three favorite charities—the Boys & Girls Club, the Children's Hospital of Los Angeles and the American Red Cross—for a chance to win tickets for the last show of the Dance Again World Tour in Puerto Rico. The American Red Cross was partly chosen to benefit victims of Hurricane Sandy which devastated parts of her home town, New York City.
Post-comeback (2013).
In November 2012, RedOne revealed that he is the executive producer of Lopez's upcoming eighth studio album. He told MTV News that: "It's a very special album. It feels like this album, has to have everything about her" and will contain multiple genres including "urban/hip-hop and the commercial, like the way she did with Ja Rule. It's everything you love about her the dance, the rhythmic, the Latin". The following month, Lopez confirmed that she would begin recording for her new album after the Dance Again World Tour ended. She later confirmed that the album will be released sometime this year. In January 2013, Lopez told "USA Today" that her primary focus was films, however, she was slowly putting together her album, stating: "I'm never not working on music". Lopez also said: "I might do a Christmas album. This is going to be my 10th album. It has to be great or I'm not putting it out". Lopez starred alongside Jason Statham, as Leslie, in the crime thriller "Parker", which was released on January 25. Her performance in the film generated positive reviews. The "Chicago Tribune" said that the role gave Lopez "an opportunity to be dramatic, romantic, funny, depressed, euphoric and violent. The audience stays with her all the way".
Public image.
Ray Martin of "60 Minutes" described Lopez as a "rarity" and one of few "Hollywood stars you can actually admire". Martin further stated, "when you meet her she's just as gorgeous, just as likeable, as she is on screen. I'm talking about J-Lo. Or for the uninitiated, Jennifer Lopez, a showbiz phenomenon who's up there with Madonna [...] she's been in more than 25 movies with leading men like George Clooney, Robert Redford and Jack Nicholson". Considered the first Latin singer or actress to be so successful in the limelight, Lopez is described as the most influential Hispanic performer in the United States, as well as an icon and pop culture "royalty". Additionally, she has been called a "triple threat performer".
Cindy Pearlman of "The Record" said Lopez is responsible for welcoming "Latina presence" into the film industry, which was a "whites-only preserve" for much of its history." In his book "Icons of American Popular Culture" (2009), author Robert C. Cotrell described Lopez as being a Latina Oprah Winfrey and the embodiment of the American dream, "Boasting a far more authentic rags-to-riches tale". Cotrell stated that she is a "multidimensional artist who had turned into a financial powerhouse" while demonstrating that an "A-lister" could still be successful as "a top recording artist, and operate as a major player in the corporate world". Having been of Latin descent and crossed over to mainstream music market, Lopez is considered "crossover royalty". Mark Guarino of "Daily Herald" discussed Lopez and fellow Latin artists such as Ricky Martin, he wrote: "judging from their records, their cultural identity was identified as cultural baggage by their record companies and those suitcases were shucked en route to stardom."
Lopez is described as a sex symbol and "one of the most desirable women on the planet". Despite being dubbed a "Bronx Barbie", Lopez has stated that she has "been trained like a boxer" and knows how to fight. Lopez is noted in the media for her curvaceous figure, in particular her buttocks, and was called "original doyenne of derriere" by Katherine Ormerod of "Grazia". A survey by Nutrisystem Diet Index revealed American females want her legs and bottom. 
In November 1998, Lopez was named "Sexiest Woman of the Year" by "Details" magazine. She led "FHM"s "100 Sexiest Women" list twice, as well as appearing on the list multiple times. 
In April 2011, Lopez was named "World's Most Beautiful Women" by "People", on a the 22nd list compiled and published by "People" of 100 people judged to be the most beautiful individuals in the world. Marianne Garvey of E! Online said Lopez looked "absolutely flawless" on the "spring-inspired" pink and green cover of the issue, while also commenting on her "striking beauty and that gorgeous face". At first, Lopez's reaction was feeling "not worthy", but eventually said she was "happy and proud" that she "wasn't 25" and a women her age was chosen. She also received praise from multiple celebrities, Kelly Osbourne said "I couldn't agree more. I've met her and she's stunning", while "American Idol" co-worker Ryan Seacrest praised her on his radio show "On Air with Ryan Seacrest", stating "I'm proud to work with the most beautiful women in the world".
Lopez is known for her fashion sense, and has changed her personal appearance multiple times, scoring several different looks over the duration of her career. Her fashion is described by "Billboard"s Lauren Savage as "stunning" and "scantily clad". Describing her fashion evolution during an interview with "Harper's Bazaar", Lopez felt that her original "boyish, hip-hoppy" look combined with her going onto adding the "sexy element to it" which was about "classic things, movie stars" and Jackie O, is her style. However, Lopez has been criticized by the animal rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals as well as celebrities such as Pink and Pamela Anderson for her use of fur in her fashion lines and outfits.
Despite her fame, Lopez has received bad press over rumors that she is a "demanding" and a "diva". Despite feeling she has "owned" the title of a diva, Lopez has dismissed these rumors and also stated: "I certainly don't like and I've never been a person who has what they call 'diva behaviour', which is something they tried to pin on me for a long time."
Legacy.
Over the course of her career, Lopez has been honored with numerous awards and recognition. In January 1998, she garnered a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy, for her work on "Selena" (1997). That year, she was recognized as the highest-paid Latin actress after earning $2 million for her critically acclaimed role in "Out of Sight". She remains the only Latin actress to appear three times on "The Hollywood Reporter"'s annual 'Actress Salary List'. 
Lopez has sold over 70 million records worldwide, with numerous albums and songs of hers having been certified by the Recording Industry Association of America. Her remix album "J to tha L-O! The Remixes" (2002) is the first number one remix album on the "Billboard" 200, appearing in the 2004 issue of the "Guinness World Records". In December 2009, "Billboard" ranked Lopez 27th on their "Artists of the Decade" chart, while VH1 ranked her 16th on their list of "100 Greatest Women In Music" in February 2012. At the 2010 World Music Awards, Lopez was honored with The Legend Award for Outstanding Contribution to the Arts. Lopez's return to commercial success in 2011 is considered one of the greatest comebacks ever. "Los Angeles Times" named her the "World's Greatest Comeback Act" of the decade that December, and "Billboard" reader's poll named her the best comeback act of the year. Lopez's media exposure that year allowed her to becoming the third most-searched musical artist on the internet, and fifth most searched human overall. Her critically acclaimed music video for "On the Floor", her highest-peaking single on the music charts in eight years, became the highest-viewed YouTube video of the year. Additionally, it is the highest-viewed female music video in history. 
In February 2007, "People en Español" placed Lopez atop its "100 Most Influential Hispanics" list. On February 14, 2007, Lopez received the Artists for Amnesty International award "in recognition of her work as producer and star of "Bordertown", a film exposing the ongoing murders of hundreds of women in the border city of Juárez, Mexico". In May 2012, Lopez was ranked at number one on business magazine "Forbes"s Celebrity 100 list, which named her the most powerful celebrity, with earnings of $52 million that year. Dorothy Pomerantz of "Forbes" said that it was due to her role as judge on "American Idol", endorsement deals and her much publicized personal life. Lopez has also garnered accolades for her fashion career; "Us Weekly" named her Style Icon of the 2000s decade. Her most memorable Fashion moment in her career was the Green Versace "Jungle Dress" that she wore at the 42nd Grammy Awards In 2000. A poll by Debenhams, published in the "Daily Telegraph", voted it the fifth most iconic dress of all time. 
Lopez has received much praise, having influenced multiple entertainers. Jessica Alba said Lopez "opened doors for ethnic girls like me". Kat DeLuna credits her as an inspiration, "Jennifer helped pave the way for Latinas like myself. I love her." Kerry Washington has cited Lopez as the reason for her career, she explained: "I grew up blocks away from Jennifer Lopez. She and I went to the same Boys & Girls Club. She was like the dancer who made it big and moved to Hollywood. I don't know if I would've taken a risk in my career if it weren't for ." Britney Spears credited Lopez as her idol, stating: "she's so beautiful and even though she's gotten older, she hasn't aged at all. She looks more amazing than ever and I really admire and respect that." 
Lopez's "Jersey Girl" co-star, Raquel Castro, who played her on-screen daughter, said Lopez "has been my role model from the start", and she "wore out" her VCR tape of the film "Selena". Jessica Mauboy has said stated that she is a big fan of Lopez. Michael Doughty credited her as the key inspiration for reviving his music career as a solo artist after leaving his band, Soul Coughing. Doughty, who felt his live was "over" saw a Lopez music video which inspired him to live his life. Selena Gomez stated that seeing Lopez's performance in the film "Selena" was a "life-changing moment." Gomez talked about emulating Lopez’s attire that she wore in the film during the same interview with "Elle". Kelly Rowland and Kim Kardashian have credited her as a style icon.
