Archer is an American animated sitcom television series created by Adam Reed for the FX network. A preview of the series aired on September 17, 2009. The first season premiered on January 14, 2010. The show carries a TV-MA-LSV rating.
The inspiration for "Archer" came to Reed while in a cafe in Salamanca, Spain. Finding himself unable to approach a beautiful woman seated nearby, Reed conjured up the idea of a spy who "would have a perfect line". Reed conceived the show's concept while walking along the Vía de la Plata in 2008. He pitched his idea to the FX Network, which accepted it and ordered six episodes, along with an additional four scripts. The show ended its first season on March 18, 2010, and the second season premiered on January 27, 2011. The season 1 DVD was released in Region 1 on December 28, 2010. On December 17, 2010 the first season of Archer also aired in Germany on Comedy Central Germany. On March 29, 2011 it was announced that FX Network had ordered a 16-episode third season of "Archer". A three episode special dubbed "The Heart of Archness" was aired in September 2011. Ten new episodes from season 3 began airing on January 19, 2012. On February 23, 2012, FX ordered a 13-episode fourth season of Archer which premiered on January 17, 2013.
Premise.
Set at ISIS, the International Secret Intelligence Service ("cf." SIS, ASIS, CSIS, NZSIS) in New York City, suave but incredibly self-centered master spy Sterling Archer deals with global espionage; his domineering, hypersexual mother/boss, Malory Archer; his ex-girlfriend (and fellow ISIS agent), Lana Kane; and his other ISIS co-workers (including fellow agent Ray Gillette, accountant Cyril Figgis, Human Resources Director Pam Poovey, secretary Cheryl Tunt, and Applied Research head Doctor Krieger); as well as a less-than-masculine code name: "Duchess" (after his mother's deceased Afghan Hound). 
The show's time setting is comically anachronistic, deliberately mixing technologies, clothing styles and historical backdrops of different decades. The characters wear 1960s clothing and hair styles, and many episodes feature references to the Soviet Union as a current nation — yet in the fourth season episode "Once Bitten", Turkmenistan is an independent nation rather than a Soviet republic — and to Fidel Castro as the current leader of Cuba. The show frequently uses pop culture references which are contemporary to the 2010s, yet character backstories place them at events — such as Woodhouse's service in World War I, or Malory's involvement in various espionage events of the Cold War era — which would require them to be much older than they are if the show were actually set in the 21st century. The technological sophistication within the series also varies, with characters using dated computer technology (e.g. reel-to-reel mainframe systems, dot-matrix printers and punchcards) and making surveillance recordings on cassette tape rather than digitally, but also using modern devices such as cell phones, GPS devices, and laser gunsights. This ambiguity is explicitly recognized in at least two episodes, in which characters are asked what year they think it is but are unable to answer.
Production.
Each episode of Archer takes a couple of months to produce following the completion of the script. The show is mostly animated by Reed's Floyd County Productions in Atlanta, Georgia, while 3D background models are made by Trinity Animation in Kansas City, Missouri. Originally, Radical Axis housed the show's animation staff for Season 1, but the crew has since moved to their own facilities close to Emory University.
The artistic style of the series was designed to be as realistic as possible, so the character designers used as much reference material as they could. The character drawings are based on Atlanta-area models; they coincidentally resemble some of the voice actors in the series. As Chad Hurd, the lead character designer for the series, noted, the end result resembles "a 1960s comic book come to life." Television critics have also compared the show's overall visual style to that of the drama series "Mad Men", as well as noting that lead character Sterling Archer, in particular, bears a substantial resemblance to "Mad Men"'s protagonist Don Draper. The artwork is also similar to the original Jonny Quest cartoon series penned by artist Doug Wildey in the 1960s.
Stylistically, the show is a mix of several different time periods; show creator Adam Reed described it as "intentionally ill-defined", noting that the show "cherry-pick the best and easiest from several decades". Numerous plot details arise from contemporary culture, such as affirmative action and sexual harassment complaints.
"Archer" is influenced by the early James Bond films, as well as OSS 117 and The Pink Panther, and can be compared to Reed's former shows for Adult Swim, "Frisky Dingo" and "Sealab 2021". Driven by rapid-fire dialogue and interaction-based drama, the series is "stuff...with pop-culture references" and features an anachronistic style, using fashion from the early 1960s, a mix of 1980s-era and modern technology and a political status quo in which "the Cold War never ended".
Relation to other media.
"Arrested Development".
Jessica Walter, Jeffrey Tambor, David Cross, and Judy Greer previously starred in the Fox critically acclaimed comedy series "Arrested Development". Since both shows largely revolve around feuds and rivalry disputes between family members, "Archer" has been described by its creator, Adam Reed, as ""James Bond" meets "Arrested Development". There are also notable similarities between the characters played by Greer, Walter and Tambor. Of particular note is Archer's relationship with his mother, which parallels somewhat Buster Bluth's relationship with Lucille Bluth, including the fact that both sons refer to her as 'Mother' and are still under great parental influence as adults. Judy Greer's character is a "lovelorn secretary", Walter is the wealth-wielding matriarch and Tambor, while not the husband, is her long-lost passion interest and possibly Sterling's biological father as well (which is similar to Tambor's secondary role on Arrested Development, Oscar). Both shows also frequently use callbacks and catchphrases. Walter stated in an interview that she became interested in "Archer" after her manager saw the pilot script describing Malory as "Think Jessica Walter in "Arrested Development"" and sent her the script.
"Sealab 2021" and "Frisky Dingo".
Just as some series voice-actors have worked together previously, notable people on the "Archer" animation and production teams (such as Adam Reed and Matt Thompson) were also cooperatively involved in several shows for Adult Swim, most notably "Frisky Dingo" and "Sealab 2021". All three shows share similar animation styles; a trademark which initially began with "Sealab's" cut-and-paste juxtaposition of vintage cartoon clips and modern dialogue, was modernized with computer animation for "Frisky Dingo," and continues with essentially unchanged appearances for some characters in "Archer." The show also shares numerous stylistic and character development similarities with its two predecessors. One of the supporting characters from "Frisky Dingo", Mr. Ford, makes a cameo appearance in "Drift Problem", the seventh episode of Season 3 of Archer, repeating one of his "Frisky Dingo" catchphrases ("My ass is everywhere.") which seems to further cement the lineage between the two shows.
"Bob's Burgers".
The fourth season of "Archer" included a crossover episode with "Bob's Burgers", as both shows share H. Jon Benjamin as their lead voice actor (Sterling Archer and Bob Belcher).
Reception.
The show has seen positive reviews, scoring a 78/100 on Metacritic for its first season, 88/100 for its second, indicating "universal acclaim", and 75/100 for its third. "Entertainment Weekly" called it a wittily raunchy spy spoof, and the "Miami Herald" referred to it as "a millennial (and very much R-rated) "Get Smart" that acerbically and hilariously plays on our post-9/11 fears that 'U.S. government intelligence' might be a grim oxymoron." The show has been nominated for a 2010 Emmy and a 2012 Annie Award.
Awards.
In 2010, H. Jon Benjamin was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Voiceover Performance. On July 17, 2010, "Archer" won the NewNowNext Award for "Best Show You're Not Watching". "Archer" was nominated for and won Best Animated Comedy Series at the 2012 Comedy Awards.
"Archer" was also nominated for Best Comedy Series at the 2011 Critics' Choice Television Award. It won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Animated Series in 2012.
