Emily Jean "Emma" Stone (born November 6, 1988) is an American actress. Stone was a cast member of the TV series "Drive", and made her feature film debut in the comedy "Superbad" (2007). She has appeared in "The House Bunny" (2008), "Ghosts of Girlfriends Past" (2009), "Zombieland" (2009), and "Paper Man" (2009). In 2010, Stone voiced the character Mazie in "Marmaduke", and starred in the comedy "Easy A", earning a nomination for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy for the latter. In 2011, she appeared in "Crazy, Stupid, Love." and starred in "The Help". In 2012, Stone played Gwen Stacy in "The Amazing Spider-Man", a reboot of the "Spider-Man" film series. In 2013, she starred in Gangster Squad, and she will voice the character of Eep in the animated film "The Croods". Stone is set to reprise her role of Gwen Stacy in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2" in 2014. 
Early life.
Stone was born in Scottsdale, Arizona, the daughter of Krista (née Yeager), a homemaker, and Jeff Stone, a contractor. She has a brother, Spencer, who is two years younger. Stone's paternal grandfather was of Swedish descent, and his family's surname was anglicized to "Stone" when immigrating to the U.S. through Ellis Island; some of her ancestors also lived in Pennsylvania Dutch Country.
While growing up, she was a member of the Valley Youth Theatre, a regional theater in Phoenix, Arizona, where she appeared in her first stage production, "The Wind in the Willows", at the age of eleven. Stone attended Sequoya Elementary School and then Cocopah Middle School for sixth grade. She was home schooled for two years, during which time she appeared in sixteen productions at Valley Youth Theatre, including: "A Winnie-the-Pooh Christmas Tail", "The Princess and the Pea", "Cinderella", "The Wiz", "Titanic", "Honk!", "The Little Mermaid", "Schoolhouse Rock Live!", "Alice in Wonderland", and "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat", and performed with the theater's improv comedy troupe.
Stone attended Xavier College Preparatory, an all-girl Catholic high school, as a freshman for one semester. She gave a PowerPoint presentation to her parents, set to the Madonna song "Hollywood", to convince them to let her move to California for an acting career. She dropped out of high school, and in January 2004, moved with her mother to a Los Angeles apartment, at the age of fifteen. She was then home schooled, so that she could audition during the day.
Career.
2004–2011.
Stone launched a career in television after winning the role of Laurie Partridge on "In Search of the New Partridge Family" (2004), a VH1 talent competition reality show. The resulting show, "The New Partridge Family" (2005), only produced a pilot episode. Stone next had appearances in the television series "Medium", "Malcolm in the Middle" and "Lucky Louie". In 2007, she had a regular role on the Fox drama "Drive", playing Violet Trimble, until the series was cancelled. She also auditioned for "Heroes", and overheard in the casting room "On a scale of 1 to 10, you are an 11" — the casting directors were referring to Hayden Panettiere, who was cast as Claire Bennet instead. Stone called this experience "rock bottom." 
Stone made her feature film debut in the 2007 teen comedy "Superbad", playing Jules, the love interest of lead character Seth (Jonah Hill). In 2008, she appeared in the comedy "The Rocker", with Rainn Wilson. Stone played Amelia, the bass guitarist in a band featuring singer Teddy Geiger. Stone learned to play bass for the role. Also that year, Stone appeared in "The House Bunny", starring Anna Faris, alongside Katharine McPhee, Kat Dennings, Rumer Willis, and Colin Hanks. Stone played the president of a sorority and sang on a single from the film, "I Know What Boys Like," a cover version of the 1982 song by The Waitresses.
In 2009, Stone appeared in "Ghosts of Girlfriends Past", a romantic comedy directed by Mark Waters, the director of "Mean Girls", starring Matthew McConaughey and Jennifer Garner. Stone played "The Ghost of Girlfriends Past," a takeoff of the Ghost of Christmas Past from Charles Dickens' "A Christmas Carol". She starred in the horror/comedy "Zombieland", along with Woody Harrelson and Jesse Eisenberg. The project began shooting in Atlanta in February 2009. Stone played Wichita, a survivor/con artist from Wichita, Kansas, traveling across the U.S. with her younger sister Little Rock (Abigail Breslin). At the end of the film, she reveals that her real name is "Krista," which is the name of Stone's mother in real life.
Stone also starred in "Paper Man" in 2009, alongside Jeff Daniels, Ryan Reynolds and Lisa Kudrow, directed by Kieran and Michele Mulroney. She played Abby, a babysitter that Daniels' character hires after moving to Long Island. Stone began filming the independent comedy on November 11, 2008, in Montauk, New York, using well-known local locations.
In 2010, Stone had a voice role in "Marmaduke", a film adaptation of the long-running comic strip about a Great Dane. She voiced Marmaduke's friend, Mazie, a tomboyish Australian Shepherd. Stone landed her first leading role that year, starring with Amanda Bynes as a high school student in "Easy A", a comedy directed by Will Gluck. Her character scandalizes her teachers and more conservative religious classmates after a false rumor circulates that she is sexually promiscuous. The script contrasts the novel "The Scarlet Letter" and its heroine, Hester Prynne, to the life of the protagonist in the film. Stone read the script before the project was optioned for production, and kept an eye on it along with her manager until preparations were made. She was attracted to the script because it was "funny and sweet" and her character was "fantastic from the first read" who was "fleshed [..] out so much in the script". When she found out that the film had gone into production, she met with Gluck to express her enthusiasm about the project. A few months later, the audition process started and Stone met again with Gluck to be one of the first actresses to audition. Stone was nominated for the 2011 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy for her role.
Stone appeared at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards on September 12, 2010, and introduced Linkin Park. She stated in 2008 that she would eventually like to venture into film production, producing her own films, and that her dream was to appear on "Saturday Night Live". Stone hosted the late-night sketch comedy show on October 23, 2010, and again on November 12, 2011.
Stone appeared in "Friends with Benefits", starring Justin Timberlake and Mila Kunis, and directed by Will Gluck. The sex comedy began filming in July 2010, in New York, and was released on July 22, 2011. She also starred in "Crazy, Stupid, Love." that year, alongside Steve Carell, Julianne Moore, Ryan Gosling, Marisa Tomei and Kevin Bacon. The Warner Bros. film, about a husband (Carell) with marital problems and difficulties with his children, began shooting on April 16, 2010, in Los Angeles and was released on July 29, 2011. Stone starred in "The Help", an adaptation of Kathryn Stockett's best-selling novel of the same name, a period piece set in Jackson, Mississippi, in the 1960s, which was released in August 2011. She plays Eugenia "Skeeter" Phelan, an aspiring writer, and employed a Southern dialect for the role.
2012–present.
Stone joined the voice cast of "The Croods", a 3D computer animated caveman comedy by DreamWorks Animation. She will voice the role of Eep, the oldest daughter of Grug (Nicolas Cage) and Ugga (Catherine Keener). Ryan Reynolds voices Gy, the love interest to Stone's character. The film is scheduled for release on March 22, 2013.
She starred in the comedic short film, "Veronica", alongside Kieran Culkin. The short, directed by Griffin Dunne, is a comedy segment that is part of the anthology film, "Movie 43", featuring Kate Winslet, Gerard Butler, Hugh Jackman, Uma Thurman, Halle Berry, and others. The feature film was produced by the Farrelly brothers. 
Stone starred as the female lead opposite Andrew Garfield in "The Amazing Spider-Man", a reboot by Columbia Pictures and Marvel Entertainment, of the "Spider-Man" film series. She played Gwen Stacy, the seventeen-year-old love interest of Peter Parker. Marc Webb directed the film, which was released on July 3, 2012. The film went into production in December 2010, lasting through April 2011. Stone was considered for the lead in a reboot of "21 Jump Street", alongside "Superbad" co-star Jonah Hill. She did not take the role however, after signing on to "Spider-Man". 
Stone co-starred in "Gangster Squad", a film by "Zombieland" director Ruben Fleischer. She was reunited with Ryan Gosling in the ensemble crime drama, which also starred Sean Penn, Josh Brolin, Anthony Mackie, Giovanni Ribisi, and Michael Peña. Stone played Grace, who is caught in a love triangle with Gosling's character, Sgt. Jerry Wooters and Penn's character, mobster Mickey Cohen. The film was released on January 11, 2013 in North America.
Stone will be reunited with writer and director Will Gluck, starring in and executive producing an untitled comedy for Screen Gems. The film studio has given Gluck and Stone full discretion in developing a new project, after the success of "Easy A". As of January 2012, she was attached to a script, "Little White Corvette", a comedy about a pair of would-be drug dealing siblings. The project was expected to film in Miami in mid-2012. 
In mid-2012, Stone voiced a supporting role in the crime-based video game, "Sleeping Dogs". She signed on to star in an untitled love story feature from Academy Award winner Cameron Crowe, for Sony Pictures. Stone will also reprise her role as Gwen Stacy in "The Amazing Spider-Man 2", which is scheduled for release on May 2, 2014.
She ranked #5 on AskMen's list of "Top 99 Women" for 2013.
In January 2013, Stone is in talks to star in Guillermo del Toro's horror film "Crimson Peak" alongside Charlie Hunnam. The film is a gothic romance set in a haunted house.
Personal life.
Though predominantly known as a redhead, Stone is naturally a blonde. She landed her first role as a teenager after dyeing her hair dark brown. Film producer Judd Apatow had her change from a brunette to a redhead for her role in "Superbad". She returned to blonde for her role in "The Amazing Spider-Man".
Stone generally avoids discussing her personal life to the media.
After Stone was cast in "The Amazing Spider-Man", confirmed on 5 October 2010, the film's director Marc Webb noted that the chemistry between Stone and Andrew Garfield made her the clear choice. That chemistry inspired their off-screen romance. In April 2012, "Life & Style" reported the duo had moved in together in an apartment in New York City. In a 2012 interview with "USA Today", Garfield and Stone both elaborated. "We're not together in real life!", joked Garfield. "It's weird because of that question. We don't talk about anything personal. That's just the way it is. Right now, we're just actors. Em will soon be a producer, too. It's just something that's personal, and this is work, really. Even though this interview is a genuine connection." Stone also explained her unwillingness to discuss Garfield: "There's such a great sense of comfort in knowing that the only thing you have control over is what you say. People can say and do all they want. If it never comes out of your own mouth, you still get to keep that semblance of what is sacred to you."
Stone's low-pitched husky voice is a result of having baby colic, a condition of frequent screaming as an infant, resulting in the development of nodules. She has calluses on her vocal cords as an adult.
Stone chose the name "Emma" when she registered for the Screen Actors Guild because there was already a listing for an "Emily Stone". Her family and friends call her Emily. She first chose Riley Stone as her professional name, but after a guest appearance on "Malcolm in the Middle", she decided she was more comfortable with Emma, a nickname her mother had given her. 
Stone moved from Los Angeles to Greenwich Village, New York City in 2009.
