"Thrift Shop" is a song by Seattle-based American rapper Macklemore and his producer Ryan Lewis. It was released as the fifth and final single from their collaborative debut studio album "The Heist" (2012) on October 8, 2012 and features vocals from Wanz. Despite being released on Macklemore's independent label, with distribution by ADA, the single was met with unexpected commercial success, also a sleeper hit, peaking on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 1 while selling over 3 million copies in total, also reaching number 1 in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Canada, France, Denmark, Australia and New Zealand. The song is the first independently-distributed title to top the "Billboard" Digital Songs since "We Are the World 25 for Haiti" in February 2010. It is also the second independent song in history to achieve the #1 spot on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, nearly 20 years after Lisa Loeb's "Stay (I Missed You)" in 1994. A music video was released to accompany the song's release.
Background.
The song illustrates the speaker's interest in buying cheap clothing from thrift shops, disdaining designer labels and trends. He claims to enjoy donning "your grandad's clothes" and impulsively buying something just because "it was 99 cents". Macklemore spoke to MTV News about the meaning of the song: "Rappers talk about, oh I buy this and I buy that, and I spend this much money and I make it rain, and this type of champagne and painting the club, and this is the kind of record that's the exact opposite," he explained. "It's the polar opposite of it. It's kind of standing for like let's save some money, let's keep some money away, let's spend as little as possible and look as fresh as possible at the same time." Upon asked why he thought the track was so successful, Macklemore replied: "I think hip-hop goes in waves, and it's something that's different. It's a concept. It's obviously against the status quo of what people normally rap about. This is a song that goes against all of that. How much can you save? How fresh can you look by not looking like anybody else? And on top of that, you have an infectious beat and a hook that gets stuck in people's heads."
Commercial performance.
The song originally entered the UK Singles Chart at number 24 on January 27, 2013, despite being available as a single via iTunes since August 1, 2012. The following week "Thrift Shop" rose twenty-two positions to number 2 and managed to peak at number 1 on February 10, 2013 - making Macklemore and Ryan Lewis only the second act in UK chart history to score a number 1 with a self-released single. 
In the United States, the song debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 on October 20, 2012 and steadily climbed the chart until it entered the top ten on the issue dated December 27, 2012. It replaced Bruno Mars's "Locked Out of Heaven" at number one in its 16th week on the chart on February 2, 2013 and has so far remained atop the chart for four consecutive weeks. It has also topped the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart for five consecutive weeks and the Hot Rap Songs chart for six. The song has also topped the Canadian Hot 100 for four consecutive weeks. It’s the first song in the history of the Hot Digital Songs chart to experience a jump in sales in each of its first five weeks atop the chart, and has sold over 3 million copies in the US as of February 13, 2013.
Reception.
Robert Copsey of Digital Spy gave the song 5 out of 5 stars, calling it "a rare beast of a song - original, musically daring and genuinely funny." Entertainment Weekly named the song as the 18th best single of 2012.
