Hugh John Mungo Grant (born 9 September 1960) is a British actor and film producer. He has received a Golden Globe Award, a BAFTA, and an Honorary César. His films have earned more than US$2.4 billion from 25 theatrical releases worldwide. Grant achieved international stardom after appearing in Richard Curtis's successful "Four Weddings and a Funeral" (1994). He used this breakthrough role as a frequent cinematic persona during the 1990s, delivering comic performances in mainstream films like "Mickey Blue Eyes" (1999) and "Notting Hill" (1999). By the turn of the 21st century, he had established himself as a leading man skilled with a satirical comic talent. Grant has expanded his oeuvre with critically acclaimed turns as a cad in "Bridget Jones's Diary" (2001), "About A Boy" (2002), "Love Actually" (2003), and "American Dreamz" (2006). He later played against type with multiple cameo roles in the epic drama film "Cloud Atlas" (2012).
Within the film industry, Grant is cited as an anti-film star who approaches his roles like a character actor, and attempts to make his acting appear spontaneous. Hallmarks of his comic skills include a nonchalant touch of irony/sarcasm and studied physical mannerisms as well as his precisely-timed dialogue delivery and facial expressions. The entertainment media's coverage of Grant's life off the big screen has often overshadowed his work as a thespian. He has been vocal about his disrespect for the profession of acting, and in his disdain towards the culture of celebrity and hostility towards the media. In a career spanning 30 years, Grant has repeatedly claimed that acting is not a true calling but just a job he fell into.
Early life and ancestry.
Grant was born at Charing Cross Hospital in Hammersmith, London, the second son of Fynvola Susan MacLean (b. Wickham, Hampshire, 11 October 1933; d. Hounslow, London, July 2001) and Captain James Murray Grant (b. 1929). Genealogist Antony Adolph has described Grant's family history as "a colourful Anglo-Scottish tapestry of warriors, empire-builders and aristocracy," including William Drummond, 4th Viscount Strathallan and Dr. James Stewart. John Murray, 1st Marquess of Atholl, Heneage Finch, 1st Earl of Nottingham, Rt. Hon. Sir Evan Nepean, and a sister of former British Prime Minister Spencer Perceval, are a few of his notable maternal ancestors. Grant's grandfather, Major James Murray Grant, DSO, a native of Inverness in Scotland, was decorated for bravery and leadership at Dunkirk during World War II.
Grant's father was trained at Sandhurst and served with the Seaforth Highlanders for eight years in Malaya, Germany and Scotland. He ran a carpet firm, pursued hobbies such as golf and painting watercolours, and raised his family in Chiswick, west London, where the Grants lived next to Arlington Park Mansions on Sutton Lane. In September 2006, a collection of Capt. Grant's paintings was hosted by the John Martin Gallery in a charity exhibition, organised by his famous son, called "James Grant: 30 Years of Watercolours." His mother worked as a schoolteacher and taught Latin, French and music for more than 30 years in the state schools of west London. She died at the age of 65, 18 months after being diagnosed with pancreatic cancer.
Grant's accent is an inheritance from his mother and, on "Inside the Actors Studio" in 2002, he credited her with "any acting genes that might have." Both his parents were children of military families, but, despite his parents' backgrounds, Grant has stated that his family was not always affluent while he was growing up. Grant spent his childhood summers shooting and hunting with his grandfather in Scotland. Grant's elder brother, James "Jamie" Grant, is a successful banker as managing director, Head of Healthcare, Consumer, & Retail Investment Banking Coverage, at JPMorgan Chase in New York.
Education.
Grant started his education at Hogarth Primary School in Chiswick but then moved to St Peter's Primary School in Hammersmith. From 1969 to 1978, he attended the independent Latymer Upper School in Hammersmith on a scholarship and played 1st XV rugby, cricket and soccer for the school. He also represented Latymer on the popular quiz show, "Top of the Form", an academic competition between two teams of four secondary school students each. Chris Hammond, his form teacher in 1975 and later the assistant head of Latymer, told "People" magazine that Grant was "a clever boy among clever boys." In 1979, he won the Galsworthy scholarship to New College, Oxford where he starred in his first film, "Privileged", produced by the Oxford University Film Foundation, OUFF. He studied English literature and graduated with 2:1 honours. Actress Anna Chancellor, who met Grant while she was still at school, has recalled, "I first met Hugh at a party at Oxford. There was something magical about him. He was a star even then, without having done anything." He received an offer from the Courtauld Institute of Art, University of London to pursue a PhD in the history of art, but decided not to take the offer because he failed to secure a grant. Viewing acting as nothing more than a creative outlet, he joined the Oxford University Dramatic Society and starred in a successful touring production of "Twelfth Night". Hugh Grant funds The Fynvola Grant Scholarship at Latymer Upper School in memory of his mother who was a teacher in West London.
Young earner.
After making his debut as Hughie Grant in the Oxford-financed "Privileged" (1982), Grant dabbled in a variety of jobs: he wrote book reviews, worked as assistant groundsman at Fulham Football Club, tried his hand at tutoring, wrote comedy sketches for TV shows, and was hired by Talkback Productions to write and produce radio commercials for products such as Mighty White bread and Red Stripe lager. To obtain his Equity card, he joined the Nottingham Playhouse, a regional theatre, and lived for a year at Park Terrace in The Park Estate, Nottingham. Bored with small acting parts, he created his own comedy revue called The Jockeys of Norfolk with friends Chris Lang and Andy Taylor. The group toured London’s pub comedy circuit with stops at "The George IV" in Chiswick, "Canal Cafe Theatre" in Little Venice and "The King's Head" in Islington. Starting on a low note, The Jockeys of Norfolk eventually proved a hit at the Edinburgh Festival after their sketch on the Nativity, told as an Ealing comedy, gained them a spot on the BBC2 TV show called "Edinburgh Nights". During this time, Grant also appeared in theatre productions of plays such as "An Inspector Calls", "Lady Windermere's Fan", and "Coriolanus.
Career.
Grant's first leading film role came in Merchant-Ivory's Edwardian drama, "Maurice" (1987), adapted from E. M. Forster's novel, in which he played the homosexual Clive Durham. He and co-star James Wilby shared the Volpi Cup for best actor at the Venice Film Festival for their portrayals of lovers Clive Durham and Maurice Hall, respectively. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, Grant balanced small roles on television with rare film work, which included a supporting role in "The Dawning" (1988), opposite Anthony Hopkins and Jean Simmons and a turn as Lord Byron in a Goya Award-winning Spanish production called "Remando al viento" (1988). He also portrayed some other real life figures during in his early career such as Charles Heidsieck in "Champagne Charlie" and as Hugh Cholmondeley in BAFTA Award-nominated "White Mischief".
In 1990, he made a cameo appearance in the sport/crime drama "The Big Man", opposite Liam Neeson, and in which Grant assumed a Scottish accent. The film explores the life of a Scottish miner (Neeson) who becomes unemployed during a union strike. In 1991, he played Julie Andrews' gay son in the ABC made-for-television film "Our Sons".
In 1992, he appeared in Roman Polanski's film "Bitter Moon", portraying a fastidious and proper British tourist who is married, but finds himself enticed by the sexual hedonism of a seductive French woman and her embittered, paraplegic American husband. The film was called an "anti-romantic opus of sexual obsession and cruelty" by the "Washington Post". His other work in period pieces such as Ken Russell’s horror film, "The Lair of the White Worm" (1988), award-winning Merchant-Ivory drama "The Remains of the Day" (1993) and (as Frédéric Chopin in) "Impromptu" (1991) went largely unnoticed. He later called this phase of his career "hilarious," referring to his early films as "Europuddings, where you would have a French script, a Spanish director, and English actors. The script would usually be written by a foreigner, badly translated into English. And then they'd get English actors in, because they thought that was the way to sell it to America."
In July 1994, Grant signed a two-year production deal with Castle Rock Entertainment and by October, he became founder and director of the UK-based Simian Films Limited. He appointed his then-girlfriend, Elizabeth Hurley, as the head of development to look for prospective projects. Simian Films produced two Grant vehicles in the 1990s and lost a bid to produce "About a Boy" to Robert De Niro's TriBeCa Productions. The company closed its U.S. office in 2002 and Grant resigned as director in December 2005. Grant was one of the choices to play James Bond in 1995's GoldenEye, but eventually lost out to Pierce Brosnan.
Grant's first studio-financed Hollywood project was Chris Columbus's comedy "Nine Months". Though a hit at the box office, it was almost universally panned by critics. The "Washington Post" called it a "grotesquely pandering caper" and singled out Grant's performance, as a child psychiatrist reacting unfavourably to his girlfriend's unexpected pregnancy, for his "insufferable muggings." The same year, he played leading roles as Emma Thompson's suitor in Ang Lee’s Academy Award-winning adaptation of Jane Austen's "Sense and Sensibility" and as a cartographer in 1917 Wales in "The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain". In the same year he performed in the Academy Award-winning "Restoration".
Before the release of "Four Weddings and a Funeral", Grant reunited with its director, Mike Newell, for the tragicomedy "An Awfully Big Adventure" that was labelled a "determinedly off-beat film" by "The New York Times". Grant portrayed a bitchy, supercilious director of a repertory company in post-World War II Liverpool. Critic Roger Ebert wrote, "It shows that he has range as an actor," but the "San Francisco Chronicle" disapproved on grounds that the film "plays like a vanity production for Grant." Janet Maslin, praising Grant as "superb" and "a dashing cad under any circumstances," commented, "For him this film represents the road not taken. Made before "Four Weddings and a Funeral" was released, it captures Mr. Grant as the clever, versatile character actor he was then becoming, rather than the international dreamboat he is today." Grant made his debut as a film producer with the 1996 thriller "Extreme Measures", a commercial and critical failure.
After a three-year hiatus, in 1999 he paired with Julia Roberts in "Notting Hill", which was brought to theatres by much of the same team that was responsible for "Four Weddings and a Funeral". This new Working Title production displaced "Four Weddings and a Funeral" as the biggest British hit in the history of cinema, with earnings equalling $363 million worldwide. As it became exemplary of modern romantic comedies in mainstream culture, the film was also received well by critics. CNN reviewer Paul Clinton said, ""Notting Hill" stands alone as another funny and heartwarming story about love against all odds." Reactions to Grant's Golden Globe-nominated performance were varied, with Salon.com's Stephanie Zacharek criticising that, "Grant's performance stands as an emblem of what's wrong with "Notting Hill". What's maddening about Grant is that he just never cuts the crap. He's become one of those actors who's all shambling self-caricature, from his twinkly crow's feet to the time-lapsed half century it takes him to actually get one of his lines out." The film provided both its stars a chance to satirise the woes of international notoriety, most noted of which was Grant's turn as a faux-journalist who sits through a dull press junket with, what the "New York Times" called, "a delightfully funny deadpan." Grant also released his second production output, a fish-out-of-water mob comedy "Mickey Blue Eyes", that year. It was dismissed by critics, performed modestly at the box office, and garnered its actor-producer mixed reviews for his starring role. Roger Ebert thought, "Hugh Grant is wrong for the role strikes one wrong note and then another," whereas Kenneth Turan, writing in the "Los Angeles Times", said, "If he'd been on the Titanic, fewer lives would have been lost. If he'd accompanied Robert Scott to the South Pole, the explorer would have lived to be 100. That's how good Hugh Grant is at rescuing doomed ventures."
While promoting Woody Allen's "Small Time Crooks" on NBC's "The Today Show" in 2000, Grant told host Matt Lauer, "It's my millennium of bastards". In 2000, Grant also joined the Supervisory Board of IM Internationalmedia AG, the powerful Munich-based film and media company. 
"Small Time Crooks" starred Grant, in the words of film critic Andrew Sarris, as "a petty, petulant, faux-Pygmalion art dealer, David, is one of the sleaziest and most unsympathetic characters Mr. Allen has ever created." In a role devoid of his comic attributes, the "New York Times" wrote: "Mr. Grant deftly imbues his character with exactly a perfect blend of charm and nasty calculation." A year later, his turn as a charming but womanising book publisher Daniel Cleaver in "Bridget Jones's Diary" (2001) was proclaimed by "Variety" to be "as sly an overthrow of a star's polished posh – and nice – poster image as any comic turn in memory". The film, adapted from Helen Fielding's novel of the same name, was an international hit, earning $281 million worldwide. Grant was, according to the "Washington Post", fitting as "a cruel, manipulative cad, hiding behind the male god's countenance that he knows all too well".
Grant's "immaculate comic performance" (BBC) as the trust-funded womaniser, Will Freeman, in the film adaptation of Nick Hornby's best-selling novel "About a Boy" received raves from critics. Almost universally praised, with an Academy Award-nominated screenplay, "About a Boy" (2002) was determined by the "Washington Post" to be "that rare romantic comedy that dares to choose messiness over closure, prickly independence over fetishised coupledom, and honesty over typical Hollywood endings." "Rolling Stone" wrote, "The acid comedy of Grant's performance carries the film he gives this pleasing heartbreaker the touch of gravity it needs," while Roger Ebert observed that "the Cary Grant department is understaffed, and Hugh Grant shows here that he is more than a star, he is a resource." Released a day after the blockbuster ', "About a Boy" was a more modest box office grosser than other successful Grant films, making all of $129 million globally. The film earned Grant his third Golden-Globe nomination, while the London Film Critics Circle named Grant its Best British Actor and "GQ" honoured him as one of the magazine's men of the year 2002. "His performance can only be described as revelatory," wrote critic Ann Hornaday, adding that "Grant lends the shoals layer upon layer of desire, terror, ambivalence and self-awareness." "The New York Observer" concluded: "film gets most of its laughs from the evolved expertise of Hugh Grant in playing characters that audiences enjoy seeing taken down a peg or two as a punishment for philandering and womanising and simply being too handsome for words-and with an English accent besides. In the end, the film comes over as a messy delight, thanks to the skill, generosity and good-sport, punching-bag panache of Mr. Grant's performance." "About a Boy" also marked a notable change in Grant's boyish look. Now 41, he had lost weight and also abandoned his trademark floppy hair. "Entertainment Weeklys Owen Gleiberman took note of Grant's maturation in his review, saying he looked noticeably older and that it "looked good on him." He added that Grant's "pillowy cheeks are flatter and a bit drawn, and the eyes that used to peer with 'love me' cuteness now betray a shark's casual cunning. Everything about him is leaner and spikier (including his hair, which has been shorn and moussed into a Eurochic bed-head mess), but it's not just his surface that's more virile; the nervousness is gone, too. Hugh Grant has grown up, holding on to his lightness and witty cynicism but losing the stuttering sherry-club mannerisms that were once his signature. In doing so, he has blossomed into the rare actor who can play a silver-tongued sleaze with a hidden inner decency."
Grant was also paired with Sandra Bullock in Warner Bros.'s "Two Weeks Notice", which made $199 million internationally but was judged poorly by professional reviewers. "The Village Voice" concluded that Grant's creation of a spoiled billionaire fronting a real estate business was "little more than a Britishism machine."
"Two Weeks Notice" was followed by the 2003 ensemble comedy, "Love Actually", headlined by Grant as the British Prime Minister. A Christmas release by Working Title Films, the film was promoted as "the ultimate romantic comedy" and accumulated $246 million at the international box office. It marked the directorial debut of Richard Curtis, who told the "New York Times" that Grant adamantly tempered the characterisation of the role to make his character more authoritative and less haplessly charming than earlier Curtis incarnations. Roger Ebert claimed that "Grant has flowered into an absolutely splendid romantic comedian" and has "so much self-confidence that he plays the British prime minister as if he took the role to be a good sport." Film critic Rex Reed, on the contrary, called Grant's performance "an oversexed bachelor spin on Tony Blair" as the star "flirted with himself in the paroxysm of self-love that has become his acting style."
A speech delivered by Grant in "Love Actually" – where he extols the virtues of Great Britain and refuses to cave to the pressure of its longstanding ally, the United States – was etched in the memory as a satirical, wishful statement on the concurrent Bush-Blair relationship. Blair responded by saying, "I know there's a bit of us that would like me to do a Hugh Grant in "Love Actually" and tell America where to get off. But the difference between a good film and real life is that in real life there's the next day, the next year, the next lifetime to contemplate the ruinous consequences of easy applause."
In 2004, Grant reprised his role as Daniel Cleaver for a small part in "", which, like its predecessor, made more than $262 million commercially. Gone from the screen for two years, Grant next reteamed with Paul Weitz ("About a Boy") for the black comedy "American Dreamz" (2006). Grant starred as the acerbic host of an "American Idol"-like reality show where, according to Caryn James of the "New York Times", "nothing is real ... except the black hole at the centre of the host's heart, as Mr. Grant takes Mr. Cowell's villainous act to its limit." "American Dreamz" failed financially but Grant was generously praised. He played his self-aggrandising character, an amalgam of Simon Cowell and Ryan Seacrest, with smarmy self-loathing. "The Boston Globe" proposed that this "just may be the great comic role that has always eluded Hugh Grant," and critic Carina Chocano said, "He is twice as enjoyable as the preening bad guy as he was as the bumbling good guy."
In 2007, Grant starred opposite Drew Barrymore in a parody of pop culture and the music industry called "Music and Lyrics". The Associated Press described it as "a weird little hybrid of a romantic comedy that's simultaneously too fluffy and not whimsical enough." Though he neither listens to music nor owns any CDs, Grant learned to sing, play the piano, dance (a few mannered steps) and studied the mannerisms of prominent musicians to prepare for his role as a has-been pop singer, based loosely on Andrew Ridgeley. "The Star-Ledger" dismissed the performance, writing that "paper dolls have more depth." The film, with its revenues totalling $145 million, allowed Grant to mock disposable pop stardom and fleeting celebrity through its washed-up lead character. According to the "San Francisco Chronicle", "Grant strikes precisely the right note with regard to Alex's career: He's too intelligent not to be a little embarrassed, but he's far too brazen to feel anything like shame." In 2009, Grant starred opposite Sarah Jessica Parker in the romantic comedy "Did You Hear About the Morgans?", which was a commercial as well as a critical failure.
Work ethic.
Grant is well known for having a very strong work ethic. He has called being a successful actor a mistake and has repeatedly talked of his hope that film stardom would just be "a phase" in his life, lasting no more than ten years. He pins his lack of interest in acting on two different thoughts: first, that he drifted into the job as a temporary joke at age 23 and finds it an immature way for a grown man to spend his time; and secondly, because he believes to have already given the one remarkable comic performance he had hoped to create on screen. A self-confessed "committed and passionate" perfectionist on a film set, Grant has constantly opted to describe himself as a reluctant actor, who chooses to be neutral about his career and works mostly with friends from previous collaborations. Richard Curtis, a frequent collaborator, revealed that Grant is not fluid about the filmmaking process and tends to be unrelaxed while filming because he does not feel as though he's in the director's hands and prefers instead to take responsibility for giving a definitive performance. Grant is noted by co-workers for demanding endless takes until he achieves the desired shot according to his own standard.
A 2007 "Vogue" profile of Grant referred to him as a man with a "professionally misanthropic mystique." The observation followed published facts such as that Grant conducts his interviews alone (without any publicists), and has derided focus groups, market research and overriding emphasis on the opening weekend. Grant decided to let go of his agent in 2006, ending a 10-year relationship with CAA. Besides proudly proclaiming in interviews to have never listened to external views on his career, he stated that he does not require the hand-holding an agent provides. A few months before firing his agent, he said, "They've known for years that I have total control. I've never taken any advice on anything."
He has stuck to the genre of comedy, especially the romantic comedy, for almost all of his mainstream film career. He also never ventures to play characters who are not British. While some film critics, such as Roger Ebert, have defended the limited variety of his performances, others have dismissed him as a . Eric Fellner, co-owner of Working Title Films and a long-time collaborator of Grant, said, "His range hasn't been fully tested, but each performance is unique." A majority of Grant's popular films in the 1990s followed a similar plot that captured an optimistic bachelor experiencing a series of embarrassing incidents to find true love, often with an American woman. In earlier films, Grant was adept at plugging into the stereotype of a repressed Englishman for humorous effects, allowing him to gently satirise his characters as he summed them up and played against the type simultaneously. These performances were sometimes deemed overbearing, in the words of "Washington Post"'s Rita Kempley, due to his "comic overreactions—the mugging, the stuttering, the fluttering eyelids." She added: "He's got more tics than Benny Hill." Grant's penchant for conveying his characters' feelings with mannerisms, rather than direct emotions, has been one of the foremost objections raised against his acting style. Stephen Hunter of the "Washington Post" once stated that, to be effective as a comic performer, he must get "his jiving and shucking under control." Film historian David Thomson wrote in "The New Biographical Dictionary of Film" about how it is merely "itchy mannerisms" that Grant equates with screen acting.
Grant's screen persona of later films, in the new millennium, gradually developed into a cynical, self-loathing cad. Claudia Puig of "USA Today" celebrated this transformation with the observation that finally "gone the self-conscious 'Aren't I adorable' mannerisms that seemed endearing at the start of [Grant's film career but have grown cloying in more recent movies." Using his facial contortions and an affected stammer for varied comic purposes, According to Carina Chocano, amongst film critics, the two tropes most commonly associated with Grant are that he reinvented his screen persona in "Bridget Jones's Diary" and "About a Boy" and dreads the possibility of becoming a parody of himself.
In the media.
Grant has repeatedly spoken about his boredom with playing the celebrity in the press and is known in popular media for his guarded privacy, About the culture of celebrity, he told "Vogue", "My theory is that it's like bodybuilders who inject testosterone, which means that their own powers to generate testosterone shut down forever. The fake esteem you get from being in the public eye feels like self-worth, but actually your own powers to produce it shut down. The stuff that really counts is your own. And that's, I think, why people go bonkers." On probing of his personal life, he has remained incredibly steadfast in "offering a dead bat to any question he feels is not general enough." Meanwhile, acquaintances portray him as a complicated man with an anarchic and sharp constitution. "There is at least as much of Hugh that is charismatic, intellectual, and whose tongue," according to Mike Newell, "is maybe too clever for its own good as there is of him that's gorgeous and kind of woolly and flubsy." Filmmaker Paul Weitz, calling Grant funny, observed that "he perceives flaws in himself and other people, and then he cares about their humanity nonetheless." British newspapers regularly refer to him as grumpy.
Libel lawsuits.
In 1996, Grant won substantial damages from News (UK) Ltd over what his lawyers called a "highly defamatory" article published in January 1995. The company's now-defunct newspaper, "Today", had falsely claimed that Grant verbally abused a young extra with a "foul-mouthed tongue lashing" on the set of "The Englishman Who Went Up a Hill But Came Down a Mountain".
On 27 April 2007, Grant accepted undisclosed damages from the Associated Newspapers over claims made about his relationships with his former girlfriends in three separate tabloid articles, which were published in the "Daily Mail" and "The Mail on Sunday" on 18, 21 and 24 February. His lawyer stated that all of the articles' "allegations and factual assertions are false." Grant said, in a written statement, that he took the action because: "I was tired of the "Daily Mail" and "Mail on Sunday" papers publishing almost entirely fictional articles about my private life for their own financial gain." He went on to take the opportunity to stress, "I'm also hoping that this statement in court might remind people that the so-called 'close friends' or 'close sources' on which these stories claim to be based almost never exist."
Legal troubles.
On 27 June 1995, Grant was arrested in an L.A. Vice police operation not far from Sunset Boulevard for misdemeanour lewd conduct in a public place with Hollywood prostitute Divine Brown. He pleaded no contest and was fined $1,180, placed on two years' summary probation, and was ordered to complete an AIDS education program.
On "Larry King Live", Grant declined the host Larry King's repeated invitations to probe his psyche, saying that psychoanalysis was "more of an American syndrome" and he himself was "a bit old fashioned." He told the host: "I don't have excuses." Grant was appreciated for "his refreshing honesty" as he "faced the music and handled it with tongue cheek."
In April 2007, Grant was arrested on allegations of assault made by paparazzo Ian Whittaker. Grant made no official statement and did not comment on the incident. Charges were dropped on 1 June by the Crown Prosecution Service on the grounds of "insufficient evidence."
Phone hacking exposé.
"Cameron is very much in debt to Rebekah Wade for helping him not quite win the election ... So that was my submission to parliament – that Cameron's either a liar or an idiot."
"20 per cent of the Met has taken backhanders from tabloid hacks. So why would they want to open up that can of worms?... And what's wrong with that, anyway? It doesn't hurt anyone particularly."
Grant's article attracted considerable interest, due to both the revelatory content of the taped conversation, and the novelty of Grant himself "turning the tables" on a tabloid journalist.
Whilst the allegations regarding the "News of the World" continued to receive coverage in the broadsheets and similar media (Grant appeared for example on BBC Radio 4) it was only with the revelation that the voicemail of the by then murdered Millie Dowler had been hacked, and evidence for her murder enquiry had been deleted, that the coverage turned from media interest to widespread public (and eventually political) outrage. Grant became something of a spokesman against Murdoch's News Corporation, culminating in a bravura performance on BBC television's "Question Time" in July 2011.
On 27 June Grant spoke about the media scandal in UK and media ownership at the new media forum 27 in the European parliament after he met Neelie Kroes and MEPs to discuss EU action to end media monopolies.
Personal life.
In 1987, while playing Lord Byron in a Spanish production called "Remando Al Viento" (1988), Grant met actress Elizabeth Hurley, who was cast in a supporting role as Byron's former lover Claire Clairmont. Grant started dating the aspiring model while shooting and their relationship was subsequently the subject of much media attention. In 1995, Grant was arrested for "lewd conduct" with a prostitute in Hollywood. After 13 years together, Grant and Hurley made "a mutual and amicable decision" to split in May 2000. Grant is godfather to Hurley's son Damian, born in 2002. Grant reportedly dated former pantomime actress Michaela Westbury from 2003 up until 2004. He subsequently began dating Jemima Khan under the intense scrutiny of British tabloids. Three years later, in February 2007, Grant's publicist announced that the couple had "decided to split amicably". The spokesman added, "Hugh has nothing but positive things to say about Jemima".
In November 2011, it was announced that Grant had become a father to a baby girl, Tabitha, earlier that autumn. The identity of the mother, with whom Grant had a "fleeting affair" according to his publicist, was not at first announced; however, it was later revealed to be a Chinese woman, Tinglan Hong. The publicist went on to say that "while this was not planned, Hugh could not be happier or more supportive. He and the mother have discussed everything and are on very friendly terms." In an interview on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" in April 2012, Grant revealed that his daughter's Chinese name is Xiao Xi, meaning "happy surprise". Grant and Hong reportedly briefly reunited in 2012. In February 2013, Grant announced that they had recently welcomed a son named Felix Chang.
Grant has claimed that Hong has been "badly treated" by the media, saying that press intrusion prevented him from attending the birth of his daughter in September 2011. Grant said, "I was at one of the party conferences, about to give a speech, and was pacing about on the end of the phone. I shouldn’t have gone to the hospital at all, because it brought all this attention down on the mother's head. But I couldn't really resist it, so I went on the second day". Hong later obtained an injunction which allowed Hugh Grant to visit her and baby Tabitha in peace.
Grant is an avid golfer and is a regular at pro-am tournaments with membership at the Sunningdale Golf Club. He is also frequently pictured by the paparazzi at the famed Scottish golf courses in St Andrews, Kingsbarns and Carnoustie. Highly competitive, he reportedly plays with a lot of money at stake. As a young boy, he played rugby union on his school's first XV team at centre and played football as an avid fan of Fulham F.C.. He is also a fan of Scottish side Rangers F.C. thanks to his grandfather who was Scottish. He continued to play in a Sunday-morning football league in south-west London after college and remains an "impassioned Fulham supporter." Grant's other interests include snooker and tennis.
In 2011, the BBC apologised after Grant made a remark about gay rugby players when he was invited into the commentary box during coverage of an England V Scotland game at Twickenham Stadium. Talking about playing rugby during his school days, Grant said: "I discovered it hurt less if you tackled hard than if you tackled like a queen."
Charity work.
Grant is a Patron of The DIPEx Charity, founded by Ann McPherson, a charity that publishes the websites Healthtalkonline and Youthhealthtalk; and a Patron of the Fynvola Foundation, named after his late mother, a charity which provides nursing and care for older learning-disabled people. He is also a supporter of Marie Curie Cancer Care, whose Great Daffodil Appeal he promoted in March 2008.
