The Carrie Diaries is an American teen drama television series on The CW. It is a prequel to the HBO television series "Sex and the City" and based on the book of the same name by Candace Bushnell. The first season of the show focuses on Carrie Bradshaw during her junior year of high school in 1984, and she explores life in New York while interning at a law office. On May 11, 2012, the pilot was picked up by The CW to series and premiered on January 14, 2013.
Production.
Development.
In September 2011, it was officially announced that The CW network was moving forward with a television series as a prequel to the original series, based on "The Carrie Diaries". The project is produced by "Gossip Girl" producers Josh Schwartz and Stephanie Savage. Former "Sex and the City" writer Amy B. Harris penned the adaptation.
On January 18, 2012, The CW network ordered a pilot of "The Carrie Diaries". The project will continue to be helmed by executive producers Josh Schwartz, Stephanie Savage, Len Goldstein and Candace Bushnell. On May 11, the pilot was picked up to series.
Casting.
On February 15, 2012 the series' first role was cast. Stefania Owen has landed the part of Carrie Bradshaw’s 14-year-old sister Dorrit. She’s described as rebelling in the most obvious of ways: dyeing her hair, getting arrested, acting out. Dorrit is desperate for attention and willing to get it any way she can. On February 27, 2012 it was announced that AnnaSophia Robb had won the role of the young Carrie Bradshaw. On February 28, Katie Findlay and Ellen Wong joined her. Wong will play Carrie's best friend in high school, Jill Thompson. Also known as 'The Mouse', Jill is said to be intelligent and loyal. Findlay will star in the project as Carrie's oldest friend Maggie Landers, the police chief's daughter. Whereas Carrie is beginning to explore Manhattan, Maggie has no desire to leave her town. On March 2, 2012, Deadline reported that Austin Butler has been cast as the male lead. Butler will play Sebastian Kydd, a brooding heartthrob and ultimate insider who always plays the outsider. His presence at Carrie’s school will shake things up in a big way. On March 4, 2012, Deadline announced that Freema Agyeman has been cast in the pilot as Larissa, a hip, cutting-edge editor and party girl who works at "Interview" magazine and is Carrie's mentor. Also, joining the cast will be Brendan Dooling. Dooling will fill the role of Walt, Carrie's gay friend. On March 9, 2012, Deadline reported that Matt Letscher has been cast as Carrie's father. On March 14, 2012 it was announced that Chloe Bridges has been cast as Carrie’s nemesis Donna Ladonna, the popular girl who is confident and savvy with more there than meets the eye.
Reception.
"The Carrie Diaries" received mixed reviews, The series was given a 57 out of 100 score on Metacritic, based on reviews from 23 critics. Gail Pennington of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch said "The CW's attempt to capture the magic of "Sex and the City" in a prequel, set in 1984, could have gone very wrong. But "The Carrie Diaries" is surprisingly right." Marisa LaScala of PopMatters says "The rest of the show goes on to prize sweetness over superficiality." Alan Sepinwall of Hitfix describes "The new series succeeds on its own nostalgic terms."
