The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), commonly called Obamacare or the federal health care law, is a United States federal statute signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010. Together with the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act, it represents the most significant government expansion and regulatory overhaul of the U.S. healthcare system since the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965.
PPACA is aimed primarily at decreasing the number of uninsured Americans and reducing the overall costs of health care. It provides a number of mechanisms—including mandates, subsidies, and tax credits—to employers and individuals in order to increase the coverage rate. Additional reforms are aimed at improving healthcare outcomes and streamlining the delivery of health care. PPACA requires insurance companies to cover all applicants and offer the same rates regardless of pre-existing conditions or sex. The Congressional Budget Office projected that PPACA will lower both future deficits and Medicare spending.
On June 28, 2012, the United States Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of most of PPACA in the case "National Federation of Independent Business v. Sebelius".
Overview.
Provisions.
PPACA includes numerous provisions to take effect over several years beginning in 2010. There is a grandfather clause on policies issued before then that exempt them from many of these provisions, but other provisions may affect existing policies.
Funding.
PPACA's provisions are funded by a variety of taxes and offsets. Major sources of new revenue include a much-broadened Medicare tax on incomes over $200,000 and $250,000, for individual and joint filers respectively, an annual fee on insurance providers, and a 40% excise tax on "Cadillac" insurance policies. The income levels are not adjusted for inflation, leaving the possibility of increased taxes on incomes over 250,000 inflation-adjusted dollars after more than two decades without indexing through. There are also taxes on pharmaceuticals, high-cost diagnostic equipment, and a 10% federal sales tax on indoor tanning services. Offsets are from intended cost savings such as changes in the Medicare Advantage program relative to traditional Medicare.
Summary of tax increases: (ten-year projection)
Summary of spending offsets: (ten year projection)
Original budget estimates included a provision to require information reporting on payments to corporations, which had been projected to raise $17 billion, but the provision was repealed.
Provisions by effective date.
PPACA is divided into ten titles and contains provisions that became effective immediately, 90 days after enactment, and six months after enactment, as well as provisions phased in through to 2020. Below are some of the key provisions of PPACA. For simplicity, the amendments in the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010 are integrated into this timeline.
Legislative history.
Background.
Health care reform was a major topic of discussion during the 2008 Democratic presidential primaries. As the race narrowed, attention focused on the plans presented by the two leading candidates, New York Senator Hillary Clinton and the eventual nominee, Illinois Senator Barack Obama. Each candidate proposed a plan to cover the approximately 45 million Americans estimated to be without health insurance at some point during each year. One point of difference between the plans was that Clinton's plan was to require all Americans to obtain coverage (in effect, an individual health insurance mandate), while Obama's was to provide a subsidy but not create a direct requirement.
During the general election campaign between Obama and the Republican nominee, Arizona Senator John McCain, Obama said that fixing health care would be one of his four priorities if he won the presidency. After his inauguration, Obama announced to a joint session of Congress in February 2009 that he would begin working with Congress to construct a plan for health care reform. On March 5, 2009, Obama formally began the reform process and held a conference with industry leaders to discuss reform and requested reform be enacted before the Congressional summer recess; but the reform was not passed by the requested date. In July 2009, a series of bills were approved by committees within the House of Representatives. Beginning June 17, 2009, and extending through September 14, 2009, three Democratic and three Republican Senate Finance Committee Members met for a series of 31 meetings to discuss the development of a health care reform bill. Over the course of the next three months, this group, Senators Max Baucus (D-Montana), Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), Kent Conrad (D-North Dakota), Olympia Snowe (R-Maine), Jeff Bingaman (D-New Mexico), and Mike Enzi (R-Wyoming), met for more than 60 hours, and the principles that they discussed became the foundation of the Senate's health care reform bill. The meetings were held in public and broadcast by C-SPAN and can be seen on the C-SPAN web site or at the Committee's own web site. During the August 2009 congressional recess, many members went back to their districts and entertained town hall meetings to solicit public opinion on the proposals. During the summer recess, the Tea Party movement organized protests and many conservative groups and individuals targeted congressional town hall meetings to voice their opposition to the proposed reform bills.
Away from the televised meetings, the legislation became a "bonanza" for lobbyists, including secret deals that were initially denied but subsequently confirmed. The Sunlight Foundation documented many of the reported ties between "the healthcare lobbyist complex" and politicians in both major parties.
President Obama delivered a speech to a joint session of Congress supporting reform and again outlining his proposals. On November 7, the House of Representatives passed the Affordable Health Care for America Act on a 220–215 vote and forwarded it to the Senate for passage.
The Senate bill, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, bore similarities to prior healthcare reform proposals introduced by Republicans. In 1993 Senator John Chafee introduced the Health Equity and Access Reform Today Act which contained a "Universal Coverage" requirement with a penalty for non-compliance. Advocates for the 1993 bill which contained the "individual mandate" included prominent Republicans who today oppose the mandate, namely Orrin Hatch (R-UT), Charles Grassley (R-IA), Robert Bennett (R-UT), and Christopher Bond (R-MO). In 1994 Senator Don Nickles introduced the Consumer Choice Health Security Act which also contained an individual mandate with a penalty provision. However, Nickles removed the mandate from the act shortly after introduction, stating that they had decided "that government should not compel people to buy health insurance." Many experts of healthcare policy have pointed out that the "individual mandate" requirement to buy health insurance was contained in many previous Republican/conservative proposals for healthcare legislation, going back as far as 1989. Other experts have pointed out that the healthcare legislation that emerged from Congress in 2009 and 2010 is patterned, largely, after former Republican Governor of Massachusetts Mitt Romney's state healthcare plan which also contains the individual mandate.
The idea that the Obama healthcare legislation was a "government takeover of healthcare", pushed by the Tea Party movement and Congressional Republicans in 2010, earned this characterization of PPACA the "Lie of the Year for 2010" by Politifact.
There were many threats made against members of Congress and many were assigned extra protection.
Senate.
The Senate failed to take up debate on the House bill and instead took up H.R. 3590, a bill regarding housing tax breaks for service members. As the United States Constitution requires all revenue-related bills to originate in the House, the Senate took up this bill since it was first passed by the House as a revenue-related modification to the Internal Revenue Code. The bill was then used as the Senate's vehicle for their health care reform proposal, completely revising the content of the bill. The bill as amended incorporated elements of earlier proposals that had been reported favorably by the Senate Health and Finance committees.
Passage in the Senate was temporarily blocked by a filibuster threat by Nebraska Senator Ben Nelson, who sided with the Republican minority. Nelson's support for the bill was won after it was amended to offer a higher rate of Medicaid reimbursement for Nebraska. The compromise was derisively referred to as the "Cornhusker Kickback" (and was later repealed by the reconciliation bill). On December 23, the Senate voted 60–39 to end debate on the bill, eliminating the possibility of a filibuster by opponents. The bill then passed by a vote of 60–39 on December 24, 2009, with all Democrats and two Independents voting for, and all Republicans voting against except one Republican senator (Jim Bunning, R-Ky.) not voting.
On January 19, 2010, Massachusetts Republican Scott Brown was elected to the Senate, having campaigned on giving the Republican minority the 41st vote needed to sustain a filibuster, even famously signing autographs as "Scott 41."
House.
Although White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel argued for a less ambitious bill, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi pushed back, dismissing Emanuel's scaled-down approach as "Kiddie Care". Obama's siding with comprehensive reform and the news that Anthem Blue Cross in California intended to raise premium rates for its patients by as much as 39% gave him a new line of argument for reform. Obama unveiled a health care reform plan of his own, drawing largely from the Senate bill. On February 22 he laid out a "Senate-leaning" proposal to consolidate the bills. On February 25, he held a meeting with leaders of both parties urging passage of a reform bill. The summit proved successful in shifting the political narrative away from the Massachusetts loss back to health care policy.
The most viable option for the proponents of comprehensive reform was for the House to abandon its own health reform bill, the Affordable Health Care for America Act, and to instead pass the Senate's bill, and then pass amendments to it with a different bill allowing the Senate to pass the amendments via the reconciliation process.
Initially, there were not enough supporters to pass the bill, thus requiring its proponents to negotiate with a group of pro-life Democrats, led by Congressman Bart Stupak. The group found the possibility of federal funding for abortion was substantive enough to cause their opposition to the bill. Instead of requesting inclusion of additional language specific to their abortion concerns in the bill, President Obama issued Executive Order 13535, reaffirming the principles in the Hyde Amendment. This concession won the support of Stupak and members of his group and assured passage of the bill.
The House passed the bill with a vote of 219 to 212 on March 21, 2010, with 34 Democrats and all 178 Republicans voting against it. The following day, Republicans introduced legislation to repeal the bill. Obama signed the original bill into law on March 23, 2010.
Impact.
Public policy.
Change in number of uninsured.
CBO originally estimated the legislation will reduce the number of uninsured residents by 30 million, leaving 25 million uninsured residents in 2019 after the bill's provisions have all taken effect. A July 2012 CBO estimate raised the expected number of uninsured by 3 million, reflecting the successful legal challenge to PPACA's expansion of Medicaid.
Early experience under PPACA was that, as a result of the tax credit for small businesses, some businesses offered health insurance to their employees for the first time. On September 13, 2011, the Census Bureau released a report showing that the number of uninsured 19- to 25-year-olds (now eligible to stay on their parents' policies) had declined by 393,000, or 1.6%. A later report from the Government Accountability Office in 2012 found that of the 4 million small businesses that were offered the tax credit only 170,300 businesses claimed it. Due to the effect of the U.S. Supreme court ruling, states can opt-in or out of the expansion of Medicaid. Arkansas, California, Connecticut, Delaware, District of Columbia, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, Rhode Island, Vermont, and Washington are implementing the expansion; Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, Georgia, South Carolina, and Texas are not.
Effects on insurance premiums.
For the effect on health insurance premiums, the CBO referred to its November 2009 analysis and stated that the effects would "probably be quite similar" to that earlier analysis. That analysis forecast that by 2016, for the non-group market comprising 17% of the market, premiums per person would increase by 10 to 13% but that over half of these insureds would receive subsidies that would decrease the premium paid to "well below" premiums charged under current law. For the small group market, 13% of the market, premiums would be impacted 1 to −3% and −8 to −11% for those receiving subsidies; for the large group market comprising 70% of the market, premiums would be impacted 0 to −3%, with insureds under high premium plans subject to excise taxes being charged −9 to −12%. The analysis was affected by various factors, including increased benefits particularly for the nongroup markets, more healthy insureds due to the mandate, administrative efficiencies related to the health exchanges, and insureds under high-premium plans reducing benefits in response to the tax.
The Associated Press reported that, as a result of PPACA's provisions concerning the Medicare Part D coverage gap (between the "initial coverage limit" and the "catastrophic coverage threshold" in the Medicare Part D prescription drug program), individuals falling in this "donut hole" would save about 40 percent. Almost all of the savings came because, with regard to brand-name drugs, PPACA secured a discount from pharmaceutical companies. The change benefited more than two million people, most of them in the middle class.
The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office estimates that "about 4 million" (3.9 million or 1.2% of the population) will pay the penalty in 2016. In September 2012, the CBO estimated that nearly six million will pay a $1,200 penalty in 2016. Also, nearly 80 percent of those who will face the penalty would be making up to or less than five times the federal poverty level. This would work out to $55,850 or less  for an individual and $115,250 or less for a family of four.
In January 2013, the Internal Revenue Service ruled that only the cost of covering the individual employee but not their family can be used for determining whether the cost of employer-based health coverage exceeds 9.5 percent of the worker’s household income, which is necessary to obtain taxpayer-subsidized coverage on the new health insurance exchanges starting in 2014. "The New York Times" said this could leave millions of Americans unable to afford family coverage under their employers’ plans and ineligible for subsidies to buy coverage elsewhere.
Federal deficit.
CBO deficit reduction estimates.
The 2011 comprehensive CBO estimate projected a net deficit reduction of more than $200 billion during the period 2012–2021. CBO estimated in March 2011 that for the 2012–2021 period, the law would result in net receipts of $813 billion, offset by $604 billion in outlays, resulting in a $210 billion reduction in the deficit.
In 2012, the CBO updated its cost estimates for a portion of the bill, but did not update its estimate of the net deficit impact of the whole bill (which was still estimated to reduce budget deficits overall). The ACA's provisions related to insurance coverage were projected earlier in 2012 to have a net cost of $1,252 billion over the 2012–2022 period; that amount represented a gross cost to the federal government of $1,762 billion, offset in part by $510 billion in receipts and other budgetary effects (primarily revenues from penalties and other sources). The addition of 2022 to the projection period had the effect of increasing the costs of the coverage provisions of the ACA relative to those projected in March 2011 for the 2012-2021 period because that change added a year in which the expansion of eligibility for Medicaid and the subsidies for health insurance purchased through the exchanges would have been in effect. This estimate was made prior to the Supreme Court's ruling regarding the expansion of Medicaid program to the individual states however. CBO and JCT now estimate that the insurance coverage provisions of the ACA will have a net cost of $1,168 billion over the 2012–2022 period—compared with $1,252 billion projected in March 2012 for that 11-year period—for a net reduction of $84 billion. (Those figures do not include the budgetary impact of other provisions of the ACA, which in the aggregate reduce budget deficits.)
As of the bill's passage into law in 2010, CBO estimated the legislation would reduce the deficit by $143 billion over the first decade, but half of that was due to expected premiums for the C.L.A.S.S. Act, which has since been abandoned. Although the CBO generally does not provide cost estimates beyond the 10-year budget projection period (because of the great degree of uncertainty involved in the data) it decided to do so in this case at the request of lawmakers, and estimated a second decade deficit reduction of $1.2 trillion.
CBO predicted deficit reduction around a broad range of one-half percent of GDP over the 2020s while cautioning that "a wide range of changes could occur".
CBO also initially stated that the bill would "substantially reduce the growth of Medicare's payment rates for most services; impose an excise tax on insurance plans with relatively high premiums; and make various other changes to the federal tax code, Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs;" A commonly heard criticism of the CBO cost estimates is that CBO was required to exclude from its initial estimates the effects of likely "doc fix" legislation that would increase Medicare payments by more than $200 billion from 2010 to 2019; however, the "doc fix" remains a separate piece of legislation. Subject to the same exclusion, the CBO initially estimated the federal government's share of the cost during the first decade at $940 billion, $923 billion of which takes place during the final six years (2014–2019) when the spending kicks in; with revenue exceeding spending during these six years.
Healthcare spending trends.
CBO further observed that "a substantial share of current spending on health care contributes little if anything to people's health" and concluded, "Putting the federal budget on a sustainable path would almost certainly require a significant reduction in the growth of federal health spending relative to current law (including this year's health legislation)."
A consultant who helped create the law admits "it was politically impossible for the ACA to include policies that would be guaranteed to "bend the curve" of rising health care costs."
Also, Jonathan Gruber, a former advisor to the Romney Administration during the development of health care reform in Massachusetts, points out that 17 percent of the country's gross domestic product (GDP) is spent on health care. Without the Affordable Care Act, this rate will soon exceed the growth of our economy and by 2080 health care spending is projected to account for 40 percent of the U.S. GDP.
Expenditure estimates.
In 2012, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projected PPACA will require more than $1.7 trillion in gross federal spending over the period 2012–2022, some of which will be offset by penalties and tax increases related to coverage, resulting in net spending of more than $1.2 trillion for the insurance portion of the bill. However, this is only a partial accounting for the impact of the bill, excluding some offsetting expense reductions and revenue increases that result in a net deficit reduction.
According to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, by 2019 PPACA will increase expenditures on Medicaid and individual subsidies by $165 billion annually while reducing Medicare expenditures by $125 billion annually.
Other financing-related debate and opinion.
There was mixed opinion about the CBO estimates from others.
Uwe Reinhardt, a health economist at Princeton, wrote that "The rigid, artificial rules under which the Congressional Budget Office must score proposed legislation unfortunately cannot produce the best unbiased forecasts of the likely fiscal impact of any legislation", but went on to say "But even if the budget office errs significantly in its conclusion that the bill would actually help reduce the future federal deficit, I doubt that the financing of this bill will be anywhere near as fiscally irresponsible as was the financing of the Medicare Modernization Act of 2003."
Douglas Holtz-Eakin, a CBO director during the George W. Bush administration, who later served as the chief economic policy adviser to U.S. Senator John McCain's 2008 presidential campaign, opined that the bill would increase the deficit by $562 billion.
Republican House leadership and the Republican majority on the House Budget Committee estimate the law would increase the deficit by more than $700 billion in its first 10 years.
Democratic House leadership and the Democratic minority on the House Budget Committee say the claims of budget gimmickry are false and that repeal of the legislation would increase the deficit by $230 billion over the same period, pointing to the CBO's 2011 analysis of the impact of repeal.
"The New Republic" editors Noam Scheiber (an economist) and Jonathan Cohn (a noted health care policy analyst), countered critical assessments of the law's deficit impact, arguing that it is as likely, if not more so, for predictions to have underestimated deficit reduction than to have overestimated it. They noted that it is easier, for example, to account for the cost of definite levels of subsidies to specified numbers of people than account for savings from preventive health care, and that the CBO has a track record of consistently overestimating the costs of, and underestimating the savings of health legislation; "innovations in the delivery of medical care, like greater use of electronic medical records and financial incentives for more coordination of care among doctors, would produce substantial savings while also slowing the relentless climb of medical expenses... But the CBO would not consider such savings in its calculations, because the innovations hadn't really been tried on such large scale or in concert with one another – and that meant there wasn't much hard data to prove the savings would materialize."
David Walker, former U.S. Comptroller General now working for The Peter G. Peterson Foundation, has stated that the CBO estimates are not likely to be accurate, because it is based on the assumption that Congress is going to do everything they say they're going to do. On the other hand, a Center on Budget and Policy Priorities analysis said that Congress has a good record of implementing Medicare savings. According to their study, Congress implemented the vast majority of the provisions enacted in the past 20 years to produce Medicare savings.
Coverage for contraceptives.
With the exception of churches and houses of worship, PPACA's contraceptive coverage mandate applies to all employers and educational institutions. The mandate applies to all new health insurance plans effective August 2012. It controversially includes Christian hospitals, Christian charities, Catholic universities, and other enterprises owned or controlled by religious organizations that oppose contraception on doctrinal grounds. Regulations made under PPACA rely on the recommendations of the Institute of Medicine, which concluded that access to contraception is medically necessary "to ensure women's health and well-being."
Effect on national spending.
The United States Department of Health and Human Services reported that the bill would increase "total national health expenditures" by more than $200 billion from 2010 to 2019. The report also cautioned that the increases could be larger, because the Medicare cuts in the law may be unrealistic and unsustainable, forcing lawmakers to roll them back. The report projected that Medicare cuts could put nearly 15% of hospitals and other institutional providers into debt, "possibly jeopardizing access" to care for seniors.
The law created the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation and requires numerous pilots and demonstrations to be conducted which may have an impact on the cost of healthcare in the long-run. Although these cost reductions have not been factored into CBO cost estimates, the experiments cover nearly every idea healthcare experts advocate, except malpractice/tort reform.
The Business Roundtable, an association of CEOs, commissioned a report from the consulting company Hewitt Associates that found that the legislation "could potentially reduce that trend line by more than $3,000 per employee, to $25,435" with respect to insurance premiums. It also stated that the legislation "could potentially reduce the rate of future health care cost increases by 15% to 20% when fully phased in by 2019". The group cautioned that this is all assuming that the cost-saving government pilot programs both succeed and then are wholly copied by the private market, which is uncertain.
After the bill was signed, AT&T, Caterpillar, Verizon, and John Deere issued financial reports showing large charges against earnings, up to 1 billion in the case of AT&T, attributing the additional expenses to tax changes in the new health care law. Under the new law, starting in 2013 companies can no longer deduct a subsidy for prescription drug benefits granted under Medicare Part D.
Political.
Public opinion.
Other specific ideas that showed majority support, such as purchasing drugs from Canada, limiting malpractice awards, and reducing the age to qualify for Medicare, were not enacted.
Public opinion supported healthcare reform proposals in 2008, but turned negative when the plan changed in 2009, and remains opposed to the final version that was signed in 2010. Though in 2008 then-Senators Barack Obama and Joseph Biden campaigned against requiring adults to buy insurance; in 2009 President Obama reportedly changed his mind and agreed with insurance industry and Democratic Congressional proposals to include an individual mandate. Public opinion of the legislation turned negative when the individual mandate proposal was announced, and remains opposed by a margin of 10 percentage points.
In March 2010, pollsters probed the reasons for opposition. In a CNN poll, 62% of respondents said they thought the PPACA would "increase the amount of money they personally spend on health care," 56% said the bill "gives the government too much involvement in health care," and only 19% said they thought they and their families would be better off with the legislation. In "The Wall Street Journal", pollsters Scott Rasmussen and Doug Schoen wrote, "One of the more amazing aspects of the health-care debate is how steady public opinion has remained... 81% of voters say it's likely the plan will end up costing more than projected 59% say that the biggest problem with the health-care system is the cost: They want reform that will bring down the cost of care. For these voters, the notion that you need to spend an additional trillion dollars doesn't make sense." "USA Today" found opinions were starkly divided by age, with a solid majority of seniors opposing the bill and a solid majority of those younger than 40 in favor.
A September 2010 Politico article reported that five House Democrats had run political ads highlighting their "no" votes on the bill, while there had not been any political ads highlighting a "yes" vote since April, when Harry Reid ran one. The article also reported a Kaiser Family Foundation poll "which showed 43 percent of the public supports the overhaul and 45 percent are opposed. Much of the disagreement falls along party lines."
, 72% of registered voters believe PPACA's individual mandate is unconstitutional, while 20% say it is permissible. By a margin of 50% to 39%, Americans say the Supreme Court should overturn the entire statute. The Supreme Court hearings occasioned public demonstrations including prayer vigils coordinated by the White House and Tea Party Protests.
A June 2012 Reuters-Ipsos poll indicated that much of the opposition to the law was because Americans wanted more reform, not less. About one-third of Republicans and independents who oppose the law did so because it did not go far enough to fix healthcare. 71% of Republican opponents reject it overall, while 29% believed it did not go far enough, while independent opponents are divided 67% to 33%. Among Democratic opponents, 49% reject it overall, and 51% wanted the measure to go further.
A poll released in July 2012 showed that "most Americans (56%) want to see critics of President Obama's health care law drop efforts to block it and move on to other national issues."
Term "Obamacare".
The term "Obamacare" was originally coined by opponents, notably Mitt Romney in 2007, as a pejorative term. However by mid-2012 it was the common term used by both sides. Use of the term in a positive sense was suggested by Democratic politicians such as John Conyers (D-MI). President Obama said subsequently, "I have no problem with people saying Obama cares. I do care." Because of the number of "Obamacare" search engine queries, the Department of Health and Human Services purchased Google advertisements, triggered by the term, to direct people to the official HHS site. In March 2012, the Obama reelection campaign embraced the term "Obamacare", urging Obama's supporters to post Twitter messages that begin, "I like #Obamacare because...". According to an analysis by the Sunlight Foundation, the term "Obamacare" has been used nearly 3,000 times in Congressional speeches since its debut as a phrase on Capitol Hill in July 2009.
According to "The New York Times", the term was first put in print in March 2007, when health care lobbyist Jeanne Schulte Scott penned it in a health industry journal. "We will soon see a 'Giuliani-care' and 'Obama-care' to go along with 'McCain-care,' 'Edwards-care,' and a totally revamped and remodeled 'Hillary-care' from the 1990s", Schulte Scott wrote. The expression Obamacare first was used in early 2007 generally by writers describing the candidate’s proposal for expanding coverage for the uninsured according to research by Elspeth Reeve at The Atlantic magazine. The word was first uttered in a political campaign by Mitt Romney in May 2007 in Des Moines, Iowa. Romney said: "In my state, I worked on health care for some time. We had half a million people without insurance, and I said, 'How can we get those people insured without raising taxes and without having government take over health care'. And let me tell you, if we don't do it, the Democrats will. If the Democrats do it, it will be socialized medicine; it'll be government-managed care. It'll be what's known as Hillarycare or Barack Obamacare, or whatever you want to call it."
Working hours for part-time employees.
In 2013, the State of Virginia limited all part-time employees, from janitors to associate professors, to working no more than 29 hours per week so that they would not qualify for mandatory health insurance coverage under the law. Florida’s Palm Beach State College, Pennsylvania’s Community College of Allegheny County, Ohio’s Youngstown State University, and New Jersey’s Kean University have instituted similar rules, as have restaurants such as Applebee's, Olive Garden, Denny's, Red Lobster, Papa John's Pizza, and some Wendy's and Taco Bell franchises.
Child-only policies.
In September 2010, some insurance companies announced that in response to the law, they would end the issuance of new child-only policies. Kentucky Insurance Commissioner Sharon Clark said the decision by insurers to stop offering such policies was a violation of state law and ordered insurers to offer an open enrollment period in January 2011 for Kentuckians under 19.
An August 2011 Congressional report found that passage of the health care law prompted health insurance carriers to stop selling new child-only health plans in many states. Of the 50 states, 17 reported that there were currently no carriers selling child only health plans to new enrollees. Thirty-nine states indicated at least one insurance carrier exited the child-only market following enactment of the health care laws.
Legal challenges.
Opponents of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act have turned to the federal courts to challenge the constitutionality of the legislation. The Supreme Court upheld the individual mandate but determined that States could not be forced to participate in the expansion of Medicaid. All provisions of PPACA will continue in effect or will take effect as scheduled subject to States determination on Medicaid expansion.
Repeal efforts.
111th Congress.
Reps. Steve King of Iowa and Michele Bachmann of Minnesota, both Republicans, introduced bills in the House to repeal PPACA shortly after it was passed, as did Sen. Jim DeMint in the Senate. None of the three bills was considered by either body.
112th Congress.
In 2011, the Republican-controlled House of Representatives voted 245–189 to approve a bill entitled "Repealing the Job-Killing Health Care Law Act" (H.R.2), which, if enacted, would repeal the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act and the health care-related text of the Health Care and Education Reconciliation Act of 2010. All Republicans and 3 Democrats voted for repeal. In the Senate, the bill was offered as an amendment to an unrelated bill, and was subsequently voted down. Before votes in both houses of the Congress took place, President Obama stated that he would veto the bill should it pass both chambers. Democrats in the House proposed that repeal not take effect until a majority of the Senators and Representatives had opted out of the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. The Republicans voted down this measure.
On June 28, 2012, following the law being ruled as constitutional by the Supreme Court, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor stated that the House would again vote to repeal the law in July when Congress returns from recess. On July 11, 2012, the House of Representatives voted to repeal the law with 5 Democrats and all 239 Republicans voting in favor of the repeal. This was the 31st effort by the House of Representatives to repeal the bill in the 112th Congress. With President Obama's reelection and the Democrats expanding their majority in the Senate following the 2012 elections, Republicans conceded that repeal almost certainly will not occur.
Job consequences of repeal.
A spokesman for Eric Cantor stated, "This is a job-killing law, period. Anyone who argues otherwise is ignoring the construct of the health care law and the widely accepted facts." The House Republican leadership justified its use of the term "job killing" by contending that PPACA would lead to a loss of 650,000 jobs, and attributing that figure to a report by the Congressional Budget Office.
However, the CBO report specifically stated that the negative effect on jobs was because people would voluntarily choose to work less once they have health insurance outside of their jobs. FactCheck noted that the 650,000 figure was not in the CBO report, and said that the Republican statement "badly misrepresents what the Congressional Budget Office has said about the law. In fact, CBO is among those saying the effect 'will probably be small.'"
The Republicans also cited a study by the National Federation of Independent Business, but PolitiFact.com said that the 2009 NFIB study had concerned an earlier version of the bill that differed significantly from what was enacted.
PolitiFact rated the Republican statement as False.
Effect of repeal proposals on federal budget projections.
The non-partisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimated that repealing the entire PPACA (including both its taxing and spending provisions) would increase the net 2011–2021 federal deficit by $210 billion. Republican politicians disagreed, arguing that estimate was based on unrealistic assumptions; House Speaker John Boehner said, "I don't think anyone in this town believes that repealing Obamacare is going to increase the deficit." In May 2011, CBO analyzed proposals to prevent the use of appropriated funds to implement the legislation, and wrote that "a temporary prohibition, extending through the remainder of fiscal year 2011, would reduce the budget deficit by about $1.4 billion in 2011 but would increase deficits by almost $6 billion over the 2011–2021 period... CBO cannot determine whether changes in spending under a permanent prohibition would produce net costs or net savings relative to its baseline projection, which assumes full implementation."
Revised CBO accounting, based on the latest repeal effort passed in the House of Representatives (H.R. 6079) on July 11, 2012 and taking into account the Supreme Court's ruling concerning the expansion of Medicaid by the States, that, on balance, the direct spending and revenue effects of enacting the "Repeal of Obamacare Act" legislation would cause a net increase in federal budget deficits of $109 billion over the 2013–2022 period. Specifically, CBO estimates that H.R. 6079 would reduce direct spending by $890 billion and reduce revenues by $1 trillion between 2013 and 2022, thus adding $109 billion to federal budget deficits over that period.
Temporary waivers.
Interim regulations have been put in place for a specific type of employer-funded insurance, the so-called "mini-med" or limited-benefit plans, which are low-cost to employers who buy them for their employees, but cap coverage at a very low level. Such plans are sometimes offered to low-paid and part-time workers, for example in fast food restaurants or purchased direct from an insurer. Most company-provided health insurance policies starting on or after September 23, 2010 and before September 23, 2011 may not set an annual coverage cap lower than $750,000, a lower limit that is raised in stages until 2014, by which time no insurance caps are allowed at all. By 2014, no health insurance, whether sold in the individual or group market, will be allowed to place an annual cap on coverage. The waivers have been put in place to encourage employers and insurers offering mini-med plans not to withdraw medical coverage before the full regulations come into force (by which time small employers and individuals will be able to buy non-capped coverage through the exchanges) and are granted only if the employer can show that complying with the limit would mean a significant decrease in employees' benefits coverage or a significant increase in employees' premiums.
Among those receiving waivers were employers, large insurers, such as Aetna and Cigna, and union plans covering about one million employees. McDonald's, one of the employers that received a waiver, has 30,000 hourly employees whose plans have annual caps of $10,000. The waivers are issued for one year and can be reapplied for. Referring to the adjustments as "a balancing act", Nancy-Ann DeParle, director of the Office of Health Reform at the White House, said, "The president wants to have a smooth glide path to 2014." On January 26, 2011, HHS said it had to date granted a total of 733 waivers for 2011, covering 2.1 million people, or about 1% of the privately insured population. In June 2011, the Obama Administration announced that all applications for new waivers and renewals of existing ones have to be filed by September 22 of that year, and no new waivers would be approved after this date.
