Revolution is an American post-apocalyptic science fiction television drama series created by Eric Kripke. It is produced by J. J. Abrams' Bad Robot Productions for the NBC network. It debuted on September 17, 2012, and airs on Mondays at 10:00 pm (ET). The network placed a series order in May 2012. Film director Jon Favreau directed the pilot episode. The pilot episode was viewable on Hulu and NBC.com, prior to the series' broadcast premiere. On October 2, 2012, NBC picked it up for a full season of 22 episodes, which was later reduced to 20 episodes. 
Setting.
"Revolution" takes place in a post-apocalyptic dystopian future. Fifteen years earlier, an unknown phenomenon disabled electricity on the planet and effectively all devices powered by it, ranging from computers and electronics to car and jet engines. People were forced to adapt to a world without electricity. Due to the collapse of government and public order, many areas are ruled by warlords and militias. The series focuses on the Matheson family, who possess a special device (a mysterious pendant) that is the key to not only finding out what happened fifteen years ago, but also a possible way to reverse its effects. However, they must elude Sebastian Monroe, the General of the Monroe Militia and President of the Monroe Republic who wants to possess that power for himself for conquest of the former United States of America.
Opening Introduction: 
In Season 1 Episode 5, "Soul Train", a map of the former Contiguous United States is shown. The map showed the former continental United States divided into six parts: the "Monroe Republic", the "Georgia Federation", the "Plains Nation", The Republic of Texas, the "California Commonwealth" and the "Wasteland".
The same episode also indicates that the Georgia Federation and Plains Nation have allied against the Monroe Republic. Border skirmishing in southwest Illinois, near St. Louis, is mentioned.
According to the wife of Captain Thomas Neville (Julia) in a letter to her husband, the Monroe Republic capital of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania is relatively safe; however, life outside west of Pittsburgh is subject to Rebel attacks and other dangers.
Production.
Executive producer J.J. Abrams told the "Los Angeles Times" Hero Complex blog that series creator Eric Kripke "came to us with an idea that was undeniably good. It was such a great premise for a series that it was just that feeling of the misery that you’d feel if you had a chance to be part of that and didn’t take advantage of it. I’m really looking forward to that show. He’s so obviously the real deal, and we’re just really lucky and honored that he wanted to collaborate with us on it."
The series debuted in the United States on September 17, 2012. On October 2, 2012, NBC announced it would pick up the series for an additional nine episodes after achieving an average of 9.8 million viewers for the first three episodes. After November 26th, 2012, Revolution will go on hiatus for a holiday break and to catch up on post-production, expected to resume broadcast on March 25th, 2013 for the remaining episodes. 
The role of Rachel Matheson was originally played by Andrea Roth until she was replaced by Elizabeth Mitchell.
A portion of episode 4 of season 1 was filmed at Freestyle Music Park in Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.
Series overview.
Ratings.
A total of 24.2 million American viewers watched all or some of the premiere episode and/or the encore two days later.
Broadcast.
In Canada, the series airs simultaneously with the American broadcast on Citytv. It premiered in Australia on Fox8 in September 2012. It premiered in New Zealand on TV2 on October 16, 2012. The series is being broadcast by DSTV in South Africa and to the rest of Africa via satellite. The broadcast is delayed by a week from the USA broadcast. In France, TF1 broadcast the show in 2013. In the United Kingdom, the series will air on Sky 1 from March 22, 2013.
Advance screenings.
In the summer of 2012, NBC had a voting campaign on "Revolution"s Facebook page where visitors could vote for which American city should have an advance screening of the series' pilot in early September. The top-10 markets selected were: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Denver, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York City, Philadelphia, Salt Lake City and Seattle. New York City's screening was held on September 4 for 1,000 guests; 80 of them seated on stationary bicycles to generate electricity for lighting. The remaining cities' screenings were held on September 6, 2012. The pilot episode is available for download in Apple's iTunes Store and is also viewable on Hulu.
Critical reception.
The first season currently has a Metacritic score of 64 out of 100 based on 32 reviews, indicating generally positive reviews.. Glen Garvin of "The Miami Herald" described the show as "big, bold and brassy adventure, a cowboys-and-Indians story for end times". Dorothy Rabinowitz of "The Wall Street Journal" praised the production quality of the show saying "if the quality of this one, so irresistible in its vitality and suspense, does fail to hold up, its creators will have delivered, at the least, one remarkably fine hour". Ed Bark observed that the show "has the overall look and feel of a big budget feature, delivers some consistently terrific action scenes". Many have compared the show to "Dies the Fire", "The Hunger Games" and "Lost". 
Verne Gay of "Newsday" however, gave the premiere a neutral review saying "There's an almost overwhelming been-there-seen-that feel to the pilot, which doesn't really offer any suggestion of 'well, you haven't seen this.'" Other reviewers were much more critical, with Mary Ann Johanson summarizing her review with ""Revolution" is science fiction for people who don’t want to be bothered with any of that tedious thinking stuff that tends to go along with true science fiction, and just want to get to the action. And the action isn't all that fabulous here, either, frankly."
