White Collar is a USA Network television series created by Jeff Eastin, starring Matt Bomer as con-man Neal Caffrey and Tim DeKay as Special Agent Peter Burke. It premiered on October 23, 2009. In December 2009, "White Collar" was renewed for a second season that began on July 13, 2010. On September 27, 2010, the USA Network renewed "White Collar" for a third season with 16 new episodes, which premiered on June 7, 2011. The series was renewed for a fourth season on August 25, 2011, which began airing on July 10, 2012. On September 25, the series was renewed for a 16-episode fifth season.
Overview.
Neal Caffrey, a con man, forger and thief, is captured after a three-year game of cat and mouse with the FBI. With only months left while serving a four-year sentence, he escapes from a maximum security federal prison to find Kate, his girlfriend. Peter Burke, the FBI agent who initially captured Caffrey, finds him and returns Caffrey to prison. This time, Caffrey gives Burke information about evidence in another case; however, this information comes with a price: Burke must have a meeting with Caffrey. At this meeting, Caffrey proposes a deal: he will help Burke catch other criminals as part of a work-release program. Burke agrees, after some hesitation. Through the successful apprehending of several white collar criminals, Caffrey has proven to Burke that he will help him, and that he will not try to escape again. This begins an unconventional but successful partnership.
DVD releases.
The first season of "White Collar" was released in the US under the title "White Collar: The Complete First Season" as a widescreen four-disc Region 1 DVD box set on July 13, 2010. In addition to all the episodes that had been aired, DVD extras included Deleted Scenes, Gag Reel, Commentary, Exclusive Featurettes: "Pro and Con", "A Cool Cat in the Hat", and "Nothing But the Truth". The same set was released on July 26, 2010 in Region 2, and on August 18, 2010 in Region 4.
The season two four-disc Region 1 DVD box set was released on June 7, 2011. DVD extras consist of Deleted Scenes, Gag Reel, Episode Commentaries (for episodes 2x09 "Point Blank", 2x12 "Forging Bonds" and 2x16 "Under The Radar") and Exclusive Featurettes: ""White Collar" Roasts "Burn Notice": Rivalry in the Writers' Rooms", ""Burn Notice" Roasts "White Collar": Rivalry in the Writers' Rooms", "Slick Willie", and "So Here's The Deal: Anatomy of an Episode".
White Collar: The Complete Third Season four-disc Region 1 DVD box set was released on June 5, 2012. Region 1 DVD Features: Interrogation room, a trivia challenge with the cast, Jeff Eastin, @ddicted, Gag reel, Deleted scenes, Audio commentary on season finale, Dual Layer Widescreen - 1.78, Audio: English Dolby Digital 5.1, Subtitles - English SDH, French, Spanish
