James Eugene "Jim" Carrey (born January 17, 1962) is a Canadian American actor, comedian, and producer. Carrey has received four Golden Globe Award nominations, winning two. Known for his highly energetic slapstick performances, he has been described as one of the biggest movie stars in Hollywood.
Carrey first gained recognition in 1990 after landing a recurring role in the sketch comedy "In Living Color". His first leading roles in major productions came with ' (1994), "Dumb and Dumber" (1994), "The Mask" (1994), and ' (1995). In 1997, he gave a critically acclaimed performance in "Liar Liar", which earned him a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actor. He then starred in the critically acclaimed hits "The Truman Show" (1998) and "Man on the Moon" (1999), with each garnering him a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor.
In 2000, he gained further recognition for his portrayal of the The Grinch in "How the Grinch Stole Christmas". Three years later, Carrey starred in the major blockbuster film "Bruce Almighty" (2003). The following year he starred in "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" (2004), for which he received another Golden Globe nomination in addition to a BAFTA Award nomination. He then starred in popular productions "Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events" (2004), "Fun with Dick and Jane" (2005), "Yes Man" (2008), "A Christmas Carol" (2009), and "Mr. Popper's Penguins" (2011).
He is set to star in "The Incredible Burt Wonderstone" in 2013 as Steve Gray, also in talks to reprise his role of Lloyd Christmas in "Dumb and Dumber To" and in 2012, it has been announced that he will star in a sequel to "Bruce Almighty". It was reported that he would team up with Christopher Nolan to star in "Citizen Hughes: The Power, the Money and the Madness". He is set to star in "Loomis Fargo" as David Scott Ghantt.
Early life.
James Eugene Carrey was born in Newmarket, Ontario, Canada, the son of Kathleen (née Oram), a homemaker, and Percy Carrey (1927-1994), a musician and accountant. He has three older siblings, John, Patricia, and Rita. He was raised Roman Catholic. His mother was of French, Irish, and Scottish descent and his father was of French Canadian ancestry (the family's original surname was "Carré").
During an interview with James Lipton at The Actor's studio, Jim stated "My father was a musician who got a 'regular job' to support his children. When he lost his job that's when everything fell apart. We went from 'lower middle class' to 'poor'. We were living out of a van. I quit school at age 15 to begin working to help support my family as a janitor. I'd have a baseball bat on my janitor cart because I was so angry I just wanted to beat the heck out of something." After his family moved to Scarborough, Ontario, he attended Blessed Trinity Catholic School, in North York, for two years, enrolled at Agincourt Collegiate Institute for another year, then briefly attended Northview Heights Secondary School. Jim never finished high school because he worked full-time to help his family survive the severe economic hardship, and also helped care for his mother who battled a severe, chronic illness.
Carrey lived in Burlington, Ontario, for eight years and attended Aldershot High School, where he once opened for 1980s new wave band Spoons. In a "Hamilton Spectator" interview (February 2007), Carrey remarked, "If my career in show business hadn't panned out I would probably be working today in Hamilton, Ontario at the Dofasco steel mill." When looking across the Burlington Bay toward Hamilton, he could see the mills and thought, "Those were where the great jobs were." At this point, he already had experience working in a science testing facility in Richmond Hill, Ontario.
Career.
Early work.
While struggling to obtain work and making a name for himself, Carrey's father decided to help the young comedian put together a stage act, driving him to Toronto to debut at comedy club Yuk Yuk's. Unfortunately, Carrey's impersonations bombed and this gave him doubts about his capability as a professional entertainer. His family, at the time, were struggling financially meaning it was difficult for them to support Carrey's ambitions. Eventually, the family's financial problems were dealt with and they moved into a new home. With a now more domestic stability, Carrey worked up the nerve to return to the stage with a more polished act. In a short period of time, Carrey went from open mic nights to regular paid shows; a growing reputation building in the process. One reviewer in the "Toronto Star" raved that Carrey was "a genuine star coming to life". Carrey was soon noticed by comedian Rodney Dangerfield, who signed the young comedian to open Dangerfield's tour performances. Dangerfield eventually brought Carrey to Las Vegas, after which he decided to move to Hollywood. Carrey began performing at The Comedy Store and in 1982, appeared on the televised stand-up show "An Evening at the Improv". The following year, he debuted his act on "The Tonight Show".
Despite his increasing popularity as a stand-up comedian, Carrey turned his attention to the film and television industries, auditioning to be a cast member for the 1980–1981 season of NBC's "Saturday Night Live." Carrey was not selected for the position (although he did host the show in May 1996, and again in January 2011 ). He was, after a period of time, cast in several low-budget films: "Rubberface" (1981) playing a struggling young comic, and "Copper Mountain" (1983) playing a sex-starved teen, the latter including his impersonation of Sammy Davis Jr. Since the film had a less than one hour runtime consisting largely of musical performances by Rita Coolidge and Ronnie Hawkins, it was not considered a full-length feature film.
In 1984, Carrey was suddenly cast as the lead in the NBC sitcom "The Duck Factory", in which he played a quirky young artist alongside Jay Tarses. However, the show was unceremoniously cancelled during its first season. Despite the sudden cancellation, Carrey landed supporting roles in several low-budget films: "Once Bitten" (1985), "Peggy Sue Got Married" (1986), and "The Dead Pool" (1988). When Carrey returned to stand-up, he retired his old act vowing that he didn't want to be famous for imitating other people; "Some nights it was a melee, literally, where I'd be standing trying to defend myself for what I was doing. People would be screaming at me to do my old act, and getting actually violent and angry at me". While many thought he was "crazy" for retiring his old act, others were increasingly interested in what Carrey was attempting to do, Judd Apatow in particular. The pair struck up a friendship and soon began writing material together.
Carrey continued to land small roles in film and television productions, which led to a friendship with fellow comedian Damon Wayans, who co-starred with Carrey as an extraterrestrial in 1989's "Earth Girls Are Easy". Damon soon introduced Carrey to his brother Keenen, who at the time, was creating a sketch comedy show known as "In Living Color", for the new Fox network. Carrey eventually landed a recurring role in the show which first aired on April 15, 1990. By the third season, Carrey was one of the few remaining original cast members and was ready to move onto bigger things, after agreeing to take on his first lead role in a Hollywood blockbuster film.
Rise to fame.
Carrey did not experience true stardom until landing the lead role in the slapstick comedy "" (1994), which premiered only months before "In Living Color" ended. Despite agreeing to play the title character, Carrey would only take the role if he was allowed to rewrite the script, mostly to suit his over-the-top visions. The film, while dismissed by most critics, was an international hit, and transformed Carrey into a bankable box-office star overnight. In that same year, he landed two lead roles in "The Mask" and "Dumb and Dumber", respectively. The Mask garnered him his first Golden Globe Award for Best Actor nomination, with Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" praising him for his "joyful performance". Well received by critics, "Dumb and Dumber" was a commercial success, grossing over $270 million worldwide, and again boosting Carrey's fanbase.
In 1995, Carrey starred in the Joel Schumacher-directed superhero film "Batman Forever", in which Batman tries to stop Two-Face and the Riddler (played by Carrey) in their villainous scheme to drain information from all the brains in Gotham City. The feature received reasonable reviews upon release with most criticism aimed towards the movie's "blatant commercialism", as stated by Peter Travers. In that same year, Carrey reprised his role as Ace Ventura in "". Like the original film, it was well received by the public but heavily criticised by critics. However, it was a huge box-office success, earning $212 million worldwide in addition to breaking records, with a $40 million opening weekend. Carrey earned $20 million for his next film, "The Cable Guy" (1996). Directed by Ben Stiller, Carrey played a lonely, slightly menacing cable TV installer who infiltrates the life of one of his customers (played by Matthew Broderick). The film tested Carrey's boundaries of his tried and true "hapless, hyper, overconfident" characters that he is known for regularly playing. However, it did not fare well with critics, many reacting towards Carrey's change of tone to previous films. Despite the reviews, "The Cable Guy" grossed $102 million worldwide.
He soon bounced back in 1997 with the critically acclaimed comedy "Liar Liar", playing Fletcher Reede, an incredibly successful lawyer who has built his career on lying, regularly breaking promises that he makes to his son Max. Max soon makes a birthday wish that for just one day, his dad can't tell a lie. Carrey was praised for his performance, earning a second Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actor. Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" said, "Well into his tumultuous career, Mr. Carrey finally turns up in a straightforward comic vehicle, and the results are much wilder and funnier than this mundane material should have allowed."
Critical acclaim.
The following year he decided to take a pay cut to play the serious role of Truman Burbank in the satirical comedy-drama film "The Truman Show" (1998). The film was highly praised and brought Carrey further international acclaim, leading many to believe he would be nominated for an Oscar. However, he did pick up his first Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Drama. "The Truman Show" was a commercial success also, earning $264 million worldwide against a budget of $60 million. According to a Film4 critic, the film, "...allows Carrey to edge away from broad comedy." but nonetheless called it "A hilarious and breathtakingly conceived satire..." That same year, Carrey appeared as a fictionalized version of himself on the final episode of Garry Shandling's "The Larry Sanders Show", in which he deliberately ripped into Shandling's character. In 1999, Carrey had the lead role in "Man on the Moon." He portrayed comedian Andy Kaufman to critical acclaim, with many believing that Carrey would finally be nominated for Best Actor. He received his second Golden Globe Award for the second consecutive year. Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" commented on Carrey's performance stating, "A brilliant, almost terrifying impersonation."
In 2000, Carrey reteamed with the Farrelly Brothers, who had directed him in "Dumb and Dumber", in the comedy classic, "Me, Myself & Irene", a film that received mixed reviews but enjoyed box office success. Carrey played the role of state trooper Charlie Baileygates, who has multiple personalities and romances a woman portrayed by Renée Zellweger. That same year, Carrey starred in the second highest grossing Christmas film of all time, "How the Grinch Stole Christmas", playing the title character, for which he received praise and criticism. The film garnered him his third Golden Globe Award nomination in addition to countless other nominations and several wins.
For his next feature film, Carrey starred opposite Jennifer Aniston and Morgan Freeman in Tom Shadyac's international hit comedy "Bruce Almighty" (2003). Carrey played a TV newsman who unexpectedly receives God's omnipotent abilities when the deity decides to take a break. The film received mixed reviews upon release but despite this was a financial success, earning over $484 million worldwide, and going on to become the seventeenth highest-grossing live action comedy of all time. The film has since gained a cult following. In 2004, Carrey starred in "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind". The film received overwhelming acclaim upon release; Carrey was highly praised for his portrayal of Joel Barish, in addition to his co-star Kate Winslet, who received an Oscar nomination. According to CNN's reviewer Paul Clinton, Carrey's performance was "the best, most mature and sharply focused performance ever." He received his fourth Golden Globe Award nomination, and was also nominated for his first BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role.
Carrey's next appearance was in the 2004 black comedy drama film "Lemony Snicket's A Series of Unfortunate Events", which was based on the popular children's novels of the same name. The film received a positive reception, with Desson Thomson from "The Washington Post" commenting on Carrey's approach to the character of Count Olaf, stating "Olaf is a humorless villain in the book. He's not amusing like Carrey at all. To which I would counter: If you can't let Carrey be Carrey, put someone boring and less expensive in the role. In his various disguises he's rubbery, inventive and improvisationally inspired. I particularly liked his passing imitation of a dinosaur." That same year, Carrey was inducted into the Canadian Walk of Fame. In 2005, Carrey starred in a remake of "Fun with Dick and Jane", playing Dick, a husband who becomes a bank robber after he loses his job. The film was dismissed by most critics but did manage to become a box office hit.
Continued success.
In 2007, Carrey reunited with Joel Schumacher, director of "Batman Forever", for "The Number 23", a psychological thriller co-starring Virginia Madsen and Danny Huston. In the film, Carrey plays a man who becomes obsessed with the number 23, after finding a book about a man with the same obsession. The film was panned by critics and did not fare well at the box office. The following year Carrey provided his voice for Dr. Seuss' "Horton Hears a Who!" (2008). Carrey voiced the beloved elephant for the CGI-animated feature, which received overwhelmingly positive reviews and delivered family crowds en masse. The film was also a box office success raking in over $290 million worldwide. Later in the year, Carrey returned to live action comedy, starring opposite Zooey Deschanel and Bradley Cooper in "Yes Man" (2008). Carrey played down-and-out man, Carl Allen, who had gone nowhere in life, thanks to always saying no to everything, until he signs up for a self-help program that teaches him the power of saying yes. Despite reviews being mixed, Rene Rodriquez of "The Miami Herald" stated, ""Yes Man" is fine as far as Jim Carrey comedies go, but it's even better as a love story that just happens to make you laugh." The film had a decent performance at the box office, earning $225 million worldwide.
Since 2009, Carrey's work has included a leading role in Glenn Ficarra and John Requa's "I Love You Phillip Morris", premiering in January 2009 at the Sundance Film Festival before receiving a wide release in February 2010. Carrey portrayed Steven Jay Russell, a con artist, imposter and multiple prison escapee who falls in love with his fellow inmate, Phillip Morris (played by Ewan McGregor). The film received largely positive reviews with Damon Wise of "The Times" giving the film four stars out of five, stating, ""I Love You Phillip Morris"" is an extraordinary film that serves as a reminder of just how good Carrey can be when he's not tied into a generic Hollywood crowd-pleaser. His comic timing remains as exquisite as ever."
For the first time in his career, Carrey portrayed multiple characters in Disney's 3D animated take on the classic Charles Dickens tale, "A Christmas Carol" (2009), voicing Ebenezer Scrooge and the Ghosts of Christmas Past, Present, and Future. Directed by Robert Zemeckis, the film also starred Robin Wright Penn, Bob Hoskins, Colin Firth, Gary Oldman and Cary Elwes. The film received reasonable reviews and was a financial success. In 2011, Carrey landed the lead role in "Mr. Popper's Penguins", playing Thomas "Tom" Popper Jr. a realtor who becomes the caretaker of a family of penguins. The film received a mixed reception upon release. He is set to star alongside former co-star Steve Carell in the Don Scardino-directed comedy film "Burt Wonderstone" (2013). Carrey will play Steve Gray, a dangerous street magician who overshadows Burt Wonderstone (played by Carell), a formerly successful magician whos partnership with another magician ends; Gray must convince Burts old partner to return to the act. Carrey entered negotiations for the role in October 2011. Principal photography began on January 10, 2012 and concluded on March 13.
Peter Farrelly said in April 2012 that Carrey and Jeff Daniels would return for a "Dumb and Dumber" sequel, "Dumb and Dumber To", with the Farrelly brothers writing and directing and a planned September 2012 production start. In June, however, Carrey's representative said Carrey had left the project because the comedian felt New Line and Warner Bros. were unenthusiastic toward it. However, on October 1, 2012, Yahoo!'s "The Yo Show" carried the news item that the script is complete and that the original actors, Carrey and Daniels, will, in fact, be reprising their roles and that part of the plot will involve one of the characters having sired a child and needing to find the child in order to obtain a kidney.
Personal life.
Carrey has ADHD.
Relationships.
Carrey has been married twice. His first marriage was to former actress and Comedy Store waitress Melissa Womer, whom he married on March 28, 1987. The two divorced in 1995. A year later Carrey married his "Dumb and Dumber" co-star Lauren Holly, on September 23, 1996; the marriage lasted less than a year. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Carrey was involved in a series of relationships, including Laurie Holden, January Jones, and Anine Bing. In addition, Carrey had a much-publicized yet short-lived romance with his "Me, Myself and Irene" co-star Renée Zellweger, whom he dated, and at one point was engaged to from 1999 to 2000.
Carrey met model and actress Jenny McCarthy in 2005 and made their relationship public in June 2006. In April 2010, the two ended their near five-year relationship. Despite the split and media circulations, McCarthy stated in October 2010 that, "Jim and I are still good friends".
Family.
Carrey has one child, a daughter named Jane Erin Carrey (born September 6, 1987) from his first marriage. Carrey announced via his Twitter account on February 27, 2010, that his daughter had given birth to her first child, a boy.
Citizenship.
Carrey received U.S. citizenship in October 2004 and remains a dual citizen of both the United States and his native Canada.
Beliefs.
Carrey has been a critic of the scientific consensus that no evidence links the childhood MMR vaccination to the development of autism, and wrote an article questioning the merits of vaccination and vaccine research for the "Huffington Post". With former partner Jenny McCarthy, Carrey led a "Green Our Vaccines" march in Washington, D.C., to advocate for the removal of toxins from children's vaccines, out of a belief that children had received "too many vaccines, too soon, many of which are toxic".
