The Legend of Korra is an American animated television series that premiered on the Nickelodeon television network in 2012. It was created by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko as a sequel to their series "", which aired on Nickelodeon from 2005 to 2008. Several people involved with creating "Avatar", including designer Joaquim Dos Santos and composers Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn, returned to work on "The Legend of Korra".
Like its predecessor, the series is set in a fictional world where some people are able to "bend" – that is, manipulate – the elements of water, earth, fire, or air. Only one person, the "Avatar," can bend all four elements, and he or she is responsible for maintaining the balance in the world. The series follows Avatar Korra, a Southern Water Tribe girl and Aang's successor, as she travels to the metropolis of Republic City to learn airbending and face an anti-bender revolutionary group, the "Equalists."
The series, whose style is strongly influenced by Japanese animation, has been a critical and commercial success. It obtained the highest audience total for an animated series in the U.S. in 2012, and was praised by reviewers for its high production values and for addressing difficult sociopolitical issues such as social unrest and terrorism. It was initially conceived as a miniseries of 12 episodes, but it is now set to run for 52 episodes separated into four "books," each of which tells a separate story.
Series overview.
"The Legend of Korra" was initially conceived as a 12-episode miniseries. Nickelodeon later expanded it to a full 26-episode season, and in July 2012 again to two 26-episode seasons. While Nickelodeon divides the series in two seasons for administrative purposes, the creators conceive of it as consisting of four separate "books" composed of 12 to 14 episodes ("chapters"), with each book telling a stand-alone story. The series is intended to conclude with the fourth book.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Story.
Setting.
"The Legend of Korra" is set in the fictional world of "Avatar: The Last Airbender". The world is separated into four nations: the (Northern and Southern) Water Tribes, the Air Nomads, the Earth Kingdom and the Fire Nation. The focus of the series is "bending," the ability of some humans (and animals) to telekinetically manipulate the element associated with their nation (water, earth, fire or air). Bending is carried out using spiritual and physical exercises, which are portrayed in the series as similar to Chinese and other Asian martial arts.
Only one person, the "Avatar," can bend all four elements. Cyclically reincarnating among the world's four nations, the Avatar is responsible for maintaining balance in the world. Like its predecessor, "The Legend of Korra" focuses on the current incarnation of the Avatar: Korra, a 17-year-old girl from the Southern Water Tribe. At the start of the series, she has mastered waterbending, earthbending, and firebending, but must complete her training by learning airbending from Tenzin, the youngest child of Aang and from the original series.
The series is mostly set in Republic City, the capital of the United Republic of Nations, a state that emerged after the end of the war that occurred in "Avatar: The Last Airbender". The metropolis, described as "what if Manhattan had happened in Asia" by the series' creators, has become a melting pot for people of all nations. Its residents are united by their passion for "pro-bending," a spectator sport in which two teams composed of one earthbender, waterbender, and firebender try to throw each other out of a ring using bending.
Plot.
The series opens with the "Book of Air", beginning with a montage of Korra's introduction and mastery of all elements but air and the spiritual aspects of her Avatar nature. Though she was to learn from her previous life's son Tenzin, he is forced to remain in Republic City to due with problems surviving there. As a result, Korra sneaks out and runs away to Republic City so that Tenzin can train her there. Once there, Korra's dispensing of vigilante justice on local triads gets her arrested by
Republic City's police chief Lin Beifong, the daughter of her group's founder Toph. Despite his frustration, Tenzin resolves to train Korra as she eventually meets the brothers Mako and Bolin and joins their pro-bending team, the "Fire Ferrets." They are successful in the league, but romantic tensions among them and Asami Sato, Mako's girlfriend, put a strain on their relationship. Ultimately, Korra finds herself dealing with a mysterious masked man named Amon who leads the Equalists, an underground activist movement consisting of non-benders bent on "equality": Namely Amon's power to remove a person's bending ability.
Another danger is Councilman Tarrlok, an ambitious politician who uses aggressive tactics for bringing the Equalists to justice, cajoling Korra to join his anti-Equalist "task force" before she eventually quits. With Asami's father aiding them, the Equalists begin using terrorist tactics that climax in Amon's attack on the pro-bending arena and Tarrlok indiscriminately repressing non-benders as he attempts to blackmail Korra into working for him by arresting her friends. But when Korra battles him, Tarrlok is revealed to be a bloodbender and kidnaps Korra to frame the Equalists. By the time Tenzin, Lin, and Korra's friends discover Tarrlok's secret, Korra learns from her visions that Tarrlok is actually the son of a bloodbender named Yakone, who could use his bending without a full moon prior to Aang stripping of him of his power 42 years ago. Though Tarrlok attempts to go into hiding, he is attacked by Amon who removed Tarrlok's bending with Korra escaping.
Soon after, Amon stages his military coup with the United Forces's naval reinforcements, led by Zuko's grandson Iroh, defeated by Equalist sea mines and biplanes. Attempting to find Amon, Korra finds Tarrlock who reveals Amon to be his older brother Noatak and that they have taught to bloodbend by Yakone to avenge him. However, Amon left his family and took a different path that gave him the means to take a person's bending through bloodbending. Though she and Mako managed to expose Amon at one of his rallies, Korra lost her ability over all but airbending as she unlocked it at the last second to save Mako. With his scheme ruined, Amon flees with Tarrlok to begin anew before his younger brother detonates their boat on the open sea to end their father's revenge. Though despondent, Korra finally manages to establish spiritual contact with her predecessor, Aang, who teaches her energybending to restores herself and the rest of Amon's victims.
Cast and characters.
Janet Varney was cast as Korra, the series' 17-year-old "headstrong and rebellious" protagonist, and Aang's successor as the Avatar. Her character was inspired by Bryan Konietzko's "pretty tough" sister, and by female MMA fighters, notably Gina Carano. The series focuses on Korra and her friends Mako, Bolin and Asami. Mako was named after Mako Iwamatsu, the voice actor for Iroh in the original series, who died during the production of "Avatar: The Last Airbender". Mako is voiced by David Faustino and is described as "dark and brooding," having grown up on the streets. His brother, Bolin, who is voiced by P. J. Byrne, has an opposite personality and is described as lighthearted, humorous, and "always having a lady on his arm." Asami Sato, the only main character who is a non-bender, is voiced by Seychelle Gabriel. She is the only daughter of the wealthy industrialist Hiroshi Sato. The other main characters are Korra's airbending teacher Tenzin, voiced by J. K. Simmons, and Republic City police chief Lin Beifong, voiced by Mindy Sterling. Additionally, Dee Bradley Baker, who voiced a number of animals in the original series, returned in "The Legend of Korra" to voice Naga and Pabu, Korra's and Bolin's animal friends. Pabu was inspired by Futa, a famous standing Japanese red panda.
Among the other recurring characters, the first to be introduced is Tenzin's wife Pema (Maria Bamford) and their children Jinora (Kiernan Shipka), Ikki (Darcy Rose Byrnes), Meelo (Logan Wells), and Rohan. Jinora and Ikki are both girls and airbenders. Jinora is calmer and an avid reader and Ikki is described as "fun, crazy, and a fast talker." Meelo (also an airbender) and Rohan (born during the finale of "Book One: Air") are Pema's sons. Korra and her friends are supported by General Iroh, a firebender and General of the "United Forces." He is voiced by Dante Basco, the voice actor of Zuko in the original series, and is described as "a swashbuckling hero-type guy." He is named after Iroh, Zuko's uncle in the original series.
"Book One: Air" features two main antagonists: Amon, the mysterious masked leader of the "Equalist" movement; and Tarrlok, a suave politician. Both are waterbenders, bloodbenders, and brothers who were raised in the Northern Water Tribe. Their father is Yakone, a criminal voiced by Clancy Brown who is seen in the series through Korra's visions of Republic City 42 years before the series' start. Amon, whose real name is Noatak, is voiced by Steve Blum. He is shown in the series to have the power to remove an individual's bending. Tarrlok, who is also voiced by Dee Bradley Baker, is the Northern Water Tribe's representative on Republic City's governing council. He is an ambitious and charismatic politician who resorts to increasingly repressive methods to counter Amon and the Equalist movement. Other recurring antagonists include the "Lieutenant" (Lance Henriksen), Amon's second-in-command, and Hiroshi Sato (Daniel Dae Kim), Asami's father who joins the Equalists because firebenders killed his wife. Sato is the self-made owner of Future Industries, a company that makes the series' version of the Model-T automobile: the "Satomobile." The character was inspired by Theodore Roosevelt and by the Japanese industrialists Keita Goto and Iwasaki Yatarō.
Production.
Development.
"The Legend of Korra" is co-created and produced by Michael Dante DiMartino and Bryan Konietzko at Nickelodeon Animation Studios in Burbank, California. Animation work is mostly done by the South Korean animation studio Studio Mir. Producing the series is a lengthy process, taking about 10 to 12 months per episode.
Production of the series was announced at the annual Comic-Con in San Diego on July 22, 2010. It was originally due for release in October 2011. Tentatively titled "Avatar: Legend of Korra" at the time, it was intended to be a twelve-episode mini series set in the same fictional universe as the original show, but seventy years later. In 2011, the title was changed to "The Last Airbender: Legend of Korra", and again in March 2012 to "The Legend of Korra". The premiere was eventually delayed to April 14, 2012.
The creators wrote all the episodes of the first book themselves, omitting "filler episodes" to allow for a more concise story. Once the series was expanded from its original 12-episode schedule to 26 (and eventually 52), more writers were brought in so that the creators could focus on design work. Joaquim Dos Santos and Ryu Ki-Hyun, who worked on the animation and design of the original series, also became involved with creating "The Legend of Korra", as is storyboarder Ian Graham. Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn, who composed the soundtrack for the original series as "The Track Team," also returned to score "The Legend of Korra".
Style.
"The Legend of Korra" is produced mainly as traditional animation, with most frames drawn on paper in Korea by the animators at Studio Mir and scanned for digital processing. Each episode comprises about 15,000 drawings. The series makes occasional use of computer-generated imagery for complex scenes, most noticeably in the animations of the pro-bending arena or the Satomobile factory.
While "The Legend of Korra" is produced in the U.S. and therefore not a work of Japanese animation ("anime") in the strict sense, "The Escapist" magazine argued that the series is so strongly influenced by anime that it would otherwise easily be classified as such: Its protagonists (a superpowered heroine, her group of talented, supporting friends, a near-impervious villain who wants to reshape the world), its themes (family, friendship, fear, and death) and the quality of its voice acting as well as the style of its visuals are very similar to those of leading anime series such as "", "Bleach" or "Trigun". A notable difference to such series is the absence of lengthy opening and ending sequences set to J-pop songs: to save broadcast time; "The Legend of Korra"s openings and endings last only a few seconds. The series mostly abstains from using the visual tropes characteristic of anime, but does rarely use exaggerated facial expressions to highlight emotions for comic effect.
Music.
Like "Avatar", "The Legend of Korra" is scored by "The Track Team", the partnership of composers Jeremy Zuckerman and Benjamin Wynn. As with "Avatar", no soundtrack album has been published or announced to date.
Bryan Konietzko and Mike DiMartino's concept for the score was to blend traditional Chinese music with early jazz. On that basis, Zuckerman and Wynn composed a score combining elements of Dixieland, traditional Chinese music and Western orchestration, performed mainly by a string sextet and various Chinese solo instruments.
Media.
Broadcast.
The first twelve episodes ("Book 1: Air") of the first season aired in the U.S. on Nickelodeon between April 14, 2012 and June 23, 2012, and are available in the U.S. on the channel's website and through the Hulu Plus service. They are to be broadcast in other countries on the local Nickelodeon channels beginning in August 2012.
In June 2012, Nickelodeon began producing the second part of the first season ("Book 2: Spirits"), which is expected to air sometime in 2013.
Home video.
"Book 1: Air" of "The Legend of Korra" was reported to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on 21 May 2013, but that date has since been removed from online retailers' websites. The creators and voice actors have recorded commentary for a DVD release.
Reception.
Ratings.
"Book One: Air" drew an average of 4.3 million viewers per episode. This was the highest audience total for an animated series in the U.S. in 2012.
Reviews.
David Hinckley of the "New York Daily News" wrote that the "visually striking" series is "full of little tricks and nuances that only true fans will notice and savor, but nothing prevents civilians from enjoying it as well." Brian Lowry of "Variety" felt that the series "represents a bit more ambitious storytelling for older kids, and perhaps a few adults with the geek gene." Prior to the first book's finale, Scott Thill of "Wired" hailed "The Legend of Korra" as "the smartest cartoon on TV," able to address adults' spiritual and sociopolitical concerns while presenting an "alternately riveting and hilarious ride packed with fantasy naturalism, steampunk grandeur, kinetic conflicts, sci-fi weaponry and self-aware comedy." Thill proposed that the Equalists' cause reflected the recent issues in the Occupy movement, and DiMartino responded that though the series was written before Occupy Wall Street began, he agreed that the show similarly depicted "a large group of people who felt powerless up against a relatively small group of people in power." Alyssa Rosenberg praised the show for examining issues of class in an urban setting, and a guest post in her column later argued that the struggle between Korra and Amon's Equalists reflected some of the ideas of John Rawls' "luck egalitarianism," praising the show for tackling moral issues of inequality and redistribution.
Elements of the first book that received particular praise were the exceptional quality of the animation, the background paintings and the martial-arts action scenes, as well as the series' innovative and engrossing visual design and style. The writers were credited for finding a believable balance between magic and technology and for their mature and nuanced portrayal of romantic relationships and conflicts. Critics also praised the writers' willingness and ability to tackle difficult themes such as social unrest, terrorism, Tarrlok's murder–suicide of Amon, as well as the insinuation of Korra contemplating suicide during the season finale.
While "Book One: Air" was generally well received, some aspects of the writing were criticized by reviewers. In "Kotaku", Kirk Hamilton wrote that he felt that the series failed to tackle its central conflicts in a meaningful way, commenting also on the mix of comedy and drama, the many character arcs in a shorter series than "Avatar", and the neat ending. Raz Greenberg of "Strange Horizons" commented that Korra seemed as though she had things too easy in life in comparison to Aang, and also criticized the show's rapid pacing. Max Nicholson of "IGN" praised the series' writing, animation, humor, setting, and characters, and wrote that elements characterized as a "deus ex machina" had been foreshadowed throughout. But in his opinion, the love triangle arc between Mako, Asami, and Korra fell flat and the pro-bending arc felt superfluous, although it led up to the conflict with Amon. He also considered that Mako, although a major character, felt underwritten. Lauren Davis of "io9", while approving of the character arcs and the setting, was also disappointed about the series's pacing.
Awards.
"The Legend of Korra" received two nominations for the 2012 Annie Awards. Bryan Konietzko, Joaquim Dos Santos, Ryu Ki-Hyun, Kim Il Kwang and Kim Jin Sun were nominated in the category of Best Character Design in an Animated Television Production, and the first two episodes were nominated in the category of Best Animated Television Production for Children. The series was also nominated for the "Outstanding Children's Program" award from among the 2012 NAACP Image Awards, which "celebrates the accomplishments of people of color". The series did not win either award.
IGN editors and readers awarded the series the "IGN People's Choice Award" and the "Best TV Animated Series" award in 2012. The series also took second place (after "") in a TV.com readers' poll for the "Best Animated Series" of 2012.
Related works.
Art book.
As with "Avatar", a hardcover art book, to be published by Dark Horse in summer 2013, is to detail the creation of the series's first 12 episodes. It is to be titled "The Legend of Korra: The Art of the Animated Series (Book One: Air)", ISBN 978-1616551681.
Adaptations.
Film.
In August 2012, "Variety" reported that Paramount Animation, a sister company of Nickelodeon, was starting development of several animated movies, with budgets of around US$100 million. According to "Variety", a possible candidate for one of the films is "The Legend of Korra". Series creator Bryan Konietzko later wrote on his blog that no such movie was in development.
