Jacoba Francisca Maria "Cobie" Smulders (born April 3, 1982) is a Canadian actress and former model, known for her role as Robin Scherbatsky on the television series "How I Met Your Mother" and Maria Hill in "The Avengers.
Early life.
Smulders was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, to a Dutch father and an English mother. She was named after her great-aunt, Jacoba, from whom she gained the nickname "Cobie."
Smulders worked in modeling, which she later said she "kind of hated," adding that the experience made her hesitant about pursuing acting as a career: "You know you go into these rooms, and I've had the experience of people judging you physically for so long and I was over that. But then it was like, 'Oh no, I have to actually perform. I have to do well, and I have to have a voice, and I have to have thoughts now.'"
Career.
Smulders' first role was as a guest in the Showtime science-fiction series "Jeremiah", and she has appeared in several television series since, including a recurring part in "The L Word". On the New York stage, she has performed in "Love, Loss, and What I Wore" from at least June 10 to June 27, 2010. Her first permanent series role was in the short-lived ABC series ', and her second was television reporter Robin Scherbatsky on the CBS sitcom "How I Met Your Mother". Joss Whedon has suggested that he considered her for the role of Wonder Woman in his draft of the (cancelled) eponymous film. Smulders played Maria Hill in Whedon's 2012 film "The Avengers" and will reprise the role in the Russo brothers' 2014 film '.
Personal life.
Smulders and American actor Taran Killam became engaged in January 2009. They married on September 8, 2012 in Solvang, California. The couple has a daughter, Shaelyn Cado Killam, born in 2009.
Smulders resides in Los Angeles, California.
Music.
In several episodes of "How I Met Your Mother" Smulders plays Canadian pop star Robin Sparkles a.k.a. Robin Daggers, under which she recorded four songs released in digital media. The first single is also part of the wii game "Just Dance 3".
