"Family Guy" is an American animated television sitcom created by Seth MacFarlane for the Fox Broadcasting Company. Since its debut on January 31, 1999, the show has broadcast 201 episodes and began airing its eleventh season on September 30, 2012. The series centers on the dysfunctional Griffin family, which consists of father Peter (MacFarlane), mother Lois (Alex Borstein), daughter Meg (Mila Kunis; Lacey Chabert, 1999; Rachael MacFarlane, pilot), son Chris (Seth Green), baby Stewie (MacFarlane) and Brian (MacFarlane), the family dog. The show is set in the fictional town of Quahog, Rhode Island, and lampoons American culture, often in the form of cutaway gags, and tangential vignettes.
The concept of "Family Guy" was conceived by MacFarlane in 1995 while studying animation at the Rhode Island School of Design. He created two shorts entitled "The Life of Larry" and "Larry & Steve", both of which played a key role in Fox executives' decision to pick up the series in 1998. After two seasons, Fox decided to cancel the show. Despite the cancellation, a third season was produced, after which the series was officially canceled at the end of 2003. Reruns on Cartoon Network's block Adult Swim drove up interest, and a letter-writing campaign, along with impressive DVD sales, encouraged Fox to bring the show back permanently. "Family Guy" returned to production in 2005, and is contracted to continue producing episodes until at least 2013. In May 2012, "Family Guy" was renewed for an 11th season in 2012/13.
"Family Guy" and its cast have been nominated for thirteen Emmy Awards, with four wins. MacFarlane won the Outstanding Voice-Over Performance award for his performance as Stewie, Murphy and MacFarlane won the Outstanding Music and Lyrics award for the song "You Got a Lot to See" from the episode "Brian Wallows and Peter's Swallows", Steven Fonti won the Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation award for his storyboard work in the episode "No Chris Left Behind", and Greg Colton won the Outstanding Individual Achievement in Animation award for his storyboard work in the episode "Road to the Multiverse". The show was nominated for eleven Annies, and won three times, twice in 2006 and once in 2008. In 2009, it was nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Comedy Series, becoming the first animated program to be nominated in this category since "The Flintstones" in 1961.
Series overview.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
