Liam John Neeson, (born 7 June 1952) is an Irish film actor with both Irish and American citizenship. Neeson is known best for his roles in "Schindler's List", "", "Michael Collins", "Taken", "Kinsey", and "Batman Begins". He has been nominated for an Oscar, a BAFTA and three Golden Globe Awards.
Educated at St Patrick's College (now St Patrick's, Dundonald), Ballymena Technical College and Queen's University Belfast, he moved to Dublin after university, joining the Abbey Theatre. After a time in London, he moved to the US, where the wide acclaim for his performance in "Schindler's List" led to more high-profile work. He is widowed and lives in New York with his two sons.
Early life.
Neeson was born in Ballymena, County Antrim, Northern Ireland, the son of Katherine "Kitty" (née Brown), a cook, and Bernard "Barney" Neeson, a caretaker at the Ballymena Boys All Saints Primary School. He was raised Roman Catholic and was called Liam after the local priest. The third of four siblings, he has three sisters, Elizabeth, Bernadette, and Rosaline. At age nine, Neeson began boxing lessons at the All Saints Youth Club, and later became Ulster amateur senior boxing champion. At age eleven, Neeson first stepped on stage. His English teacher gave him the lead role in a school play, which he accepted because the girl he was attracted to would be starring. From then on, he kept acting in school productions for the following years.
His interest in acting and decision to become an actor was also influenced by minister Ian Paisley, whose church Neeson would sneak into. Neeson has said of Paisley that "He had a magnificent presence and it was incredible to watch this six foot-plus man just Bible-thumping away... It was acting but it was also great acting and stirring too."
Neeson was enrolled in 1971 as a physics and computer science student at Queen's University Belfast in Belfast, Northern Ireland, before leaving to work for the Guinness Brewery.
Also at Queens, he discovered a talent for football and was spotted by Seán Thomas at Bohemian F.C.. There was a club trial in Dublin and played one game as a substitute against Shamrock Rovers but was not offered a contract.
Career.
1978–1999.
After leaving university, Neeson returned to Ballymena where he worked in a variety of casual jobs, from a fork-lift operator at Guinness to a truck driver. He also attended teacher training college in Newcastle for two years before again returning to his hometown. In 1976, Neeson joined the Lyric Players' Theatre in Belfast where he performed for two years. He got his first film experience in 1977, playing Jesus Christ and Evangelist in the religious film, "Pilgrim's Progress" directed by Ken Anderson. Neeson moved to Dublin in 1978 after he was offered a part in Ron Hutchinson's "Says I, Says He", a drama about The Troubles, at the Project Arts Centre. He acted in several other Project productions and joined the Abbey Theatre (the National Theatre of Ireland).
In 1980, filmmaker John Boorman saw him on stage as Lennie Small in "Of Mice and Men" and offered him the part of Sir Gawain in the Arthurian film, "Excalibur". After "Excalibur", Neeson moved to London, where he continued working on stage, in small budget films and in television. He lived with the actress Helen Mirren at this time, whom he met working on "Excalibur". Between 1982 and 1987, Neeson starred in five films; most notably alongside Mel Gibson and Anthony Hopkins in 1984's "The Bounty" and Robert De Niro and Jeremy Irons in 1986's "The Mission". He also guest-starred in the third season of the television series "Miami Vice" in 1986.
In 1987, Neeson made a conscious decision to move to Hollywood in order to star in high-profile roles. That year, he starred alongside Cher and Dennis Quaid in "Suspect" in a role that brought him critical acclaim. In 1990 he followed this with a starring role in "Darkman". Although the film was successful, Neeson's subsequent years would not bring him the same recognition. In 1993, he joined "Ellis Island" co-star and future wife Natasha Richardson in the Broadway play "Anna Christie". They also worked together in "Nell", released the following year. He recited the Van Morrison song "Coney Island" on the 1994 Van Morrison tribute album, "". A single was also released with Neeson's version.
"Schindler's List" and afterward.
Director Steven Spielberg offered him the role of Oskar Schindler in the film about the Holocaust, "Schindler's List" after seeing him in "Anna Christie" on Broadway. Even with Kevin Costner, Mel Gibson, and Warren Beatty all expressing interest in portraying Schindler, (the latter audtioning),Neeson was cast in December 1992 after formally auditioning for the role. Neeson read the Keneally book and concluded that his character "enjoyed fookin' with the Nazis. In Keneally's book it says he was regarded as a kind of a buffoon by them... if the Nazis were New Yorkers, he was from Arkansas. They don't quite take him seriously, and he used that to full effect."
His critically acclaimed performance earned him a nomination for a Best Actor Oscar, and helped the film earn Best Picture. However, the best actor award went to Tom Hanks for his performance in "Philadelphia". Neeson also garnered BAFTA and Golden Globes nominations for his work as Oskar Schindler. Soon after these accolades, he starred in other period pieces followed: "Rob Roy" (1995) and "Michael Collins" (1996), the latter earning him a win for Best Starring Role at the Venice Film Festival and another Golden Globe nomination. He went on to star as Jean Valjean in the 1998 adaptation of Victor Hugo's "Les Misérables" and in "The Haunting" (1999) as Dr. David Marrow.
"Star Wars".
In 1999, Neeson starred as Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn, in director George Lucas' '. As the first "Star Wars" film to be released in over sixteen years, it was surrounded by a large amount of media anticipation. Neeson's connection to the "Star Wars" films started in the Crown Bar, Belfast. Neeson stated to Ricki Lake, "I probably wouldn't have taken the role if it wasn't for the advice of Peter King in the Crown during a Lyric reunion." "The Phantom Menace" was an enormous box-office success and remains the most financially successful "Star Wars" film unadjusted for inflation. Qui-Gon's voice, provided by Neeson, would later be heard during a brief scene in ' (2002). Qui-Gon was supposed to make an appearance in "" (2005) as a Force Ghost, and Neeson had hinted at involvement. However, he was ultimately unable to appear due to a motorcycle injury, and his character is only mentioned in the film.
In 2011, he reprised the role of Qui-Gon once again, by lending his voice for the character in two episodes of the animated television series "".
2001–present.
Neeson narrated the 2001 documentaries "Journey Into Amazing Caves", a short about two women scientists who travel around the world to search for material for potential cures, and "The Endurance: Shackleton's Antarctic Adventure". The latter won awards at a number of film festivals including Best Documentary from both the Chicago Film Critics Association and the National Board of Review. After being nominated for a Tony Award for his role opposite Laura Linney in "The Crucible", Neeson teamed up with Harrison Ford in Kathryn Bigelow's 2002 submarine thriller "" as Captain Mikhail Polenin. He appeared in Martin Scorsese's "Gangs of New York" with Leonardo DiCaprio, Brendan Gleeson, Cameron Diaz and Daniel Day-Lewis, and played a recently widowed writer in Richard Curtis' ensemble comedy "Love Actually" (2003). His role as Alfred Kinsey in "Kinsey" again put the actor up for nomination for a Golden Globe Award but he lost to Leonardo DiCaprio for "The Aviator".
In 2004, Neeson hosted an episode of the NBC sketch show "Saturday Night Live". He starred as a redneck trucker, Marlon Weaver, in an "Appalachian Emergency Room" sketch and a hippie in a one-off sketch about two (the other played by Amy Poehler) who attempt to borrow a police dog in order to find their lost stash of marijuana. Despite vowing not to play any Irish , Neeson did play a stereotypically Irish man named Lorcan McArdle in the home makeover show parody "You Call This A House, Do Ya?" In 2005, Neeson played Godfrey of Ibelin in Ridley Scott's epic adventure "Kingdom of Heaven", Ra's al Ghul, one of the main villains in "Batman Begins", and as Father Bernard in Neil Jordan's adaptation of Patrick McCabe's novel, "Breakfast on Pluto".
In 2005, he voiced the role of a kindly priest on "The Simpsons", who (briefly) converts Bart and Homer to Catholicism. That same year, he gave his voice to the lion Aslan in the blockbuster fantasy film "". In 2007, he starred in the American Civil War epic "Seraphim Falls".
Neeson's voice is featured in the video game "Fallout 3" as the main character's father, James. The executive producer of the game, Todd Howard, said "This role was written with Liam in mind, and provides the dramatic tone for the entire game". "Fallout 3", the third game in the Fallout series, was extremely well received by critics and shipped 4.7 million copies by the end of 2008, the year it was released.
In the director's commentary of the 2007 "Transformers" DVD, Michael Bay said that he had told the animators to seek inspiration from Neeson in creating Optimus Prime's body language. Neeson appeared as Alistair Little in the BBC Northern Ireland/Big Fish Films television drama "Five Minutes of Heaven", which tells the true story of a young Protestant man convicted of murdering a Catholic boy during The Troubles.
He starred in the action film "Taken" in 2008, a French produced film also starring Famke Janssen and Maggie Grace. Based on a script by Luc Besson and Robert Mark Kamen and directed by Pierre Morel the film stars Neeson playing a retired Central Intelligence Agency operative from their elite Special Activities Division who sets about tracking down his teenage daughter after she is kidnapped for sexual slavery while travelling in Europe. "Taken" was a huge worldwide box office hit, grossing $223.9 million worldwide, making almost $200 million more than its production budget. "Taken" brought him back into the center of the public eye and resulted in his being cast in many more big-budget Hollywood movies. That year he also narrated the documentary "Black Holes: The Other Side of Infinity" and again lent his voice to Aslan in "" (2008).
Neeson has wrapped filming the psychological thriller "After.Life" with Christina Ricci and Justin Long. He also provided a voice for Hayao Miyazaki's anime film "Ponyo on the Cliff by the Sea", which received an August 2009 release.
In 2010, Neeson played Zeus in the remake of the 1981 film, "Clash of the Titans". The film went on becoming a huge box office hit, grossing $475 million worldwide.
Neeson also starred in Atom Egoyan's erotic thriller "Chloe", theatrically released by Sony Pictures Classics on 26 March 2010. "Chloe" had enjoyed commercial success and became the Canadian director's biggest money maker ever. Later the same year, he played John "Hannibal" Smith in the spin-off movie from the TV series "The A-Team".
In 2010, Neeson voiced the character Aslan again in the sequel "". In late 2010, Neeson stated, "Aslan symbolises a Christlike figure, but he also symbolises for me Mohammed, Buddha and all the great spiritual leaders and prophets over the centuries"; this disappointed many fans of the series, who felt that he was "destroying the author's legacy to be politically correct".
In 2011, Neeson starred in "Unknown", a German-British-American co-production of a French book, it was filmed in Berlin in early 2010. It has been compared to "Taken", which was set in Paris. Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, the film enjoyed box office success in the United States. It was largely funded by Dark Castle entertainment with smaller amounts coming from the Berlin film agency.
He was set to reunite with director Steven Spielberg and star as Abraham Lincoln in the film based on the book "" by Doris Kearns Goodwin. In preparation for the role, Neeson visited Washington, D.C., Springfield, Illinois where Lincoln lived prior to being elected, and read Lincoln's personal letters. Neeson eventually declined the role, claiming he was "past his sell date" and had grown too old to play Lincoln. He was later replaced in the role by Daniel Day-Lewis.
Director Lee Daniels has confirmed that Neeson will play former U.S. president Lyndon B. Johnson in Daniels' developing film "Selma", which is about Martin Luther King, Jr., Johnson, and the civil rights marches.
Neeson also starred as Ben Ryan in the drama "Before and After" alongside Meryl Streep. This film was about how a family dealt with the aftereffects of a murder their son was accused of committing. It was announced in July 2010 that Neeson would guest-star on the new Showtime series "The Big C". In 2011, he played himself, in BBC2's series "Life's Too Short", starring Warwick Davis. Neeson reprised his role as Ra's Al Ghul for the film: "The Dark Knight Rises". He narrated the first trailer for the film.
In late 2011, Liam Neeson was cast to play the lead character of the journalist, in a new album recording, and arena production, of "Jeff Wayne's War Of The Worlds". He replaced Richard Burton, who, through CGI animation, had post-humously appeared in the arena production. Neeson would also not physically appear on the stage, instead he plays the role through the use of 3D holography.
Personal life.
Neeson was married to actress Natasha Richardson from 3 July 1994, until her death on 18 March 2009, when she suffered a severe head injury in a skiing accident at the Mont Tremblant Resort, in Quebec. Richardson and Neeson had two sons: Michael and Daniel. Neeson lives in Millbrook, New York. In August 2004 Neeson and his wife purchased an additional 16 acres next to their estate.
A heavy smoker earlier in his career, Neeson has since quit smoking. When he took the role of Hannibal for the 2010 film adaptation of "The A-Team", Neeson had reservations about smoking cigars (which is a signature trait of the character) in the film due to being an ex-smoker, but agreed to keep that personality trait of Hannibal intact for the film.
In August 2009, Neeson stated on ABC's "Good Morning America" that he had been naturalised as a United States citizen.
Neeson is a fan of Liverpool Football Club
In March 2011, Neeson was appointed a Goodwill Ambassador for "UNICEF".
Honours and awards.
Neeson was offered the 'Freedom of the Town of Ballymena' by Ballymena Borough Council, but because of objections made by members of the Democratic Unionist Party regarding his comments that he had felt like a 'second-class citizen' growing up as a Catholic in the town, he declined the award, citing tensions. Following the controversy, Neeson wrote a letter to the council, stating; "I will always remain very proud of my upbringing in, and association with, the town and my country of birth, which I will continue to promote at every opportunity. Indeed I regard the enduring support over the years from all sections of the community in Ballymena as being more than sufficient recognition for any success which I may have achieved as an actor." On 28 January 2013, Neeson received the Freedom of the Borough from Ballymena Borough Council at a ceremony in the town. Neeson continues to practice the Catholic faith and has raised his children as Catholics. He has also expressed admiration for The "Spiritual Exercises" of Saint Ignatius of Loyola.
He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in her 1999 New Year Honours. The American Ireland Fund honoured Neeson with their Performing Arts Award for the great distinction he has brought to Ireland at their 2008 Dinner Gala in New York. In 2009, at a ceremony in New York, Neeson was awarded an honorary doctorate by Queen's University, Belfast.
