Demetria Devonne "Demi" Lovato (born August 20, 1992) is an American singer-songwriter, musician, actress, and anti-bullying spokesperson. She is also involved in philanthropic activities through charity work and various social and environmental causes. Lovato's earliest roles included Angela on "Barney & Friends" before rising to prominence as a starring cast member in the 2008 film "Camp Rock". In 2009, Lovato received her own television sitcom, "Sonny with a Chance", and was a starring cast member in the film "Princess Protection Program".
Lovato's debut studio album, "Don't Forget", was released on September 23, 2008. It debuted at number two on the "Billboard" 200 selling 89,000 copies in the first week. It has since shipped over 500,000 copies, earning a Gold certification in the United States. Her second album, "Here We Go Again", was released on July 21, 2009. The album debuted at number one on the "Billboard" 200, selling 108,000 copies in the first week. Lovato's third studio album, "Unbroken", was released on September 20, 2011 and debuted at number four on the "Billboard" 200. She is working on her fourth studio album.
In 2012, Lovato was hired as a judge on the second season of the American version of "The X Factor".
Early life.
Lovato was born in Albuquerque, New Mexico, on August 20, 1992, and raised in Dallas, Texas. She is the daughter of Dianna Hart de la Garza and Patrick Lovato. Her ancestry includes Irish, Italian and Mexican roots. She has an older sister, Dallas Lovato, and a younger half-sister, Madison de la Garza, from her mother's re-marriage. Her mother was a Dallas Cowboys Cheerleader and country music recording artist. Lovato began playing piano at the age of seven and guitar at the age of ten. She also began taking dancing classes and acting classes around that age.
In an interview with Ellen DeGeneres, Lovato revealed going through painful experiences with bullying in the seventh grade. According to Lovato, the bullying was so bad that one day, in a fit of frustration and distress, she requested her mom give her a home-schooled education. Lovato earned a high school diploma through homeschooling in April 2009. She later became a spokesperson for anti-bullying organization PACER and appeared on "America's Next Top Model" and CNN to speak out against bullying. Lovato stated in an interview with "20/20" in 2011 that she had had a "really unhealthy relationship with food" since age 8 due to bullying experienced as a child, and self-mutilated her wrists to cope with her emotions and depression since age 11. In an interview with "Fabulous Magazine UK", she stated, "They called me a whore and told me I was fat and ugly. I shouldn't have listened, but I took it to heart and it hurt. I thought maybe I didn't have friends because I was too fat," she remembers. So she starved herself, and anything she did eat, she threw up again. "I'd make myself sick up to six times a day," she says. "My mom was worried, but because I was going through puberty I was having growth spurts so she assumed that was why I was thinner."
Acting career.
2002–09: "Camp Rock" and "Sonny With a Chance".
Lovato began her acting career at the age of seven on the children's television series "Barney & Friends" as Angela, appearing in seasons seven and eight alongside long time friend Selena Gomez. In 2006, Lovato guest starred on "Prison Break" as Danielle Curtin in the episode "First Down." She also appeared in the second season of the television sitcom "Just Jordan" as Nicole, in the episode "Slippery When Wet." In January 2007, she landed the role of Charlotte Adams on the Disney Channel Original Short Series, "As the Bell Rings", which premiered on August 26, 2007. A few of her original songs, including "Shadow", were featured on the show. In the summer of 2007, Lovato auditioned for the Disney Channel television film "Camp Rock" and the television series "Sonny with a Chance" in the same day and got both parts. For "Camp Rock", she submitted an audition tape and Gary Marsh, Disney's president of entertainment, asked her to sing. She sang Christina Aguilera's "Ain't No Other Man", and Hollywood Records senior vice president Bob Cavallo said that their "jaws just dropped". Lovato received the lead role in "Camp Rock", and a record deal with Hollywood Records in 2007. In "Camp Rock" she played Mitchie Torres, a fourteen-year-old girl with hopes of becoming a singer. The movie premiered on June 20, 2008, in the United States on the Disney Channel with 8.9 million viewers, making Lovato a household name among young viewers. Its Disney Channel Italy premier received 1.14 million viewers on September 2008.
Starting in 2009, Lovato appeared as Sonny Munroe in the Disney channel comedy "Sonny With a Chance". The show featured Lovato as the newest cast member on the show-within-a-show "So Random!". The series debuted on February 8, 2009 in the United States. This is the first Disney Channel Original Series to be shot and aired in high-definition from the beginning; like most of Disney Channel's sitcoms, it is shot on tape, but uses a "filmized" appearance. The second season, some scenes are shot on location. The series is one of three Disney Channel Original Series to feature a show-within-a-show, with the others being "The Famous Jett Jackson" and "Shake It Up". The series officially ended on January 2, 2011. Gary Marsh, president of entertainment, Disney Channel Worldwide, stated "This series is rooted in one of the core thematic attributes that we stand for, which is following your dreams, there also was the opportunity to do a hybrid show." The show began production on September 15, 2008 and the first season was taped at Stage 11 at NBC Studios in Burbank, California; for the second season, the show's production moved to Hollywood Center Studios in Hollywood, California, where "The Suite Life on Deck", "Wizards of Waverly Place" and "Jonas L.A." are also taped. 
In June 2009 Lovato co-starred in "Princess Protection Program" as Princess Rosalinda alongside Selena Gomez on the Disney Channel. The made-for-television movie is the third highest rated Disney Channel Original Movie, premiering on the Disney Channel with 9.8 million viewers. Laura Fries of Variety magazine describes the film as being "light as a summer breeze on the Louisiana bayou". Although the film does not stray far from the Disney formula, she praises writer Annie DeYoung for providing young girls a nice message about self-esteem. She says the film should be a hit with the channel's target audience.
2010-present:"Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam" and acting hiatus.
In September 2009, production began for "Camp Rocks sequel, '. The Disney Channel Original Movie premiered on September 3, 2010. The film was watched by 7.9 million viewers on its premiere night, about 1 million less viewers than its predecessor. In 2010 it also became the most watched cable television programme that week, as well as the No. 1 movie by number of viewers on 2010's cable television. In its second broadcast on September 4, the film reached 3.7 million viewers. The film also reached 21 million unique viewers over its premiere weekend from September 3 to September 6. In its UK premiere on September 17, 2010 in was watched by 637,000 viewers. The film received generally mixed reviews. The review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reported that 40% of critics gave the film mixed reviews, based on 5 reviews (3 'Rotten' and 2 'Fresh'), with an average score of 6.1/10. The film currently holds an 8.7 rating, earning it a "Great" film rating on TV.com. Lovato appeared as a guest star in an episode of the medical drama series "Grey's Anatomy" as a teenage patient named Hayley May, whose parents brought her in for schizophrenia. In a review of the episode, EW.com praised her performance, stating, "I still believe that even an unbiased observer would conclude that the Disney princess did a fine job acting it up as a suicidal 16-year-old who was admitted after trying to claw her own eyes out." 
On April 19, 2011, People.com reported that Demi Lovato would not be returning for the third season of "Sonny With a Chance" due to her health issues. As a result, the show will be renamed "So Random!" and focus only on the sketches rather than the behind-the-scenes antics. As a result of Lovato's departure from "Sonny with a Chance", the series is the second Disney Channel original series to have its lead actor/actress leave during the series' run (after "So Weird"), and the fourth Disney Channel series to have a main cast member leave the series during its run (with "That's So Raven" and "Jonas L.A." also included). The third season was then turned into its own new series based on its new format. On leaving the show, Lovato satated "...it's kind of sad for me that a chapter of my life has ended but there couldn't be a better time for me to move on...I don't think going back to "Sonny" would be healthy for my recovery...Being in front of a camera would make me nervous." 
Lovato said in an April 2012 interview with KOKO POP UK that music is currently her "top priority", but that she is "kind of getting the itch to get back into acting, so we'll see what comes next." In an interview with Fabulous Magazine UK, Lovato said she will not come back to acting until she is fully confident. "I need to be secure in my body before I go back in front of the camera. Anyone in recovery from an eating disorder would find that triggering, and I'm not ready," she says.
Music career.
2007–08: "Don't Forget" and Demi Live! Warm Up Tour.
Lovato's music career began in 2007, when several of her original songs, including "Shadow", were included on the mini-series "As the Bell Rings". In 2008, Lovato signed with Hollywood Records after getting the lead role in the film "Camp Rock". She provided vocals on four of the songs featured on the "Camp Rock" soundtrack, including "We Rock", "Who Will I Be", "Our Time Is Here" and "This Is Me" featuring Joe Jonas. The song peaked at #9 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and peaked at the top 20 in Australia, Canada and Norway. The soundtrack was released on June 24, 2008. The song peaked at number 3 on the US "Billboard" 200 and topped the US "Billboard" Top Soundtracks and peaked at the top 10 in Canada, Italy, Mexico, New Zealand and Spain. The soundtrack has sold over 1 million copies and was certified Platinum in the United States. Full songs of the album were made available on "Camp Rock"'s official web site for one week, beginning June 10, 2008, and the full soundtrack premiered on Radio Disney on June 14, 2008 during "Planet Premiere: Camp Rock". The soundtrack was released in the UK on July 14, 2008.The soundtrack album (both original and two-disc collector's edition) is an enhanced CD which contains a clip of an acoustic version of "This Is Me" when played on the computer with internet access. On November 16, 2008, a karaoke/instrumental version of the "Camp Rock" soundtrack was released. It is not available on iTunes, but can be purchased in stores such as Wal-Mart, Target, etc. In June and July 2008, Lovato performed at various House of Blues and parks for her Demi Live! Warm Up Tour in preparation for the release of her debut album and the Burnin' Up Tour with the Jonas Brothers. Lovato served as the support act on the Jonas Brothers' Burnin' Up Tour from July through September 2008. 
Lovato's debut album, "Don't Forget" was released on September 23, 2008. The bulk of the album was co-written with the Jonas Brothers, who also produced the album with John Fields. They co-wrote ten songs in a week during the band's headlining Look Me in the Eyes Tour. The album is of the pop-rock genre and is lyrically similar to other teen-pop albums. It peaked at number two on the "Billboard" 200, selling 89,000 units in its first week of release. It has since sold over 500,000 records in the US. Critics noticed the distinct sound of the Jonas Brothers in the production of the album. "Don't Forget" spawned two singles. The first single released was "Get Back". It was written by Lovato, the Jonas Brothers, and produced by the Jonas Brothers alongside John Fields. The song features Jack Lawless on drums and John Taylor and the Jonas Brothers on guitars. It was released as the album's lead single on August 12, 2008, by Hollywood Records. The song was met with positive reviews from critics and performed average commercially, peaking at number forty-three on the Billboard Hot 100. The second and final single, "La La Land", was released on April 10, 2009 through Hollywood Records. It was written by Lovato and the Jonas Brothers, and produced by the Jonas Brothers alongside John Fields. The song was met with positive reviews from critics. Commercially, the song peaked at number fifty-two on the Billboard Hot 100. Lovato joined Disney's Friends for Change, an organization which promotes "environmently-friendly behavior," and appears in its public service announcements to raise awareness for the cause on the Disney Channel. Lovato, Selena Gomez, Miley Cyrus, and the Jonas Brothers recorded "Send It On," a charity single that served as the theme song for the organization in 2009. The song debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 at #20. Disney's Friends for Change directed all of its proceeds from "Send It On" to environmental charities to the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund.
2009–10: "Here We Go Again" and Demi Lovato Live in Concert.
Lovato embarked on the Summer Tour 2009 to promote her second album, "Here We Go Again", released in the summer of 2009. The album debuted at #1 on the "Billboard" 200 with 108,000 copies sold in its first week. The album was more inspired by acoustic music, such as John Mayer's songs, than her debut's pop rock-influenced sound. The album received favorable reviews from critics, "Billboard" called Lovato "a natural talent who could really take flight after outgrowing Disney." Allmusic ranked "Here We Go Again" as one of the best pop albums of 2009. The album was preceded by the lead single, "Here We Go Again," which was released on June 23, 2009. It was written by Isaac Hasson, Lindy Robbins and Mher Filian and produced by SuperSpy, for Lovato's second studio album of the same name (2009). It was released as the album's lead single on June 23, 2009, through Hollywood Records. The song received positive reviews from critics, who praised its pop hook and made comparisons with works by Kelly Clarkson. The song peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 and became Lovato's first top 40 hit on the chart as a solo artist. The album's second and final single, "Remember December," was released on November 17, 2009. It was written by John Fields, Lovato and Anne Preven, and produced by Fields. The song was released as the album's second and final single outside North America on January 18, 2010, through Hollywood Records. The song received generally positive reviews from music critics; the majority of them praised its hook and chorus. Several critics also named it one of the album's standouts. The song underperformed commercially; it peaked at number 80 on the UK Singles Chart. Lovato's South American Tour was her first international headlining tour. The tour commenced on May 23, 2010, in Santiago, Chile, and concluded on May 28, 2010, in São Paulo, Brazil. She later joined the Jonas Brothers Live in Concert tour as a special guest.
In October 2009, she collaborated again with the Jonas Brothers and appeared on the music video on YouTube for the song called "Bounce" under her alter-ego, MC D Love. In 2010, Lovato and Joe Jonas recored a song called "Make a Wave", a second charity single that currently serves as the theme song for Disney's Friends for Change.
The soundtrack, "", was released on August 10, 2010. She provided vocals on nine of the songs featured on the soundtrack, including "Brand New Day", "Can't Back Down", "It's On", "You're My Favorite Song", "What We Came Here For", "This Is Our Song", "Different Summers", "It's Not Too Late" and "Wouldn't Change a Thing". The song was released on July 31, 2010. The song was released as the soundtrack's fourth single. The song failed to chart in the US "Billboard" Hot 100 but peaked at number 10 on the US "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart. The soundtrack peaked at number 3 on the US "Billboard" 200 and topped the US "Billboard Top Soundtracks", and peaked at the top 10 in Brazil, Canada, Italy and Spain. The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies and was certified Gold in the United States. The tour is actually Jonas Brothers' 2010 World Tour, which special guests are Demi Lovato and the cast of Camp Rock 2: The Final Jam. The Camp Rock 2 Tour is officially called "Jonas Brothers 2010 World Tour/Camp Rock 2 Tour". The tour started on August 7, 2010, two weeks later than planned.
On October 5, 2010, the soundtrack "Sonny with a Chance" was released from Walt Disney Records. She provided vocals on four of the songs featured on the soundtrack, including "So Far, So Great", "Me, Myself and Time", "What to Do" and "Work of Art". It debuted at no. 163 on the "Billboard" 200, making it Lovato's lowest debut and peaking soundtrack there. It also debuted at number 3 on the US Kid Albums and at number 8 on the US Top Soundtracks. Two singles were released from the soundtrack. The first single to be released was "So Far, So Great". It was released on June 9, 2009 and is the theme song for the series. It first appeared on the album "Disney Channel Playlist", and was later released on Demi Lovato's album "Here We Go Again" as a bonus track. The song is about chasing your dreams. It has also received rotation on Radio Disney. Lovato performed the song in her "Summer Tour 2009". It is the ninth and final track of the soundtrack, written by Jeannie Lurie, Aris Archontis and Chen Neeman and the length of the song is two minutes and fourteen seconds. The second single to be released was "Me, Myself and Time". It was published for the title track of the CD. It was released digitally on August 3, 2010, but was shown worldwide on April 11, 2010, the episode was issued Sonny With a Song in the United States chapter of the series in which Sonny shows her singing career performing the song appears to promote the fashion line of her character. The song managed to peak at number 6 on the US "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart.
2011–12: "Unbroken".
Lovato's third studio album, "Unbroken", was released on September 20, 2011. Lovato began working on the album in July 2010, prior to receiving treatment. She had described it as having a more soulful and R&B inspired sound, citing Keri Hilson and Rihanna as inspirations for the sound. After Lovato's stint in the treatment facility, producer Timbaland expressed interest in working with her. Lovato confirmed in July 2011 that she was working on a duet with the producer. The album was described as more "radio friendly" than her previous albums, as she planned to incorporate dance, hip-hop and R&B styles in it. The album received mixed to positive reviews from music critics, praising Lovato's vocals and growth in musicianship compared to her previous two albums, as well as some of the album's ballad tracks. The first single off the album, "Skyscraper", premiered on July 12, 2011, as a promotional single, before the album released. It was written by Toby Gad, Lindy Robbins and Kerli Kõiv and produced by Gad. The song was very well received by music critics and also by the media, with the majority of them praising Lovato's vocals and the inspirational lyrics. Upon its release, it was also met with praise from celebrities on the microblogging site Twitter. The song debuted at number ten on the "Billboard" Hot 100, spending a total of 17 weeks on the chart. The song became Lovato's highest-peaking single on the chart since "This Is Me" peaked at number nine in August 2008. The album's second single, "Give Your Heart a Break", was officially released on January 23, 2012. The track was written and produced by American songwriters Josh Alexander and Billy Steinberg. The song received critical acclaim from contemporary music critics, praising the production as well as Lovato's vocals. The single debuted at number seventy on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, and peaked at number 16, while becoming her biggest radio single to date. The song has sold over 1,000,000 digital copies and was officially certified Platinum in the United States on August 15, 2012. Lovato's began on June 12, 2012 and will end on September 30, 2012. On July 31, 2012, "Skyscraper" was nominated for "Best Video With a Message" at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards, which she won.
2012-present: Fourth studio album.
On April 4, 2012, it was reported that Lovato is working on her fourth studio album with producer Mitch Allan. On April 5, 2012, Lovato confirmed on Twitter that writing for the album had began, saying that she was "so excited to start writing for my fourth album", and that "this time, there's NO holding back.." On April 8, 2012, Lovato stated that she "just wrote a song I will never be able to release. *sigh*". In August 2012 at the Minnesota State Fair, Lovato announced that she will work on her fourth album for two months after her 2012 MTV Video Music Awards pre-show performance and the lead single from the album was confirmed to be released in December 2012, but never was. In the October 2012 issue of Teen Vogue, Lovato stated, "I will say that I'm tired of all the dubstep that's on the radio right now -- I think it's going to be out in two months. I want to make something that people will listen to for a while, rather than something that's just trendy. I feel like I've grown as a person, and I want my music to grow with me". On December 24, 2012, Lovato released a video of her performing "Angels Among Us" on her YouTube account, which she dedicated to the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting.
On February 12, 2013, Lovato announced that the lead single from her upcoming fourth studio album, "Heart Attack" would be released on March 4, 2013. The song was written by Lovato, Mitch Allan, Jason Evigan, Sean Douglas, and Nikki Williams. Her fourth album is expected for release in Spring 2013.
Other work.
"The X Factor USA".
In 2012, rumors that Lovato and Miley Cyrus were in talks to be replacement judges on the season two of the American version of "The X Factor", in hopes of luring a younger audience, began circulating. Lovato reportedly signed a deal to judge the show on May 13, 2012. On May 14, 2012, it was officially confirmed that Spears and Lovato would join "The X Factor USA" as the two newest judges. When asked about the new judges, Cowell said: "I'm absolutely delighted Britney and Demi are joining us. Britney remains one of the biggest stars in the world, she's talented, fascinating – and I believe she knows exactly how to spot "The X Factor". Demi's had an amazing career in music, TV and film for someone her age. She's young, confident, and enthusiastic. I think it’s really important that she speaks to our younger audience. The new panel will be dynamic and will work really well with the changes we are making to the show." Filming for the audition, bootcamp, and judges houses processes of the show were filmed from May 24, 2012 to September 15, 2012. The season premiered on September 12, 2012 and ended on December 20, 2012. Lovato mentored the Young Adults category, with Lovato's highest-ranking act in her category, CeCe Frey finishing in sixth place. Lovato reportedly received slightly over $1 million for her work on "X Factor". 
When asked if she would return as a judge for the show's third season, Lovato told MTV that she has "no idea what's gonna happen next season", however that she is "trying to build her career for my own" and called being a judge "an amazing experience and I loved doing the show," but that there is "no way to tell" if she will return in 2013. On December 20, 2012, Lovato released a series of tweets on Twitter thanking her fans for their support while she was on the show and saying that she would miss working with her fellow judges, implying that she would not return for the show's third season, however a representative for Lovato stated that she was "just saying goodbye for the season" and not necessarily leaving the show. In February 2013, in an interview with "Extra", Lovato stated "You know, I would love to for the third season; it would absolutely be incredible. I hope that, scheduling-wise; you know, I'm focusing on music this year so it's gonna be a lot of touring and a lot of promoting my album, but I would love to, and obviously if they asked me to come back I would say 'yes'".
Philanthropy.
Lovato is the spokesperson for anti-bullying organization PACER. She explained to NY Post about becoming a spokesperson against bullying “Bullying is a very serious thing to me, I’ve witnessed it first hand – I was bullied myself when I was 12, I want to be able to help other girls around sister’s age come into their own with a strong confidence in their skin, their size, who they are and everything about themselves.” Lovato is also the spokesperson for the Join the Surge Campaign!, DoSomething.Org and the Clean & Clear Brand launched Joining the Surge, which is a national campaign that empowers teenagers to take action in their communities. 
In 2009, Lovato has been honored The Honorary Ambassador of Education award from the American Partnership For Eosinophilic Disorders. Lovato is involved in Disney's Friends for Change, an organization which promotes "environmently-friendly behavior", and appears in its public service announcements to raise awareness for the cause on the Disney Channel. Lovato, Selena Gomez, Miley Cyrus, and the Jonas Brothers recorded "Send It On", a charity single which serves as the theme song for Disney's Friends for Change in 2009. The song debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at number twenty. Disney's Friends For Change will direct all of its proceeds from "Send it On" to environmental charities to the Disney Worldwide Conservation Fund. Lovato and Joe Jonas recorded a new song called "Make a Wave", the second charity single which serves as the theme song for Disney's Friends for Change in 2010. In January 2010, Lovato was one of the many stars featured in a public service announcement for Voto Latino in order to promote the organization's "Be Counted" campaign for the 2010 United States Census. Lovato is also part of the "A Day Made Better" School Advocacy Campaign. "The campaign is giving a deserving teacher with $1,000 in school supplies on behalf of OfficeMax’s “A Day Made Better” school advocacy campaign." Lovato has also supported charities such as DonateMyDress.org, Kids Wish Network, Love Our Children USA, ST. Jude Children's Research Hospital, and City of Hope. 
To raise awareness about personal issues similar to her own, Lovato became a Contributing Editor to "Seventeen" magazine. She will discuss her personal issues as a part of a larger campaign called "Love is Louder than the Pressure to Be Perfect", directed towards teen girls. In 2012, Lovato was named the new Ambassador of "Mean Stinks", an anti-bullying campaign to inspire students to "gang up for good" against girl-to-girl bullying.
Artistry.
Influences.
Growing up, her musical influences were Aretha Franklin, Billie Holiday, Whitney Houston, Kelly Clarkson and Christina Aguilera. 
In an MTV interview, Lovato stated that she likes metal music, particularly black metal and metalcore. She called symphonic black metal band Dimmu Borgir "one of her favorite live acts". On the July 24, 2009 episode of "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", Lovato stated that three of her favorite bands were metalcore/symphonic black metal band Abigail Williams, deathcore band Job for a Cowboy and southern metal band Maylene and the Sons of Disaster. On another episode of "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", after the release of "Unbroken", she stated that she is now more into hip-hop and R&B styles of music, and has moved on from death metal. Her favorite R&B artist is Rihanna because she thinks her voice is "amazing" and she "loves all the songs she performs".
Voice.
Lovato's vocals have been acclaimed by music critics. Nick Levine of Digital Spy commented on Lovato's vocals on the album, "Don't Forget": "she's certainly a stronger singer than the Jonases. In fact, her full-bodied vocal performances are consistently impressive." Jeff Miers from "The Buffalo News" commented about Lovato's vocals on the album, "Here We Go Again": "Unlike so many of her Disney-fied peers, Lovato can really sing, and part of what makes her sophomore effort appealing is the lack of in-studio vocal manipulation." Miers further wrote that it is "refreshing" that Lovato does not need Auto-Tune "to mask any lack of natural ability". Singer and producer Ryan Tedder who worked on her album, "Unbroken" said of her voice: "Demi blew me out of the water vocally! I had no idea how good her voice is. She's one of the best singers I've ever worked with. Literally, that good... I mean, she's a Kelly Clarkson-level vocalist. And Kelly has a set of pipes." Becky Brain of Idolator wrote Lovato has a "killer voice and the A-list material to put it to good use".
Personal life.
Public image.
Lovato wrote the song "For the Love of a Daughter" about her estranged father. According to UK magazine "Fabulous", the song was prompted by a series of interviews given by Lovato's father in what seemed to be an attempt to cash in on his daughter's fame. Lovato says she has no interest in having a relationship with her father. In the March 2009 issue of "Teen Vogue", Lovato stated, "My first passion is music, because it comes naturally to me. Acting has been like a hobby." Lovato is a Christian and prays with her band before they perform. She has described herself as very spiritual rather than very religious and said she believes in God.
She was best friends with Selena Gomez, whom she has known since Lovato "asked her to sit on my jacket and draw with crayons with me" at the "Barney & Friends" auditions. On March 12, 2010, Lovato confirmed that she had begun dating Joe Jonas, whom she first met while filming "Camp Rock" in 2007. On May 24, 2010, Lovato confirmed via her official Twitter that she and Jonas were no longer together. In an interview with UsMagazine, Jonas stated, "Demi and I knew that going into our romantic relationship it may not be an easy one. I realize that over the time we have spent together that I feel I care more about our friendship right now. It was my choice to break up, but I love her as a friend. She's been there for me when I needed her. I will continue to be her friend and be there for her." Lovato was a vegetarian, but since entering treatment, she has started eating meat.
In 2010, on her 18th birthday, Lovato bought her family a Mediterranean-style house in Los Angeles. She said, "For me to give that to my family on my birthday, that was the best present." then added, "It's got pretty much everything you could possibly imagine in it. It's the most beautiful, homey-feeling house. I love it." Lovato also purchased their current $1.88 million home in Toluca Lake, LA. She bought the house when she was 16 years old.
Personal struggles.
On October 30, 2010, Lovato dropped out of the Jonas Brothers Live in Concert World Tour 2010 in order to enter a treatment facility to treat "physical and emotional issues". The tour was not scheduled to be complete until November 13, 2010. Lovato's publicist stated that "she regrets not being able to finish her tour, but is looking forward to getting back to work in the near future." Many media sources reported that Lovato had decided to enter treatment after punching a female Jonas Brothers back-up dancer, Alex Welch, on a tour flight out of Bogotá, Colombia, allegedly because Lovato believed that Welch had informed tour managers of inappropriate behavior on Lovato's part the previous night, causing Lovato to be confronted by her managers and her stepfather, Eddie de la Garza. Lovato's camp reached a financial settlement with Welch in late December 2010, with Welch stating that the agreement stipulated for a portion of the settlement to be donated to charity. 
On January 28, 2011, it was reported that Lovato had completed her inpatient treatment at the rehab facility and returned home to Los Angeles, where she would "continue to see doctors" to "help her work on the issues she confronted in treatment." The day after the announcement, a Disney spokesperson told "People" that Disney "supportDemi's decision to put her health first and [they send her best wishes". On March 8, 2011 an exclusive video was released on Cambio.com in which Lovato thanked her fans for their support during what she described as "the darkest time of my life" and also stated that she was excited to get back to work. 
Lovato granted her first post-rehab interview to ABC newscaster Robin Roberts, which aired on "Good Morning America" and "20/20" on April 22, 2011. During the interview, Lovato confirmed reports that her treatment was for bulimia and self-injury, and had taken place at the Timberline Knolls facility in Illinois after the aforementioned confrontation between her and Welch led to an intervention by her family and management team. Her condition came to a head during the tour because Lovato "was performing concerts on an empty stomach...I was losing my voice from purging. I was self-medicating. I was not taking medication for depression, and I literally was so emotionally whacked out that I took it out on someone that meant a lot to me." Later elaborating on this "self-medicating", Lovato said, "I'm not gonna lie. I was self-medicating. I was doing things like drinking and using like a lot of teens do to numb their pain." Lovato expressed regret at her actions towards Welch, stating "I take 100 percent, full responsibility..." In another interview, Lovato added that she had "basically had a nervous breakdown", and was also diagnosed with bipolar disorder during her treatment. As part of her efforts to raise awareness about issues similar to her own, Lovato was announced in April 2011 as a Contributing Editor to "Seventeen" magazine. She will discuss her personal issues as a part of a larger campaign called "Love is Louder than the Pressure to Be Perfect", directed towards teen girls.
On December 23, 2011, Lovato posted a message on Twitter criticizing her former network for airing episodes of "Shake It Up" and "So Random!" which featured characters making jokes about eating disorders. Disney Channel publicity officials quickly took action and apologized to Lovato, then removed those episodes from the network's airing cycle and video on demand sources, after further criticism in the wake of Lovato's message to the network's public relations account. In March 2012, MTV aired a documentary special, "Stay Strong", about Lovato's time in rehab. In the documentary, Lovato opened up about her fans, battling her eating disorders, and returning to touring. In January 2013, it was reported that Lovato had been residing in a sober living facility in Los Angeles for more than a year, including during her judging stint on "The X Factor". She reportedly decided to move there shortly after her release from rehab in 2011 because she felt it was the best way to avoid returning to her addictions and eating disorder.
Concert tours.
Headlining
Opening act
Awards and nominations.
Lovato has been the recipient of several awards and nominations; including an award at the MTV Video Music Awards, an award out of three nominations at the ALMA Awards, two People's Choice Awards, an award out of two nominations at the O Music Awards, and six Teen Choice Awards out of eighteen nominations. She also received two nominations at the Young Artist Awards, a nomination at the Billboard Touring Awards and a nomination at the Australian KCAs.
