The Impossible () is a 2012 English-language Spanish disaster drama thriller directed by Juan Antonio Bayona. It was written by Sergio G. Sánchez, stars Naomi Watts and Ewan McGregor, and is based on the true story of María Belón and her family's experience of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. The film received positive reviews from critics for its direction and its acting, especially for Watts who was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress and who was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama.
Plot.
Maria Bennett (Naomi Watts), her husband Henry (Ewan McGregor) and their three sons Lucas (Tom Holland), Tomas and Simon are on holiday over Christmas at a tropical paradise resort in Khao Lak, Thailand. However, the devastating 2004 tsunami, which occurred on 26 December 2004, destroys the coastal zone, and they are swept up in the flood - a flood which captures Maria searching for a lost page of a book against a glass window while the rest of the family is near the pool. 
Maria and Lucas are separated from the others and Maria's leg is badly injured. At Maria's insistence, they rescue a small boy called Daniel who has also been separated from his family. The three climb a tree in case a new wave approaches. They are found by locals and taken to a hospital - Maria on a door used as a stretcher. Maria, who is a doctor, is concerned about her leg, and asks Lucas to tell her if it turns black. She encourages Lucas to see if he can provide any help to the others. Lucas takes names from patients and searches for their relatives. When he returns to Maria's bed she is not there, and due to a mix-up, the hospital staff believes she has died and takes Lucas to a tent where other children without families are being held; a phone call can be made, but Lucas does not remember the number of his grandpa. In fact, Maria has surgery on her torn chest and is later reunited with Lucas.
Elsewhere Henry, Tomas, and Simon are together and safe. Henry asks Tomas to look after his little brother then places the children into a vehicle full of tourists who are being taken to a safe place in the mountains, while he keeps searching for Maria and Lucas. Later, Henry arrives in the mountains and finds Tomas and Simon have been sent elsewhere. Communication facilities are scarce, but another man, German tourist Karl, allows Henry to make a phone call to his father-in-law Brian in the UK. Henry uses the phone only to break down in the midst of the call. Maria and Lucas have not contacted the family, so Henry doesn't know they have survived. Karl then volunteers to accompany Henry to look for his wife and son.
Henry and Karl search for their missing families in various shelters and hospitals before they arrive at the hospital where Maria and Lucas are. Unbeknownst to all, the entire family is miraculously in the same place. Henry walks past Maria's ward, and she appears to recognize his shadow against the curtain of her ward, but is too weak to call out. Lucas spots his father (recognizing his shorts and bloody legs) in the distance, but immediately loses sight of him, and takes chase. Simon recognizes Lucas's voice when he shouts for his father. Tomas and Simon leap off a truck transporting lost children just in time to reunite with Lucas, and at the same moment Henry stumbles across all three of his sons and Lucas tells him their mother is in the hospital. 
They find Maria, who appears to be on the verge of death and needs immediate surgery. She survives the surgery, and the following day a representative of their insurance company arrives to fly them to a hospital in Singapore in a small plane. Lucas tells Maria that the boy they rescued, Daniel, has been reunited with his father. As they take off, Maria is shown viewing the devastation of the tsunami from the plane window, and she begins to weep.
Production.
The film was a co-production of Spanish film companies Apaches Entertainment and Telecinco Cinema, and employed much of the same crew from "The Orphanage", including the director, writer, production manager, cinematographer, composer, and editor. Principal photography began 23 August 2010, in Alicante, Spain, and continued in October in Thailand.
Director Juan Antonio Bayona decided not to specify the nationalities of the main characters in order to create a universal film in which nationalities were irrelevant to the plot.
The tsunami was recreated with a mixture of digital effects and real water surges using miniatures that were destroyed by a huge wave created in a water tank in Spain. Bayona committed to working with real water, rather than a computer generated wave, because he wanted the story to be authentic. This meant actors Naomi Watts and Tom Holland spent five weeks filming physically and psychologically demanding scenes in a massive water tank. 16-year-old Holland later described it as a "scary environment ...You can imagine how tiring and brutal that was." 
The film marks the second collaboration between Watts and McGregor after appearing together in the 2005 film "Stay".
Release.
Warner Bros. released the film in Spain on 11 October 2012. The United States distribution rights were pre-bought by Summit Entertainment. A teaser trailer was released on 26 December 2011. After a full-length English-language trailer was released on 20 August 2012, a United States release date was confirmed by Summit of 21 December 2012. "The Impossible" had its world premiere at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival on 9 September, where it received critical acclaim. The film was released on 11 October 2012, in Spain and in North America on 21 December 2012, by Summit Entertainment. It was released in the United Kingdom on 1 January 2013. The film was made available by Summit Entertainment through a website streaming the movie to members of SAG-AFTRA for consideration of the SAG awards.
"The Impossible" will be released on DVD/Blu-ray in the USA and Canada on Tuesday, 23 April 2013, with a European release 13 May 2013.
Reception.
Critical response.
Response for the film was positive, with much praise going to the performances of Watts, McGregor and newcomer Tom Holland. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 80% based on reviews from 169 critics, with an average rating of 7.3/10. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film holds an average score of 74, based on 41 reviews, which indicates "generally favorable reviews."
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film a perfect four star rating, praising the performances of Watts and McGregor, as well as the direction of Bayona. He would go on to call it "one of the best films of the year".
Deborah Young of "The Hollywood Reporter" gave the film a very positive review, praising the performances of the two leading stars, stating that "Watts packs a huge charge of emotion as the battered, ever-weakening Maria whose tears of pain and fear never appear fake or idealized. McGregor, cut and streaked with excessive blood he seems too distraught to wash away, keeps the tension razor-sharp as he pursues his family in a vast, shattered landscape." About the film itself she added, ""The Impossible" is one of the most emotionally realistic disaster movies in recent memory -- and certainly one of the most frightening in its epic re-creation of the catastrophic 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami."
Justin Chang of "Variety" magazine also gave the film a positive review, praising Bayona's directing and Sánchez's writing: "Collaborating again after their impressive 2007 debut feature, "The Orphanage", Bayona and Sanchez get many things right here, starting with their decision to eschew a more panoramic view of the disaster to follow one family's journey from start to finish." About the performances of the main cast members he added, "Watts has few equals at conveying physical and emotional extremis, something she again demonstrates in a mostly bedridden role, and McGregor, in one of his better recent performances, manages to turn a simple phone call home into a small aria of heartbreak. Holland, in his live-action bigscreen debut, is wonderful as a kind, somewhat short-tempered kid who still has plenty to learn, setting the tone for similarly heartrending turns by young Joslin and Pendergast."
Damon Wise of "The Guardian" gave the film four stars out of five. He also praised the performances, stating that "as Maria, Watts is both brave and vulnerable, and her scenes with the young Lucas (the excellent Tom Holland) are among the film's best, with adult and child now unexpected equals, the mother humbled, the son rising to the challenge. McGregor, meanwhile, gives one of his best performances as the sad and desperate Henry, trying to play the hero, the provider, while knowing his cause is almost certainly lost." About the film, he added: "Part of the appeal of this affecting and powerful drama is that it puts the viewer right in the moment at every stage, using authentic locations and tsunami survivors to hammer home the reality of this tragedy." 
Eric Kohn of "IndieWire" gave the film a "B-" grade, and stated that the film "suffers from the greater problem of emphasizing a feel-good plot within the context of mass destruction."
Criticism of the film, however, has also focused on the concept of whitewashing, a term that now has also come to refer to the entertainment industry's attempt at making ethnic characters more appealing to the white, money-spending masses by making exotic characters less ethnic and more "white." The movie focuses on a white family on vacation who get separated for a little while during the tsunami, but eventually get to return to their intact homes in the west. Thais, however, are hardly present in the film, except where they offer a helping hand to the white family. Though the tsunami killed over 200,000 and severely affected the lives of roughly 2 million brown people in multiple Asian nations, the movie has been criticized for its focus on the white experience while entirely marginalizing Asians and minimizing the reality that Asians continued (and continue) to live with the damage brought by the tsunami to their homes and livelihoods.
Response from Western victims.
Simon Jenkins, a Western survivor, wrote to "The Guardian", stating the film is "beautifully accurate". This was in response to critics commenting that the movie is "overdramatic" and "whitewashed". He says of the cynical comments, "As I must, I've never been the sort of person to revisit and analyze events of the past, but some of these articles frustrated me. Had this film been purely about the tale of a western middle-class family's "ruined" holiday then I would have agreed. For me, it was the exact opposite. Rather than concentrating on the "privileged white visitors", the film portrayed the profound sense of community and unity that I experienced in Thailand, with this family at the centre of it. Both for my (then) 16-year-old self and the Belon family, it was the Thai people who waded through the settled water after the first wave had struck to help individuals and families...The Thai people had just lost everything – homes, businesses, families – yet their instinct was to help the tourists".
The London "Daily Mail" reported that British survivors of the Indian Ocean felt "horrified," "ambushed," and were reduced to tears by the film's trailer, which was screened in cinemas prior to "". Support UK, a support group for survivors of the, lobbied to have the trailer screened with a warning notice beforehand. A spokesman for Odeon Cinemas stated that it had no control over the content of the BBFC-approved trailer, saying, "We can only apologise for any offence caused on this occasion."
Box office performance.
"The Impossible" has enjoyed global success at the box office, grossing over $160 Million worldwide (approximately $58 million in Spain) as of 22 February 2013. In Spain the film was released on 11 October 2012, and opened in 638 theaters, grossing $11,569,306 on its opening weekend, ranking #1 with a per theater average of $18,134. That is the highest-grossing opening weekend ever for a film in Spain. On its second weekend the film remained at #1 and grossed $9,016,065 with a per theater average of $14,022. On its third weekend it remained at #1 and made $5,768,184 with a per theater average of $9,098.
External links.
