The semicolon (;) is a punctuation mark with several uses. The Italian printer Aldus Manutius the Elder established the practice of using the semicolon to separate words of opposed meaning and to indicate interdependent statements. "The first printed semicolon was the work of ... Aldus Manutius" in 1494. Ben Jonson was the first notable English writer to use the semicolon systematically. The modern uses of the semicolon relate either to the listing of items or to the linking of related clauses. In Unicode it is encoded at .
According to Lynne Truss, a British writer on grammar, many non-writers avoid the colon and semicolon for various reasons: "They are old-fashioned", "They are middle-class", "They are optional", "They are mysteriously connected to pausing", "They are dangerously addictive ("vide" Virginia Woolf)", and "The difference between them is too negligible to be grasped by the brain of man". However, the semi-colon is used frequently in academic writing.
In English.
While terminal marks (i.e., full stops, exclamation marks, and question marks) mark the end of a sentence, the comma, semicolon and colon are normally sentence internal, making them secondary boundary marks. The semicolon falls between terminal marks and the comma; its strength is equal to that of the colon.
Usage.
A semicolon is used when a sentence could have been ended, but it wasn’t. Semicolons are followed by a lower case letter, unless that letter is the first letter of a proper noun like the word I or Paris. Modern style guides recommend no space before them, and one space after. Modern style guides also typically recommend placing semicolons outside of ending quotation marks—although this was not always the case. For example, the first edition of the "Chicago Manual of Style" (1906) recommended placing the semicolon inside ending quotation marks. 
Other languages.
Greek and Church Slavonic.
In Greek and Church Slavonic, a semicolon indicates a question, similar to a Latin question mark. To indicate a long pause or separate sections, each with commas (the semicolon's purpose in English), Greek uses the "άνω τελεία", an interpunct ( · ).
Greek: Με συγχωρείτε· πού είναι οι τουαλέτες; (Excuse me; where are the toilets?)
Church Slavonic: гдѣ єсть рождeйсѧ царь їудeйскій; (Where is the one who is born king of the Jews? - Matthew 2:1)
Literature.
Some authors have spurned the semicolon throughout their works. Lynne Truss stated that "Samuel Beckett spliced his way merrily through such novels as "Molloy" and "Malone Dies", thumbing his nose at the semicolon all the way," "James Joyce preferred the colon, as more authentically classical; P. G. Wodehouse did an effortlessly marvellous job without it; George Orwell tried to avoid the semicolon completely in "Coming up for Air," (1939)," "Martin Amis included just one semicolon in "Money" (1984)," and "Umberto Eco was congratulated by an academic reader for using no semicolons in "The Name of the Rose" (1983)." 
Kurt Vonnegut in "A Man Without a Country" (2005) stated: "Here is a lesson in creative writing. First rule: Do not use semicolons. They are transvestite hermaphrodites representing absolutely nothing. All they do is show you've been to college." In response to Vonnegut and Truss, Ben MacIntyre, columnist in "The Times" (London), wrote: "Americans have long regarded the semi-colon with suspicion, as a genteel, self-conscious, neither-one-thing-nor-the other sort of punctuation mark, with neither the butchness of a full colon nor the flighty promiscuity of the comma. Hemingway and Chandler and Stephen King wouldn’t be seen dead in a ditch with a semi-colon (though Truman Capote might). Real men, goes the unwritten rule of American punctuation, don’t use semi-colons."
Computing usage.
The semicolon is represented by Unicode and ASCII character . The EBCDIC semicolon character is 94 or 0x5E. Scripts comprising wide characters, such as kanji, use a full-width equivalent, ；, located at Unicode code point U+FF1B (fullwidth semicolon).
In computer programming, the semicolon is often used to separate multiple statements (for example, in Perl, Pascal, PL/I, and SQL). In other languages, semicolons are called "terminator"s and are required after every statement (such as in Java, and the C family). Other languages (for instance, some assembly languages and LISP dialects) use semicolons to mark the beginning of comments. Additionally, the semicolon stands for a NOP (no operation or null command) in C/C++, useful in busy waiting synchronization loops.
int main(void) 
</source>
Conventionally, in many languages, each statement is written on a separate line, but this is not typically a requirement of the language. In the above example, two statements are placed on the same line; this is legal, since the semicolon separates the two statements.
The semicolon is often used to separate elements of a string of text. For example, multiple e-mail addresses in the "To" field in some e-mail clients have to be delimited by a semicolon.
The semicolon is commonly used as parts of emoticons, in order to indicate winking.
In Microsoft Excel, the semicolon is used as a list separator, especially in cases where the decimal separator is a comma, such as codice_1, instead of codice_2.
In MATLAB, the semicolon can be used as a row separator when defining a vector or matrix (whereas a comma separates the columns within a row of a vector or matrix) or to execute a command silently, without displaying the resulting output value in the console.
In HTML, a semicolon is used to terminate a character entity reference, either named or numeric.
Mathematics.
In the argument list of a mathematical function formula_1, a semicolon may be used to separate variables and parameters.
In differential geometry, a semicolon preceding an index is used to indicate the covariant derivative of a function with respect to the coordinate associated with that index.
