Amour (; French for "Love") is a 2012 French-language drama film written and directed by the Austrian filmmaker Michael Haneke, starring Jean-Louis Trintignant, Emmanuelle Riva and Isabelle Huppert. The narrative focuses on an elderly couple, Anne and Georges, who are retired music teachers with a daughter who lives abroad. Anne suffers a stroke which paralyses her on one side of her body. The film is a co-production between the French, German, and Austrian companies "Les Films du Losange", "X-Filme Creative Pool", and "Wega Film".
The film was screened at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival, where it won the Palme d'Or. It won the Best Foreign Language Oscar at the 85th Academy Awards, making the January shortlist. At the 25th European Film Awards, it was nominated in six categories, winning in four, including Best Film and Best Director. At the 47th National Society of Film Critics Awards it won the awards for Best Film, Best Director and Best Actress. At the 66th British Academy Film Awards it was nominated in four categories, winning for Best Leading Actress and Best Film Not in the English Language. Emmanuelle Riva became the oldest person to win a BAFTA.
At the 85th Academy Awards the film has been nominated for five Academy Awards including Best Picture, Best Actress in a Leading Role (Emmanuelle Riva), Best Original Screenplay (Michael Haneke), Best Director (Michael Haneke) and Best Foreign Language Film. At the age of 85, Emmanuelle Riva is the oldest nominee for the Best Actress in a Leading Role. At the 38th César Awards it was nominated in ten categories, winning in five, including Best Film, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Actress. This film also won the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film.
Plot.
A brigade of firemen break down the door of an apartment in Paris to find the corpse of Anne (Emmanuelle Riva) lying on a bed, adorned with cut flowers.
Flashback several months. Anne and her husband Georges (Jean-Louis Trintignant), both retired piano teachers in their eighties, attend a performance by one of Anne's former pupils. The next morning while they are eating breakfast, Anne silently suffers a stroke. She sits in a catatonic state, not responding to Georges. She comes around as Georges is about to get help, but doesn't remember anything that took place. Georges thinks she was playing a prank on him. Anne is unable to pour herself a drink.
Anne undergoes surgery on a blocked carotid artery, but the surgery goes wrong, leaving her paralyzed on her right side and confined to a wheelchair. She makes Georges promise not to send her back to the hospital or go into a nursing home. Georges becomes Anne's dutiful, though slightly irritated, caretaker. One day, Anne tells Georges that she doesn't want to continue to live.
The pupil whose performance they attended stops by and Anne gets dressed up and carries on a lively conversation during the visit, giving Georges hope that her complaint was a passing fancy. However, she soon suffers a second stroke that leaves her demented and incapable of sound speech. Georges continues to look after Anne, despite the strain it puts on him. Georges begins employing a nurse three days a week. Their daughter, Eva (Isabelle Huppert), wants her mother to go into care, but Georges says he will not break the promise he made to his wife.
Georges employs a second nurse to help care for Anne, but he fires her after he discovers her mistreatment of his wife. One day, Georges sits next to Anne's bedside and tells her a story of his childhood, which calms her, and as it reaches the conclusion, he grabs the pillow on the bed and smothers her to death.
Georges returns home with bundles of flowers in his hands, which he proceeds to wash and cut. He picks out a dress from Anne's wardrobe and writes a long letter. He tapes the bedroom door shut and catches a pigeon which has flown in from the window. In the letter, Georges explains that he has released the pigeon. Georges hallucinates Anne washing dishes in the kitchen and, speechless, he gazes at Anne as she cleans up and prepares to leave the house. Anne calls for Georges to bring a coat, and he complies, following her out the door.
The film concludes after the opening scene, with Eva seated in the living room, after wandering around the now-empty home.
Production.
The film was produced for €7,290,000 through France's Les Films du Losange, Germany's X-Filme Creative Pool and Austria's Wega Film. It received co-production support from France 3 and €404,000 in support from the Île-de-France region. Further funding was granted by the Medienboard Berlin-Brandenburg in Germany and National Center of Cinematography and the moving image in France. Principal photography took place from 7 February to 1 April 2011.
After 14 years, Jean-Louis Trintignant came back on screen for Haneke. Haneke had sent Trintignant the script, which had been written specifically for him. Trintignant said that he chooses which films he works in on the basis of the director, and said of Haneke that "he has the most complete mastery of the cinematic discipline, from technical aspects like sound and photography to the way he handles actors".
The film is based on an identical situation that happened in Haneke's family. The issue that interested him the most was: "How to manage the suffering of someone you love?"
Release.
Artificial Eye has acquired the distribution rights for the United Kingdom.
Critical reception.
The film has been met with acclaim from film critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 93% based on 169 reviews, with an average rating of 8.7/10, while Metacritic gives a weighted average rating of 94 based on reviews from 41 critics, indicating "universal acclaim."
Writing for "The Guardian" after the Cannes screening, Peter Bradshaw said "this is film-making at the highest pitch of intelligence and insight". Jamie Graham of "Total Film" gave "Amour" 5 stars out of 5, stating "far from being a cold, scientific study from a filmmaker frequently accused of placing a pane of glass between his work and his viewers, this sensitive film emerges heartfelt and humane." Dave Calhoun of "Time Out London" also gave the film 5 out of 5 stars, stating ""Amour" is devastatingly original and unflinching in the way it examines the effect of love on death, and vice versa". Calling "Amour" the best film of 2012, critic A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" said that "months after its debut at Cannes this film already feels permanent." Writing in "The Times", critic Manohla Dargis hailed the film as "a masterpiece about life, death and everything in between." The newspaper flagged the film as a critics' pick. "The Wall Street Journal"'s film critic Joe Morgenstern wrote of "Amour": "Mr. Haneke's film, exquisitely photographed by Darius Khondji, has won all sorts of prizes all over the world, and no wonder; the performances alone set it off as a welcoming masterpiece."
Calum Marsh of the "Slant Magazine" indicated that the film "isn't the work of a newly moral or humanistic filmmaker, but another ruse by the same unscrupulous showman whose funny games have been beguiling us for years", adding that "Haneke's gaze, trained from an unbridgeable remove, carries no inflection of empathy; his style is too frigid, his investment too remote, for the world of these characters to open up before us, for their pain to ever feel like something more than functional."
Numerous conservative and prolife writers and reviewers have singled out the film's euthanasia theme for moral criticism. Attention has also been called to its similarity to the 1941 German film "Ich klage an". In both films the wives have very similar names, music careers and serious illnesses. They both beg their husbands for death. In both films the husbands eventually agree and, in both films, the first judgment of "society" is that the act is murder. But, in both cases, the audience is led to the conclusion that allowing the wife to live would have been the greater crime.
Accolades.
Best of 2012.
Both "Sight & Sound" film magazine and Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" named "Amour" the third best film of 2012.
