Benjamin Solomon "Ben" Carson, Sr. (born September 18, 1951) is a neurosurgeon and the Director of Pediatric Neurosurgery at Johns Hopkins Hospital. He was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the highest civilian award in the United States, by President George W. Bush in 2008.
Early life.
Carson was born in Detroit, Michigan and was raised by his single mother, Sonya Carson. He struggled academically throughout elementary school, but after his mother reduced his television time and required him to read two books a week and produce written reviews for her, he started to excel in middle school and throughout high school. After graduating with honors from Southwestern High School, he attended Yale University, where he earned a degree in psychology. He chose to go to Yale because in "College Bowl", an old knowledge competition TV program, he saw Yale compete against and defeat many other colleges, including Harvard. Carson wanted to participate in "College Bowl", but the program was discontinued. From Yale, he attended University of Michigan Medical School.
Career.
Carson is a Professor of Neurosurgery, Oncology, Plastic Surgery and Pediatrics at John Hopkins University. He was inspired to pursue a career in medicine when he heard stories in church of missionary doctors and their ability to heal people physically, mentally, and spiritually. At age 33, he became the youngest major division director in Johns Hopkins history, as Director of Pediatric Neurosurgery. He is also a Co-Director of The Johns Hopkins Craniofacial Center. Carson used to perform 450-500 surgeries per year, but has reduced his surgery load to approximately 350 per year as his scheduled speaking engagements have increased.
According to John Hopkins Hospital: "Dr. Carson focuses on traumatic brain injuries, brain and spinal cord tumors, achondroplasia, neurological and congenital disorders, craniosynostosis, epilepsy and trigeminal neuralgia. He is also interested in maximizing the intellectual potential of every child." 
Carson's hand-eye coordination and three-dimensional reasoning skills made him a gifted surgeon. After medical school, he became a neurosurgery resident at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore. Starting off as an adult neurosurgeon, Carson became more interested in pediatrics. He believed that with children, "what you see is what you get, ... when they’re in pain they clearly show it with a frown on their face or when they are happy they show it by smiling brightly."
Carson's other surgical innovations have included the first intrauterine procedure to relieve pressure on the brain of a hydrocephalic fetal twin, and a hemispherectomy, in which a young girl suffering from uncontrollable seizures had one half of her brain removed.
Awards and honors.
Carson is a member of the American Academy of Achievement, and the Horatio Alger Association of Distinguished Americans. In 2008, the White House awarded Benjamin Carson the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor. As an internationally renowned physician, Carson has authored over 100 neurosurgical publications, along with three best-selling books, and has been awarded 38 honorary doctorate degrees and dozens of national merit citations.
Publications and appearances.
Carson has written four bestselling books published by Zondervan, an international Christian media and publishing company: "Gifted Hands", "The Big Picture", "Take the Risk", and "Think Big". The first book is an autobiography and two are about his personal philosophies of success that incorporate hard work and a faith in God; Carson is a Seventh-day Adventist. In a debate with Richard Dawkins, Francis Collins, and Daniel Dennett, Carson stated he doesn't believe in evolution: "I don't believe in evolution...evolution says that because there are these similarities, even though we can't specifically connect them, it proves that this is what happened."
A video documentary about Carson's life titled "" was released by Zondervan in 1992. Subsequently in 2009, a separate television movie with the same title premiered on TNT on February 7, 2009, with Academy Award winner Cuba Gooding Jr. in the lead role and Kimberly Elise portraying his mother.
Politics.
On February 7, 2013, Carson was the keynote speaker at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast. Despite the fact that all speakers are told by organizers to steer clear of politics, Carson broke with the non-political tradition of the National Prayer Breakfast and spoke about political issues including President Barack Obama's policies on healthcare, the national debt, and taxation. His observations, which some have called conservative, created an immediate national reaction. The YouTube video of the breakfast reached over two million views in six days. (Two identical YouTube clips equal over 2 million views.) Conservative commentators from Rush Limbaugh, to Fox News commentators Sean Hannity and Neil Cavuto widely praised the speech as speaking "truth to power". On February 8, 2013, "The Wall Street Journal" had an article titled: "Ben Carson for President". Nationally-syndicated columnist, Star Parker, wrote in a column that "Ben Carson owes no apology for honest talk." Conservative Fox News pundit and contributor Cal Thomas, however, opined that Carson's remarks were inappropriate for the event and that he should apologize to President Obama. In an interview with Neil Cavuto, Carson defended himself by saying “Somebody has to be courageous enough to stand up to the bullies.” Carson appeared on the Fox News program "Hannity" on Friday February 8th, and was asked about a possible run for the White House. Carson responded: “If the Lord grabbed me by the collar and made me do it, I would.”
During the speech, he addressed political correctness: "The PC Correct Police are out in force at all times ... We have to get over this sensitivity ... PC is dangerous, because you see, this country, one of the founding principles was freedom of thought and freedom of expression. And it muffles people. It puts a muzzle on them." On education, he compared our abysmal graduation rates with 200 years ago: "In 1831, Alexis de Tocqueville came to our country... anybody finishing the second grade was completely literate." About healthcare: "Here’s my solution. When a person is born, give him a birth certificate, an electronic medical record and a health savings account [HSA, to which money can be contributed, pre-tax from the time you are born, to the time you die. When you die, you can pass it on to your family members".
As part of his increased national exposure, Carson was featured on ABC's venerable "This Week" Sunday morning TV political program on February 17, 2013. Carson told interviewer and Chief White House Correspondent Jonathan Karl in the “Sunday Spotlight” segment: “I don’t think it was particularly political,” Carson said of his White House speech. ”You know, I’m a physician. I like to diagnose things. And, you know, I’ve diagnosed some pretty, pretty significant issues that I think a lot of people resonate with.” Regarding the policies of President Obama, he said: “There are a number of policies that I don’t believe lead to the growth of our nation and don’t lead to the elevation of our nation. I don’t want to sit here and say all of his policies are bad. What I would like to see more often in this nation is an open and intelligent conversation, not people just casting aspersions at each other. I mean, it’s unbelievable to me the way people act like third graders. And if somebody doesn’t agree with them, they’re this and they’re that and, you know — it comes from both sides. And it’s just so infantile.”
In the National Review Online article “A Speech Worthy of Booker T. Washington”, Editor-at-Large Jonah Goldberg compared Carson to legendary African-American leader Booker T. Washington.
His recent ascent has catapulted his most recent book "America the Beautiful, Rediscovering What Made this Nation Great," to become the number one Best Seller at Amazon (February 20, 2013).
Flat Tax Proponent.
Carson is a proponent of a flat tax system, which he prefers to call the “Proportional Tax”. He views our current tax system as complicated and inefficient. “What we need to do is come up with something simple. And when I pick up my Bible, you know what I see? I see the fairest individual in the universe, God, and he's given us a system. It's called a tithe,” said Carson at the prayer breakfast. “"We don't necessarily have to do 10%, but it's the principle. You make $10 billion, you put in a billion. You make $10 you put in one. Of course you've got to get rid of the loopholes.” He opined that some people think you have to hurt people who have a higher income. “Where does it say you've got to hurt the guy? He just put a billion dollars in the pot. We don't need to hurt him. It's that kind of thinking that has resulted in 602 banks in the Cayman Islands. That money needs to be back here building our infrastructure and creating jobs."
Political Affiliation.
Carson has indentified himself as being independent of any political party. “If I were part of one, it would be called the ‘Logic party,’ and it would be dedicated to commonsense approaches we all should be able to see.” This would include “recognizing that our debt is so great we have got to stop digging the hole and spend less.” 
Personal life.
In June 2002, Carson cut back on his public appearances when he was diagnosed with prostate cancer. He still operates on more than 300 children a year, but has been trying to shorten his days: prior to his cancer he used to work from 7:00 in the morning until 8:00 at night. He is also a devout Seventh-Day Adventist Christian. 
Carson Scholars Fund.
Carson and his wife started the Carson Scholars Fund in 1994. According to the Carson Scholars website, "Carson Scholarships are awarded to students in grades 4-11 who exemplify academic excellence and humanitarian qualities. Winners receive a $1,000 scholarship to be invested toward their college education, along with a recognition package, and an invitation to attend an awards banquet."
Family.
The Carsons are members of the Seventh-day Adventist Church.
