Films generate income from several revenue streams including theatrical exhibition, home video, television broadcast rights and merchandising. However, theatrical box office earnings are the primary metric for trade publications (such as "Variety" and "Box Office Mojo") in assessing the success of a film, mostly due to the availability of the data compared to sales figures for home video and broadcast rights, and also due to historical practice. Included on the list are charts of the top box-office earners (ranked by both the nominal and real value of their revenue), a chart of high-grossing films by calendar year, a timeline showing the transition of the highest-grossing film record, and a chart of the highest-grossing film franchises and series. All charts are ranked by international theatrical box office performance where possible, excluding income derived from home video, broadcasting rights and merchandise.
Traditionally, war films, musicals and historical dramas have been the most popular genres, but franchise films have been the best performers in the 21st century, with films from the "Harry Potter", "Lord of the Rings" and "Pirates of the Caribbean" series dominating the top end of the list. Since "Superman" (1978) there has been new interest in the superhero genre; "Batman" from DC Comics and films based on the Marvel Comics brand such as "Spider-Man", "X-Men" and films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe have all done particularly well. The only films in the top ten that do not form a franchise are the top two, "Avatar" and "Titanic", both directed by James Cameron. Animated family films have performed consistently well, with Disney films enjoying lucrative re-releases prior to the home video era. Disney enjoyed later success with its Pixar brand, of which the "Toy Story" films and "Finding Nemo" have been the best performers; beyond Pixar animation, the "Shrek", "Ice Age" and "Madagascar" series have met with the most success.
While inflation has eroded away the achievements of most films from the 1960s and 1970s, there are franchises originating from that period that are still active: "James Bond" and "Star Trek" films are still being released periodically, and the "Star Wars" saga was reprised after a lengthy hiatus; "Indiana Jones" also saw a successful comeback after lying dormant for nearly twenty years. All four are still among the highest-grossing franchises, despite starting over thirty years ago. Some of the older films that held the record of highest-grossing film still have respectable grosses even by today's standards, but do not really compete against today's top-earners: "Gone with the Wind" for instance—which was the highest-grossing film for 25 years—does not even make the top fifty in the modern market, but, adjusted for inflation, it would still be the highest-grossing film. All grosses on the list are expressed in US dollars at their nominal value, except where stated otherwise.
Highest-grossing films.
With a worldwide box-office gross of about $2.8 billion, "Avatar" is often proclaimed to be the "highest-grossing" film, but such claims usually refer to theatrical revenues only and do not take account of home video and television income, which can form a significant portion of a film's earnings. Once revenue from home entertainment is factored in it is not immediately clear which film is the most successful. In addition to the $1.8 billion "Titanic" grossed during its original theatrical run, it also earned a further $1.2 billion from video and DVD sales and rentals. While complete sales data is not available for "Avatar", it earned $190 million from the sale of 10 million DVD and Blu-ray units in North America, and sold a total of 30 million units worldwide. After home video income is accounted for, both films have earned over $3 billion. Television broadcast rights will also substantially add to a film's earnings, with a film often earning as much as 20–25% of its theatrical box-office for a couple of television runs on top of pay-per-view revenues; "Titanic" earned $55 million from just the US broadcast rights alone for its initial television run (equating to about 9% of its North American gross).
When a film is highly exploitable as a commercial property, its ancillary revenues from merchandising can dwarf its income from direct film sales. Pixar's "Cars" earned $461 million in theatrical revenues—which was only a modest hit by comparison to other Pixar films—but generated merchandise sales approaching $10 billion in the five years after its 2006 release, the most revenue ever generated by a single film.
Only the revenues from theatrical exhibition at their nominal value are included here, which sees "Avatar" rank in the top position. Fourteen films in total have grossed in excess of $1 billion worldwide. The films on this chart have all had a theatrical run (including re-releases) since 1993, and films that have not played since then do not appear on the chart due to ticket-price inflation, population size and ticket purchasing trends not being considered. The most represented year is 2012 with eight films.
Highest-grossing films adjusted for inflation.
Due to the long-term effects of inflation, notably the significant increase of movie theater ticket prices, the list unadjusted for inflation gives far more weight to later films. The unadjusted list, while commonly found in the press, is therefore largely meaningless for comparing films widely separated in time, as many films from earlier eras will never appear on a modern unadjusted list, despite achieving higher commercial success when adjusted for price increases. To compensate for the devaluation of the currency, some charts make adjustments for inflation, but not even this practise fully addresses the issue since ticket prices and inflation do not necessarily parallel one another. For example, in 1970 tickets cost $1.55 or about $6.68 in inflation-adjusted 2004 dollars; by 1980, prices had risen to about $2.69, a drop to $5.50 in inflation-adjusted 2004 dollars. Ticket prices have also risen at different rates of inflation around the world, further complicating the process of adjusting worldwide grosses.
Another complication is release in multiple formats for which different ticket prices are charged. One notable example of this phenomenon is "Avatar", which was also released in 3D and IMAX: almost two-thirds of tickets for that film were for 3D showings with an average price of $10, and about one-sixth were for IMAX showings with an average price over $14.50, compared to a 2010 average price of $7.61 for 2D films. Social and economic factors such as population change and the growth of international markets also impact on the number of people purchasing theater tickets, along with audience demographics where some films sell a much higher proportion of discounted children's tickets, or perform better in big cities where tickets cost more.
The measuring system for gauging a film's success is based on unadjusted grosses, mainly because historically this is the way it has always been done due to the practices of the film industry: the box office receipts are compiled by theaters and relayed to the distributor, which in turn releases them to the media. Converting to a more representative system that counts ticket sales rather than gross is also fraught with problems due to the fact that the only data available for older films are the sale totals. As the motion picture industry is highly oriented towards marketing currently released films, unadjusted figures are always used in marketing campaigns so that new blockbuster films can much more easily achieve a high sales ranking, and thus be promoted as a "top film of all time", so there is little incentive to switch to a more economically robust system from a marketing or even newsworthy point of view. 
Despite the inherent difficulties in accounting for inflation, several attempts have been made. Estimates can result in different amounts since the price index used to adjust the grosses and the exchange rates used to convert between currencies all impact upon the calculations, which can have an effect on the ultimate rankings of an inflation adjusted list. "Gone with the Wind"—first released in 1939—is generally considered to be the most successful film, with "Guinness World Records" estimating its adjusted global gross at $3.3 billion. Estimates for "Gone with the Wind"s adjusted gross have varied substantially: its owner, Turner Entertainment, also estimated its adjusted earnings at $3.3 billion in 2007, a few years earlier than the "Guinness" estimate; other estimates fall either side of this amount, with one putting its gross just under $3 billion in 2010, while another provided an alternative figure of about $3.8 billion in 2006. Which film is "Gone with the Wind"'s nearest rival depends on the set of figures used: "Guinness" have "Avatar" in second place with nearly $2.8 billion, while other estimates see "Titanic" in the runner-up spot with first-run worldwide earnings of almost $2.9 billion at 2010 prices. Including the "Guinness" figures, estimates for "Star Wars" (1977) range from $2.2–2.7 billion at 2010/11 price levels, while "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" has earned approximately $1.9–2.2 billion, and the $1.9–2.0 billion figure for "Jaws" is corroborated by "The Economist". "Guinness" estimates that seven films have earned in excess of $2 billion at 2011 prices.
High-grossing films by year.
Audience tastes were fairly eclectic during the 20th century, but several trends did emerge. During the silent era, films with war themes were popular with audiences, with "The Birth of a Nation" (American Civil War), "The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse", "The Big Parade" and "Wings" (all World War I) becoming the most successful films in their respective years of release, with the trend coming to an end with "All Quiet on the Western Front" in 1930. With the advent of sound in 1927, the musical—the genre best placed to showcase the new technology—took over as the most popular type of film with audiences, with 1928 and 1929 both being topped by musical films. The genre continued to perform strongly in the 1930s, but the outbreak of World War II saw war themed films dominate again during this period, starting with "Gone with the Wind" (American Civil War) in 1939, and finishing with "The Best Years of Our Lives" (World War II) in 1946. "Samson and Delilah" (1949) saw the beginning of a trend of increasingly expensive historical dramas set during Ancient Rome/biblical times throughout the 1950s as cinema competed with television for audiences, with "Quo Vadis", "The Robe", "The Ten Commandments", "Ben-Hur" and "Spartacus" all becoming the highest-grossing film of the year during initial release, before the genre started to wane after the financially catastrophic "Cleopatra" in 1963. The success of "White Christmas" and "South Pacific" in the 1950s foreshadowed the comeback of the musical in the 1960s with "West Side Story", "Mary Poppins", "My Fair Lady", "The Sound of Music" and "Funny Girl" all among the top films of the decade. The 1970s saw a shift in audience tastes to high concept films, with six such films made by either George Lucas or Steven Spielberg topping the chart during the 1980s. The 21st century has seen an increasing dependence on franchises and adaptations, with "Avatar" in 2009 being the only chart-topper forming an original work.
Steven Spielberg is the most represented director on the chart with six films to his credit, occupying the top spot in 1975, 1981, 1982, 1984, 1989 and 1993. William Wyler (1942, 1946, 1959 and 1968) and Cecil B. DeMille (1947, 1949, 1952 and 1956) are in second place, each with four films, while Leo McCarey (1932, 1944 and 1945), George Roy Hill (1966, 1969 and 1973) and James Cameron (1991, 1997 and 2009) all feature heavily with three films apiece. George Lucas directed two chart-toppers in 1977 and 1999, but also served in a strong creative capacity as a producer and writer in 1980, 1981, 1983, 1984 and 1989 as well. The following directors have also all directed two films on the chart: D. W. Griffith, Frank Lloyd, King Vidor, Frank Capra, Michael Curtiz, Alfred Hitchcock, David Lean, Stanley Kubrick, Guy Hamilton, Mike Nichols, Peter Jackson and Gore Verbinski; Mervyn LeRoy, Ken Annakin and Robert Wise are each represented by one solo credit and one shared credit, and John Ford co-directed two films. Disney films are usually co-directed and some directors have served on several winning teams: Wilfred Jackson, Hamilton Luske, Clyde Geronimi, David Hand, Ben Sharpsteen, Wolfgang Reitherman and Bill Roberts have all co-directed at least two films on the list. Only five directors have topped the chart in consecutive years: McCarey (1944 and 1945), Nichols (1966 and 1967), Spielberg (1981 and 1982), Jackson (2002 and 2003) and Verbinski (2006 and 2007).
Due to release schedules—especially in the case of films released towards the end of the year—and different release patterns across the world, many films can do business in two or more calendar years; therefore the grosses documented here are not confined to just the year of release. Grosses are not limited to original theatrical runs either, with many older films often being re-released periodically so the figures represent all the business a film has done since its original release; a film's first-run gross is included in brackets after the total if known. In the cases where estimates conflict both films are recorded, and in cases where a film has moved into first place due to being re-released the previous record-holder is also retained. Due to incomplete data it cannot be known for sure how much money some films have made and when they made it, but generally the chart chronicles the films from each year that went on to earn the most. Every highest-grossing film of the year since 1918 has earned a million dollars in distributor rentals, and since 1949 every chart-topper has taken over $10 million in rentals. At least one film every year has generated $100 million in gross revenue at the box office since 1967, and from 2008 each year has succeeded in producing a billion dollar grossing film.
Timeline of highest-grossing films.
At least ten films have held the record of 'highest-grossing film'. "The Birth of a Nation" and "Gone with the Wind" spent 25 consecutive years apiece as the highest-grosser, with Steven Spielberg holding the record on three occasions and James Cameron—the current holder—twice. Spielberg became the first director to break his own record when "Jurassic Park" overtook "E.T.", and Cameron emulated the feat when "Avatar" broke the record set by "Titanic".
Some sources claim that "The Big Parade" superseded "The Birth of a Nation" as highest-grossing film, eventually being replaced by "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs", which in turn was quickly usurped by "Gone with the Wind". Exact figures are not known for "The Birth of a Nation", but contemporary records put its worldwide earnings at $5.2 million as of 1919. Its international release was delayed by World War I, and it was not released in many foreign territories until the 1920s; coupled with a 1921 reissue in the United States, its $10 million earnings as reported by "Variety" in 1932 are consistent with the earlier figure. At this time, "Variety" still had "The Birth of a Nation" ahead of "The Big Parade" ($6,400,000) on distributor rentals, and if its estimate is correct, "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" ($8,500,000) would not have earned enough on its first theatrical run to take the record, although it would have been the highest-grossing 'talkie', displacing "The Singing Fool" ($5,900,000). Although received wisdom holds that it is unlikely "The Birth of a Nation" was ever overtaken by a silent-era film, the record would fall to "Ben-Hur" (1925) ($9,386,000) if "The Birth of a Nation" earned significantly less than its estimated gross. In addition to its gross rental earnings through public exhibition, "The Birth of a Nation" played at a large number of private, club and organizational engagements which figures are unavailable for. It was hugely popular with the Ku Klux Klan who used it to drive recruitment, and at one point "Variety" estimated its total earnings to stand at around $50 million. Despite later retracting the claim, the sum has been widely reported even though it has never been substantiated. While it is generally accepted that "Gone with the Wind" took over the record of highest-grossing film on its initial release—which is true in terms of public exhibition—it is likely it did not overtake "The Birth of a Nation" in total revenue until a much later date, with it still being reported as the highest earner up until the 1960s. "Gone with the Wind" itself may have been briefly overtaken by "The Ten Commandments" (1956), which closed at the end of 1960 with worldwide rentals of $58–60 million compared to "Gone with the Wind"'s $59 million; if it did claim the top spot its tenure there was short-lived, since "Gone with the Wind" was re-released the following year and increased its earnings to $67 million. Depending on how accurate the estimates are, the 1959 remake of "Ben-Hur" may also have captured the record from "Gone with the Wind": as of the end of 1961 it had earned $47 million worldwide, and by 1963 it was trailing "Gone with the Wind" by just $2 million with international takings of $65 million, ultimately earning $66 million from its initial release.
Another film purported to have been the highest-grosser is the 1972 pornographic film, "Deep Throat". In 1984, Linda Lovelace testified to a United States Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on juvenile justice that the film had earned $600 million; this figure has been the subject of much speculation, since if it is accurate then the film would have made more money than "Star Wars", and finished the 1970s as the highest-grossing film. The main argument against this figure is that it simply did not have a wide enough release to sustain the sort of sums that would be required for it to ultimately gross this amount. Exact figures are not known, but testimony in a federal trial in 1976—about four years into the film's release—showed the film had grossed over $25 million. Roger Ebert has reasoned it possibly did earn as much as $600 million on paper, since mobsters owned most of the adult movie theaters during this period and would launder income from drugs and prostitution through them, so probably inflated the box office receipts for the film.
"The Birth of a Nation", "Gone with the Wind", "The Godfather", "Jaws", "Star Wars", "E.T." and "Avatar" all increased their record grosses with re-releases. The grosses from their original theatrical runs are included here along with totals from re-releases up to the point that they lost the record; therefore the total for "The Birth of a Nation" includes income from its reissues up to 1940; the total for "Star Wars" includes revenue from the late 1970s and early 1980s reissues but not from the 1997 Special Edition; the total for "E.T." incorporates its gross from the 1985 reissue but not from 2002; the total for "Avatar"—as the current record-holder—includes all its earnings at the present time. "Gone with the Wind" is represented twice on the chart: the 1940 entry includes earnings from its staggered 1939–1942 release (roadshows/first-run engagements/general release) along with all of its revenue up to the 1961 reissue prior to losing the record to "The Sound of Music" in 1966; its 1971 entry—after it took back the record—includes income from the 1967 and 1971 reissues but omitting later releases. "The Godfather" was re-released in 1973 after its success at the 45th Academy Awards, and "Jaws" was released again in 1976, and their grosses here most likely include earnings from those releases. "The Sound of Music", "The Godfather", "Jaws" and "Titanic" increased their earnings with further releases in 1973, 1997, 1979 and 2012 respectively, but they are not included in the totals here since they had already conceded the record prior to being re-released. "Jurassic Park" has had just one theatrical run, so its total represents its entire gross.
"The Sound of Music" was the first film to earn $100 million in rentals, but "Gone with the Wind" would have been the first to generate $100 million in box office receipts through its reissues, while "Titanic" was the first $1 billion grossing film.
Highest-grossing franchises and film series.
Prior to 2000, only seven series had grossed over $1 billion at the box office: "James Bond", "Star Wars", "Indiana Jones", "Rocky", "Batman", "Jurassic Park" and "Star Trek". Since the turn of the century that number has increased to over thirty; this is partly due to inflation and market growth, but also to Hollywood's adoption of the franchise model: films that have built-in brand recognition, such as being based on a well known literary source ("The Lord of the Rings") or an established character (Indiana Jones). The methodology is based on the concept that films associated with things audiences are already familiar with can be more effectively marketed to them, and as such are known as "pre-sold" films within the industry. The "Harry Potter" series has grossed the most, amassing nearly $8 billion over eight films at the box office, although the EON "James Bond" series is the highest grossing when adjusted for inflation, with a total of over $13 billion at 2011/12 prices. If ancillary income from merchandising is included, then "Star Wars" is the most lucrative franchise, earning more than $22 billion in total, with direct income from the films themselves accounting for just one third of overall revenues. At constant prices the live-action "Star Wars" films are also the most consistent performers, earning on average more per film than any other series, while Peter Jackson's "The Lord of the Rings" trilogy is the nominal record-holder, averaging at about $970 million with each film earning in excess of $870 million.
