Christopher Scott "Chris" Kyle (April 8, 1974 – February 2, 2013) was a United States Navy SEAL and the most lethal sniper in American military history, with 160 confirmed kills (out of 255 claimed kills), although these statistics have not been released by the Pentagon.
At the age of 8, Kyle's father taught him to shoot. As a youth, he trained as a bronco rider for the rodeo, which he gave up after a serious injury to his arm. He had intended to volunteer and enlist in the U.S. Marine Corps, and was recruited by the U.S. Army, but eventually enlisted with the U.S. Navy. Kyle served four tours in the second Iraq war, and was awarded the Bronze and Silver Star medals multiple times. Iraqi insurgents dubbed him the "Devil of Ramadi" and offered an increasing bounty for his head. He was shot twice, and was involved in six IED attacks.
Kyle was honorably discharged from the U.S. Navy in 2009 in order to spend time with his family. He remained in the spotlight during retirement, and wrote a "New York Times" bestselling autobiography, "American Sniper". Kyle was shot and killed on February 2, 2013, near Chalk Mountain, Texas.
Early life.
Born in Odessa, Texas, the son of a Sunday school teacher and a deacon, Kyle's father bought his son his first gun at 8 years old, a bolt-action .30-06 Springfield rifle, and later a shotgun, with which they hunted pheasant, quail, and deer. After school, Kyle became a professional bronco rodeo rider, but his profession ended abruptly when he severely injured his arm. After his arm healed, he went to a military recruiting office, interested in joining the United States Marine Corps (USMC). A Navy recruiter told him about the Navy SEALs. Kyle signed up, but was rejected because of the pins in his arm. A little while later, he received a call and he had the chance to go to BUD/S (Basic Underwater Demolition SEAL school), finally joining the United States Navy in 1999.
Military service.
Iraq War.
Assigned to SEAL Team 3, Sniper Element Charlie platoon within the Naval Special Warfare Command, and with over four tours of duty, Kyle served in every major battle of Operation Iraqi Freedom. His first long-range kill shot was taken during the initial invasion, when he shot a woman approaching a group of Marines with a hand grenade in her hand. As ordered, he opened fire, killing the woman before she could attack. 
For his deadly track record as a marksman during his deployment to Ramadi, the insurgents named him "Shaitan Ar-Ramadi" (English: "The Devil of Ramadi"), and put a $20,000 bounty on his head that was later increased to $80,000.
In 2008, outside Sadr City, he made his longest successful shot, after he spotted an insurgent with a rocket launcher near a U.S. Army convoy at a range of . He fired a shot from his .338 Lapua Magnum chambered McMillan TAC-338 sniper rifle, killing the insurgent as told in his book "American Sniper". During four tours of duty in Iraq, Kyle was shot twice and caught up in six separate IED explosions. His other weapons included the Mk 12 sniper rifle, M4 carbine and a .300 Winchester Magnum sniper rifle. 
Later work.
Kyle left the U.S. Navy in 2009, and moved to Midlothian, Texas with his wife, Taya, and two children. He ran Craft International, which provides military, law enforcement, and civilian training, as well as private security and protection until his death. In 2012, Harper Collins released Kyle's autobiographical book "American Sniper". Kyle also paired with FITCO Cares Foundation, a non-profit organization which created the Heroes Project to provide free in-home fitness equipment, individualized programs, personal training, and life-coaching to in-need veterans with disabilities, Gold Star families, or those suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder. On August 13, 2012, Kyle appeared on the reality television show "Stars Earn Stripes", which features celebrities pairing up with a special operations or law enforcement professional who will train them in weapons and combat tactics. Kyle was teamed with actor Dean Cain.
Alleged confrontation with Jesse Ventura.
While promoting his book "American Sniper" on the "Opie and Anthony Radio Show" on January 4, 2012, Kyle claimed to have knocked down former Governor of Minnesota Jesse Ventura, who was also a member of the Underwater Demolition Teams, with a punch to the face at a bar in Coronado, California in 2006 after Ventura allegedly “badmouthed the troops” and said that the SEALs "deserved to lose a few guys." The alleged incident occurred during a wake for Michael A. Monsoor, a Navy SEAL who was killed in action in Iraq the same year. Kyle also wrote about the alleged incident in his book but did not mention Ventura by name. Ventura released a statement on his Facebook page calling Kyle's claims completely false, denying he said anything derogatory about the troops, and also denying Kyle’s claim of punching him in the face or even having ever met Kyle. Kyle claimed two Navy SEALs had come forward with the story but no police report is known to exist. At the time of Kyle's death, 
Ventura was suing Kyle for defamation in court.
Death.
On Saturday, February 2, 2013 Kyle and a companion, Chad Littlefield, were shot and killed at the Rough Creek Lodge shooting range in Erath County, Texas by 25-year-old fellow veteran Eddie Ray Routh, whom Kyle and Littlefield had purportedly taken to the gun range in an effort to help him with his posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
Local police captured Routh after a short freeway chase, which ended when Routh, who had left the scene of the shootings in Kyle's Ford F-350 truck, crashed into a police cruiser. Routh was arrested just before 9:00 p.m. the same day in Lancaster, Texas. Erath County sheriffs said the motive for the killing was unclear. Routh, from Lancaster, Texas, was arraigned Saturday, February 2, 2013, on two counts of capital murder, according to Sgt. Lonny Haschel of the Texas Department of Public Safety. He was taken to the Erath County Jail for holding under a $3 million bond. 
A memorial service was held for Kyle at Cowboys Stadium in Arlington, Texas, on February 11, 2013. Kyle was buried on February 12, 2013, in Austin, Texas, after a funeral procession from Midlothian, Texas, to Austin, stretching over 200 miles. The funeral procession, according to the Texas Department of Public Safety, may have been longest in American history.
