The fifth and final season of the American television drama series "Breaking Bad" premiered on July 15, 2012. It will consist of 16 episodes, each running approximately 47 minutes in length. AMC broadcasts the fifth season on Sundays at 10:00 pm ET in the United States. The season is split into two parts, each containing eight episodes. The second half will debut in summer 2013.
Plot.
Walter White (Bryan Cranston) disposes of anything linking him to his successful plot against Gus Fring (Giancarlo Esposito) — the pipe bomb materials, the Lily of the Valley plant that he used to poison Brock (Ian Posada) while duping Jesse Pinkman (Aaron Paul) into thinking Gus did it, and Gus' office laptop via an industrial electromagnet. Mike Ehrmantraut (Jonathan Banks) joins Walter and Jesse in their new cartel ownership, while not trusting Lydia Rodarte-Quayle (Laura Fraser), an executive with Madrigal Electromotive GmbH, the parent company of Gus' Los Pollos Hermanos. Saul Goodman (Bob Odenkirk) suggests different sites for the cooking process, but none are satisfactory, save for one — a pest control company known as Vamonos Pest. Walter and Jesse use the business' fumigation tent on random houses as a mobile laboratory. Skyler White (Anna Gunn) realizes that Walter is not exactly "free" from his meth-making past and begins to fear for her and her children's lives, thinking the danger will return, and asks Marie to care for her children. Resigned, with no other options, she decides to patiently wait for Walt's cancer to come back.
Meanwhile, the methylamine flow is disrupted, forcing Walter, Jesse, and Mike to rob a train carrying a large shipment. The heist is nearly compromised when a child spots them, but he is shot by a new hire for the heist, Todd (Jesse Plemons). As the DEA begins to track Mike, and with the recent death of the child, both Jesse and Mike design a permanent exit for themselves from the meth business. They plan to sell their methylamine for $5 million each to Declan, a major regional meth producer and distributor. Walt shanghais Jesse and Mike's scheme when he refuses to sell his share of the methylamine and uses his Heisenberg persona's infamy to cut a deal with Declan and negotiate a handsome severance for Mike. Jesse is determined to leave the business, irrespective of his financial cut. Walter enlists Todd as an assistant cook. After Mike gets in trouble with the DEA and decides to leave for good, Walter shoots Mike dead as he refuses to give him the names of Gus' former employees who might talk.
Mike's death shakes Walt, who manages to get the names from Lydia anyway, and arranges for the men to be killed by associates of Todd's uncle, a neo-Nazi and former convict. Lydia also arranges for Walt's product to be shipped to the Czech Republic using Madrigal's more obscure branches. Over the next few months, this nets Walt an extraordinary amount of money - so much that, after some pleading from Skyler, he finally decides to retire, dropping off $10 million at Jesse's door. Months later, the White family is all living under one roof again. All seems to be going well until Hank discovers a book of poetry in Walt's bathroom, signed by Gale Boetticher (as "G.B."). Hank now clearly sees that Walter is Heisenberg. 
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Development and production.
In July 2011, series creator Vince Gilligan indicated that he intended to conclude "Breaking Bad" with the fifth season. In early August 2011, negotiations began over a deal regarding the fifth and possibly final season between the network AMC and Sony Pictures Television, the production company of the series. AMC proposed a shortened fifth season (six to eight episodes, instead of 13) to cut costs, but the producers declined. Sony then approached other cable networks about possibly picking up the show if a deal could not be made. On August 14, 2011, a deal was made where AMC renewed the series for a final 16 episodes. Filming began for the season on March 26, 2012. Filming for the second half of the season began on December 7, 2012, during which AMC sent the cast and crew cupcakes decorated with characters and props used throughout the show's run.
Dean Norris, who plays Hank Schrader, had asked Gilligan to kill off his character during the first half of the season.
Reception.
The fifth season has received unanimous acclaim from television critics, and currently earns 99 out of 100 score based on 22 reviews on the aggregate review website Metacritic, making it the highest rated season of any show on the site. The premiere was also the most watched episode in the series' history, with 2.93 million viewers, until the seventh episode had 2.98 million. For the 65th Writers Guild of America Awards, the series received four nominations for Best Episodic Drama, for "Buyout", "Dead Freight", "Fifty-One" and "Say My Name", and won for Best Dramatic Series.
