Javier Ángel Encinas Bardem (; born 1 March 1969) is a Spanish actor. In 2007, he won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his role as psychopathic assassin Anton Chigurh in "No Country for Old Men". He has also garnered critical acclaim for roles in films such as "Jamón, jamón", "Carne trémula", "Boca a boca", "Los Lunes al sol" and "Mar adentro". He portrayed the main antagonist Raoul Silva in the 2012 "James Bond" movie "Skyfall".
As well as the Academy Award, Bardem has been awarded a Golden Globe, a Screen Actors Guild Award, a BAFTA, five Goya awards, two European Film Awards, a Prize for Best Actor at Cannes and two Coppa Volpis at Venice for his work. He is the first Spaniard to be nominated for an Oscar (Best Actor, 2000, for "Before Night Falls"), as well as the first Spanish actor to win an Academy Award. He received his third Academy Award nomination, and second Best Actor nomination, for the film "Biutiful".
Early life.
Bardem was born in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, in the Canary Islands (Spain). His mother, Pilar Bardem (née María del Pilar Bardem Muñoz), is an actress, and his father, José Carlos Encinas Doussinague, was a businessman involved in environmental work. The two separated shortly after his birth. His mother raised him alone. Bardem comes from a long line of filmmakers and actors dating back to the earliest days of Spanish cinema; he is a grandson of actors Rafael Bardem and Matilde Muñoz Sampedro, and nephew of screenwriter and director Juan Antonio Bardem. Both his older brother and sister, Carlos and Mónica, are actors. He also comes from a very political background, in which his uncle Juan Antonio was imprisoned by Franco for his anti-fascist films. Bardem was brought up in the Roman Catholic faith by his grandmother.
As a child, he hung around theatres and film sets. At age six, he made his first film appearance, in Fernando Fernán Gómez's "El Pícaro" ("The Scoundrel"). He also played rugby for the underage Spanish National Team. Though he grew up in a family full of actors, Bardem did not see himself going into the family business. Actually, painting was his first love. He went on to study painting for four years at Madrid's Escuela de Artes y Oficios. In need of money he took acting jobs to support his painting, but he also says he was a bad painter and eventually abandoned that career pursuit. In 1989, for the Spanish comedy show "El Día Por Delante" ("The Day Ahead"), he had to wear a Superman costume for a comedic sketch, a job that made him question whether he wanted to be an actor at all. Bardem has confessed to having worked as a stripper (for one day only) during his struggling acting career.
Career.
Bardem starred in his first major motion picture, "The Ages of Lulu", when he was 20. He was propelled to fame, in 1992, by his role as a potential underwear model and would-be bullfighter in "Jamón, jamón", which also starred a teenage Penélope Cruz. Bardem's talent did not go unnoticed in the English-speaking world. In 1997, John Malkovich was the first to approach him, then a 27-year-old, for a role in English, but the Spanish actor turned down the offer because his English was still poor. His first English-speaking role came that same year, in with director Alex de la Iglesia's "Perdita Durango", playing a santería-practicing bank robber. After starring in about two dozen films in his native country, he gained international recognition in Julian Schnabel's "Before Night Falls" in 2000, portraying Cuban poet Reinaldo Arenas. He received praise from his idol Al Pacino; the message Pacino left on Bardem's answering machine was something he considers one of the most beautiful gifts he's ever received. For that role, he received an Academy Award for Best Actor nomination, the first for a Spaniard. Immediately after, he turned down the role of "Witwer" in "Minority Report" which eventually went to Colin Farrell. Instead, in 2002, Bardem starred in John Malkovich's directorial debut, "The Dancer Upstairs". Malkovich originally had the Spanish actor in mind for the role of the detective's assistant, but the movie took so long to obtain financing it gave Bardem time to learn English and take on the lead role of the detective. "I will always be grateful to him because he really gave me my very first chance to work in English," Bardem has said of Malkovich.
Bardem won Best Actor at the Venice Film Festival for his role in "Mar Adentro" (2004), released in the United States as "The Sea Inside", in which he portrayed the quadriplegic turned assisted suicide activist Ramón Sampedro. He made his Hollywood debut in a brief appearance as a crime lord who summons Tom Cruise's hitman to do the dirty work of dispatching witnesses in the crime drama "Collateral". He stars in Miloš Forman's 2006 film "Goya's Ghosts" opposite Natalie Portman, where he plays a twisted monk during the Spanish Inquisition. In 2007, Bardem acted in two film adaptations: the Coen Brothers' "No Country for Old Men", and the adaptation of the Colombian novel "Love in the Time of Cholera" with Giovanna Mezzogiorno by Gabriel García Márquez. In "No Country for Old Men," he played a sociopathic assassin, Anton Chigurh. For that role, he became the first Spanish actor and Spaniard to win an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He also won a Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild (SAG) Award for Best Supporting Actor, the Critics' Choice Award for Best Supporting Actor, and the 2008 British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) Award for Best Supporting Actor. Bardem's rendition of Chigurh's trademark phrase, "Call it, friendo", was named Top HollyWORDIE of 2007 in the annual survey by the Global Language Monitor. Chigurh was named No. 26 in "Entertainment Weekly" magazine's 2008 "50 Most Vile Villains in Movie History" list. Bardem's life's work was honored at the 2007 Gotham Awards, produced by Independent Feature Project.
Francis Ford Coppola singled out Bardem as an heir to, and even improvement on, Al Pacino, Jack Nicholson and Robert De Niro, referring to Bardem as ambitious, hungry, unwilling to rest on his laurels and always "excited to do something good." Bardem was attached to play the role of Tetro's mentor in Coppola's film "Tetro", but the director felt the character should be female, so he was replaced by fellow Spaniard Carmen Maura. Bardem was originally cast to play fictional filmmaker Guido Contini in the film adaptation of the Broadway musical "Nine", but dropped out due to exhaustion. The part eventually went to Daniel Day-Lewis. He went on to star alongside Penélope Cruz and Scarlett Johansson in Woody Allen's "Vicky Cristina Barcelona" (2008). In 2010, he was awarded Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival for his performance in "Biutiful" directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu, who specifically wrote the film with Bardem in mind. After being overlooked by the Globes and SAG, Bardem was the unexpected Oscar nominee on 25 January 2011, becoming the first all Spanish-language Best Actor nominee ever. He won his 5th Goya Award, this time for Best Actor in "Biutiful", dedicating the win to his wife, Penélope Cruz, and newborn son. Around this same time he was offered the lead role of "Gunslinger" Roland Deschain in Ron Howard's adaptation of Stephen King's Dark Tower novels. If he had signed, he would have starred in the TV series as well. Then Eon Productions offered him a role in the James Bond film, "Skyfall". With Universal deciding not to go forward with the ultra-ambitious adaptation of the Stephen King 7-novel series, and to end months of speculation, Bardem officially confirmed his role in "Skyfall" during an interview with Christiane Amanpour for ABC's "Nightline".
Bardem received the 2,484th star of the Hollywood Walk of Fame on 8 November 2012. The star is located outside the El Capitan Theatre.
With his movie "" he showed up the suffering of the Sahrawi people in refugee camps. He publicly denounced the UN immobilism and unwillingness to definitively resolve that human crisis.
Personal life.
Bardem is now fluent in English. He is also a stated fan of heavy metal music, with a particular penchant for the band AC/DC. Bardem cannot drive, only getting behind the wheel for film roles, and he consistently refers to himself as a "worker", and not an actor. Bardem was raised a Catholic, but is now an atheist. Following the legalization of same-sex marriage in Spain in 2005, Bardem incited controversy when he stated that if he were gay, he would get married "right tomorrow, just to screw with the Church" ("mañana mismo, sólo para joder a la Iglesia"). In May 2011 Bardem teamed up with The Enough Project's co-founder John Prendergast to raise awareness about conflict minerals in eastern Congo.
Marriage.
In 2007, Bardem began dating Penélope Cruz, his co-star in "Vicky Cristina Barcelona". Bardem and Cruz have maintained a low public profile. They are famously private and will not talk about their personal lives. The couple married in July 2010 in The Bahamas. They have one son, named Leo Encinas Cruz (in keeping with Spanish naming custom), born in January 2011. In February 2013, it was reported that Cruz is pregnant with the couple's second child.
