Beauty and the Beast is an American television series very loosely inspired by the 1987 CBS series of the same name. The series premiered on October 11, 2012. On November 9, 2012, The CW ordered a full 22-episode season of the series.
Plot.
Catherine Chandler, a detective, witnessed her mother being shot the same night she is saved from her mother´s murderers by a supposed beast. Nine years later, a case leads her to discover that Vincent Keller, an ex soldier, killed in action during military service is actually alive. As Catherine gets to know him, she starts finding out more about her mother's murder and about who (and what) Vincent really is. At the same time a complicated relationship grows between them.
Production.
The CW Television Network officially began developing the series in September 2011. The project was described as "a modern-day romantic love story with a procedural twist", unlike the original series which was a romantic drama with mystery and suspense elements. The show is the first project that new president Mark Pedowitz developed when he joined the network.
The network ordered a pilot of the series in January 2012. The pilot of the show was filmed in Toronto, Canada from March 22 to April 2, 2012. It was picked up by The CW on May 11, 2012, and was scheduled to premiere during the 2012–13 television season. Filming of the first season continued in Toronto from July 27 and episode 13 is scheduled to be completed on December 21, 2012.
Kristin Kreuk was cast as the lead role of Catherine Chandler (Beauty) on February 16, 2012, with Jay Ryan cast in the role of Vincent Keller (the Beast) on March 2, 2012. (The character was originally called Koslow, though in the original series, Vincent had no last name.)
Reception.
The series was given a 34 out of 100 score on Metacritic, indicating "generally unfavorable" reviews from 19 critics. David Hinckley of the "New York Daily News" said the series was "such a natural it's downright devilish." Neil Genzlinger of "The New York Times" stated the "girl-power themes will probably play well to the network's core audience." Kyle Anderson of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the pilot of "Beauty and the Beast" a C- grade, stating that it lacks the same charm that the 1980s drama had, and that 'The Beast' is more of a Hulk rather than an actual beast. David Wiegand of the "San Francisco Chronicle" called the series an "overheated, badly written, wretchedly acted and unconvincing drama, which makes mincemeat out of the traditional beauty and the beast fairy tale." Jon Stewart on "The Daily Show" dismissed it with a derisive snort, saying, "Without Ron Perlman, WTF? What's the point?"
Broadcast.
The show currently airs on Thursdays at 9:00 pm Eastern/8:00 pm Central following "The Vampire Diaries". For those living in the United States, the show can be streamed on The CW's website; for those in Canada, the show can be streamed on Showcase's website.
