Pirates of the Caribbean is a series of fantasy adventure films directed by Gore Verbinski ("1"–"3") and Rob Marshall ("4"), written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio and produced by Jerry Bruckheimer. All four films are based on Walt Disney's theme park ride of the same name and follow the adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow (Johnny Depp), Will Turner (Orlando Bloom), Elizabeth Swann (Keira Knightley), Captain Hector Barbossa (Geoffrey Rush), Joshamee Gibbs (Kevin McNally), Davy Jones (Bill Nighy), Angelica (Penélope Cruz) and Blackbeard (Ian McShane).
The films started with their first release on the big screen in 2003 with '. After the success of the first film, Walt Disney Pictures revealed that a trilogy was in the works. ' was released three years later in 2006. The sequel proved successful, breaking records worldwide the day of its premiere. In the end, it earned $1,066,179,725 at the worldwide box office, becoming the fastest film (at the time) to reach the $1 billion mark and standing as the third highest-grossing film worldwide (since having dropped to eighth place). The third film in the series, ', was released in 2007. In September 2008, Depp signed on for a fourth film in the franchise, ', released on May 20, 2011 in conventional 2D, Digital 3-D and IMAX 3D. It succeeded in grossing more than $1 billion, becoming the eighth film and fastest Disney film (at the time) to achieve this. So far, the film franchise has grossed $3.72 billion worldwide, being the first of only two franchises with "two" films that reached $1 billion worldwide (the other being the Christopher Nolan's "Dark Knight" trilogy). It is the sixth highest-grossing film series of all-time. It has been confirmed that two more installments to the franchise are included in Disney's future plans. In July 2011, Johnny Depp confirmed he was closing in on a deal for a fifth installment and that the franchise wouldn't be going ahead without Depp's participation.
Although it has never been officially confirmed, there is strong evidence to suggest that the series was influenced by, and perhaps loosely based upon, the "Monkey Island" series of video games. Ted Elliott, one of the two screenwriters of the first four films, was allegedly the writer of a Steven Spielberg-produced animated film adaptation of "Monkey Island" entitled "The Curse of Monkey Island" (presumably based on the game of the same name), which was cancelled before its official announcement, three years prior to the release of "The Curse of the Black Pearl". This film was allegedly in production at Industrial Light & Magic before being cancelled.
Ron Gilbert, the creator of the "Monkey Island" video game series, has jokingly expressed a bitterness towards the "Pirates of the Caribbean" franchise for its similarities to "Monkey Island". Gilbert has also stated that "On Stranger Tides", a novel by Tim Powers which was adapted into the fourth film, was the principal source of inspiration for his video games.
Development.
First film.
In the early 1990s screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio conceived of writing a film based on the "Pirates of the Caribbean" ride. Disney had Jay Wolpert write a script based on the ride, which producer Jerry Bruckheimer rejected, feeling it was "a straight pirate movie". Bruckheimer brought Stuart Beattie in to rewrite the script in March 2002, due to his knowledge of piracy, and later that month Elliott and Rossio were brought in. Elliott and Rossio, inspired by the opening narration of the "Pirates of the Caribbean" theme-park ride, decided to give the film a supernatural edge. As the budget rose, Michael Eisner and Robert Iger threatened to cancel the film, though Bruckheimer changed their minds when he showed them concept art and animatics.
In June 2002 Gore Verbinski signed on to direct "", and Johnny Depp and Geoffrey Rush signed on the following month to star. Verbinski was attracted to the idea of using modern technology to resurrect a genre that had disappeared after the Golden Age of Hollywood, and recalled his childhood memories of the ride, feeling the film was an opportunity to pay tribute to the "scary and funny" tone of it. Depp was attracted to the story as he found it quirky: rather than trying to find treasure, the crew of the "Black Pearl" were trying to return it in order to lift their curse; also, the traditional mutiny had already taken place. Verbinski approached Rush for the role of Barbossa, as he knew he would not play it with attempts at complexity, but with a simple villainy that would suit the story's tone. Orlando Bloom read the script after Rush, with whom he was working on "Ned Kelly", suggested it to him. Keira Knightley came as a surprise to Verbinski: he had not seen her performance in "Bend It Like Beckham" and was impressed by her audition. Tom Wilkinson was negotiated with to play Governor Swann, but the role went to Jonathan Pryce, whom Depp idolized.
Shooting for "The Curse of the Black Pearl" began on October 9, 2002 and wrapped by March 7, 2003. Before its release, many executives and journalists had expected the film to flop, as the pirate genre had not been successful for years, the film was based on a theme-park ride, and Depp rarely made a big film. However, "The Curse of the Black Pearl" became both a critical and commercial success.
Second and third films.
After seeing how well the first film was made, the cast and crew signed for two more sequels to be shot back-to-back, a practical decision on Disney's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew. Writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio knew that with an ensemble cast, they weren't free to invent totally different situations and characters, as with the "Indiana Jones" and "James Bond" series, and so had to retroactively turn "The Curse of the Black Pearl" into the first of a trilogy. They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann's embrace at the end of the first film, and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device. They settled on introducing Davy Jones, the "Flying Dutchman" and the Kraken, a mythology mentioned twice in the first film. They introduced the historical East India Trading Company, which for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates.
Filming for the sequels began on February 28, 2005, with ' finishing on March 1, 2006, and ' on January 10, 2007.
The second film was also the first Disney theatrical feature film with the current computer-generated Walt Disney Pictures logo.
Fourth film.
Rossio and Elliot discovered the novel "On Stranger Tides" during production of "Dead Man's Chest" and "At World's End" and decided to use it as the basis for a fourth film. As Gore Verbinski was unavailable, Bruckheimer invited Rob Marshall to direct the film. Elliott and Rossio decided to do a standalone film, with a story that would support new characters, and incorporate elements from the novel, such as Blackbeard, the Fountain of Youth and mermaids—the latter two having been already alluded to in the previous films. Depp, Rush, Greg Ellis and Kevin McNally returned to their roles, and the cast saw the additions of Ian McShane as Blackbeard and Penélope Cruz as Angelica, Blackbeard's daughter and Jack Sparrow's love interest. A further addition was Richard Griffiths as King George II of Great Britain. After the costly production of two simultaneous films, Disney tried to scale down the fourth installment, giving a lower budget, which led to cheaper locations and fewer scenes with special effects. It was also filmed in 3D, with cameras similar to the ones used in "Avatar".
Filming for "" began June 14, 2010 and ended on November 19, 2010. It was released in the United States on May 20, 2011.
Fifth film.
In the fourth film the cast and crew were told by Disney not to occupy their time in the near future, as the studio intends to shoot a fifth and sixth film back-to-back. On January 14, 2011, it was confirmed that Terry Rossio will write the screenplay for the fifth installment, without his co-writer Ted Elliott. Johnny Depp said that he would be happy to return as Captain Jack Sparrow saying "As long as we can put all the puzzle pieces together, I would most definitely consider it". Jerry Bruckheimer said that the fifth film would be a stand-alone film. According to Terry Rossio, the script for the fifth film is finished, and he has handed the script to Disney executives. Speaking at the fourth film's press launch in Cannes, Depp said he would play the role for as long as it is popular with the public.
Disney has a wishlist of directors they would like to direct, as Rob Marshall has not yet accepted nor declined to direct. The list includes Tim Burton, Sam Raimi, Alfonso Cuaron, Shawn Levy, Chris Weitz, and original "Pirates" director Gore Verbinski. Verbinski and Burton are Disney's top choices as they have both worked with Disney and Johnny Depp on numerous occasions. On July 6, 2011, Johnny Depp was reported to be close to a deal for the fifth film. Due to Depp's filming of "Lone Ranger" (2012–13) they will not be filming the 5th installment until 2014. Orlando Bloom said he would like to return for a fifth film if he was offered. In August 2012 news surfaced that Johnny Depp signed on officially for the fifth film. On January 11, 2013, Jeff Nathanson signed on to write the script for the film. On January 14, 2013, Disney revealed that the film would be released on July 10, 2015.
Films.
"The Curse of the Black Pearl " (2003).
Blacksmith Will Turner teams up with eccentric pirate Captain Jack Sparrow to save his love, the governor's daughter, from Jack's former pirate allies, thanks to a cursed chest of 882 pieces of Aztec Gold that they stole.
"Dead Man's Chest" (2006).
Lord Cutler Beckett, a powerful and ruthless East India Trading Co. agent, arrests Will and Elizabeth for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow's escape in the previous film. Beckett, however, offers clemency if Will agrees to search for Sparrow and his magical compass. At the same time, Sparrow tries to release himself from an old debt with villainous Davy Jones by finding the Dead Man's Chest which he can use to command Jones to do his bidding.
"At World's End" (2007).
Lord Beckett gains power over Davy Jones, and with the help of Jones' ship, the "Flying Dutchman", he is now executing his plans to extinguish piracy forever. To stand against the East India Trading Co., Will, Elizabeth, Barbossa, and the crew of the "Black Pearl" set out to rescue Captain Jack Sparrow from Davy Jones' Locker. Sparrow, as one of the Nine Pirate Lords, is needed in order to summon an ancient goddess, with the power to defeat Beckett's forces.
"On Stranger Tides" (2011).
Captain Jack Sparrow is on a quest to find the fabled Fountain of Youth and crosses paths with a former lover, Angelica. She forces Jack aboard the "Queen Anne's Revenge", a ship captained by the infamous pirate Blackbeard, Angelica's father. Both are also in search of the Fountain; Angelica to save her father's soul, Blackbeard to escape a prophecy of his demise at the hands of a one-legged man. Joining the hunt is former pirate captain Barbossa, now a privateer in King George II's Navy, who is in a race against the Spanish to the fountain.
"Pirates of the Caribbean 5" (2015).
In October 2011, Jerry Bruckheimer confirmed that they are working on a script. In an interview, Kevin McNally stated that a fall 2012 production start was possible. Because of the financial success of "On Stranger Tides", the film's director Rob Marshall might return for this addition to the series. On July 6, 2011, Johnny Depp was reported to be close to a deal for the fifth film. Due to Depp's filming of "The Lone Ranger" (2012–13) they will not be filming the fifth installment until 2014. Also there has been rumours floating around about how Orlando Bloom and Keira Knightley may return to the Pirates Of The Caribbean franchise. Orlando Bloom said he would like to return for a fifth film if he was offered. Also a report, came out overnight in clarifying that , the Disney rep did get one line out of its Disney contact: "Will Turner's story might not be finished". In August 2012 news that Depp signed on officially for the fifth film had surfaced.
In November 2012 "Sunset", the ship which played the "Black Pearl" and the "Queen Anne's Revenge" in the second, third, and the latter in the fourth film was docked into Long Beach, California from Oahu, Hawaii where "On Stranger Tides" was filmed, waiting for her call up.
On January 14, 2013 Disney announced that "Pirates of the Caribbean 5" would be released on July 10, 2015.
Short film.
"Tales of the Code: Wedlocked" (2008).
Wenches Scarlett (Lauren Maher) and Giselle (Vanessa Branch) fix each other up for their wedding, in which they would each marry their groom. Upon realizing that both their grooms were the same man, Jack Sparrow, the two wenches found themselves in an auction led by the Auctioneer. The short film serves as the prequel to "The Curse of the Black Pearl", explaining just why Jack Sparrow's boat the Jolly Mon was seen sinking at the beginning of the whole story, and explaining why wenches Scarlett and Giselle were so upset with him and implies how Cotton lost his tongue. The plot took inspiration from the "Auction scene" from the original ride.To watch the short film.
It was included in the Blu-ray Box set.
Reception.
Box office performance.
All "Pirates of the Caribbean" films were successful at the box office, with grosses of over $600 million, and all at some point ranking among the 50 highest-grossing films of all time. Two of the films had earnings surpassing the $1 billion mark, "Dead Man's Chest" and "On Stranger Tides", becoming the first of only two franchises with "two" films which have earned over $1 billion, the second being the "Batman" series.
"Curse of the Black Pearl" was the third highest-grossing 2003 film in North America (behind ' and "Finding Nemo") and fourth worldwide (behind "Return of the King", "Finding Nemo" and "The Matrix Reloaded"). "Dead Man's Chest" was the most successful film of 2006 both in North America and worldwide, and "At World's End" led the worldwide grosses in 2007, though being only fourth in North America (behind "Spider-Man 3", "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" and "Shrek the Third"). "On Stranger Tides" was the third highest-grossing film of 2011 worldwide (behind "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2" and ') and the fifth in North America. All of the sequels broke box office records upon release, of which the most notable are the opening-weekend record in North America ("Dead Man's Chest"), the Memorial-Day weekend record in North America ("At World's End") and the opening-weekend record outside North America ("On Stranger Tides").
