The "Die Hard" series is a series of action movies beginning with "Die Hard" in 1988, which was based on the 1979 bestselling novel, "Nothing Lasts Forever" by Roderick Thorp. All five films are centered on the character of John McClane (portrayed by Bruce Willis), a New York City police detective.
Films.
Plot summaries.
"Die Hard" (1988).
The first film begins on Christmas Eve when McClane is traveling to Los Angeles to spend Christmas with his wife Holly (Bonnie Bedelia), who is living in Los Angeles with their two children and using her maiden name. They attend a party at the fictional Nakatomi Plaza. During the party, East German terrorists break into the building and take the partygoers hostage. McClane escapes detection and manages to hide throughout the building, gradually killing off the terrorist gang and learning that their real aim is to steal millions from the building's vault. When McClane meets the terrorist's leader, Hans Gruber (Alan Rickman), a climactic battle ensues and McClane throws Gruber out of the window.
"Die Hard 2: Die Harder" (1990).
The second film takes place a year after the events of the first film, once again on Christmas Eve. The setting for the film is Washington, D.C., McClane is at Washington Dulles International Airport awaiting the arrival of his wife. Meanwhile a group of mercenaries, led by former U.S. Army Special Forces Colonel Stuart (William Sadler), take over the airport's communication systems, stranding several planes in the air, including the one McClane's wife is on. Colonel Stuart's plan is to free a captured Latin American dictator (Franco Nero) who is en route to the airport. McClane discovers the plan, including a conspiracy between Stuart and an Army counter-terrorist unit sent to stop him. He foils their plans and provides a visual landing signal for the circling aircraft by exploding the plane the villains were using for their getaway.
"Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995).
In the third film, McClane is back in New York City, and is now separated from his wife, suspended from the police force, and a borderline alcoholic. A terrorist who goes only by the name "Simon" (Jeremy Irons) threatens to blow up various locations in the city unless McClane will play his twisted version of Simon Says. McClane must solve a number of riddles and challenges in order to keep the bombs from going off. He receives the reluctant help of Zeus Carver (Samuel L. Jackson), a shopkeeper from Harlem who had saved McClane after the first challenge "Simon" had put him through. The FBI finally reveal that "Simon" is in fact Simon Peter Gruber, the brother of Hans Gruber, who is attempting to kill McClane in revenge for his brother's death in the first film. In a subsequent revelation, McClane discovers that revenge is only a timely and clever cover story to conceal the true purpose behind his terrorist activities: the forced depletion of New York's Federal Reserve. With the help of Carver, McClane tracks Simon to the Canadian border. There, in a decisive final confrontation with the latter in a helicopter, McClane puts an end to Simon's plan with a handgun and a power line.
"Live Free or Die Hard" (2007).
The fourth film takes place on Independence Day, over a decade after the events of "Die Hard with a Vengeance", with McClane now divorced from his wife and estranged from his daughter Lucy (Mary Elizabeth Winstead). A group of cyber-terrorists begin hacking into the computers of the FBI, who send McClane to bring in computer hacker Matthew "Matt" Farrell (Justin Long) to question him about the cyber-attack. In the process, a group of assassins, hired by terrorist mastermind Thomas Gabriel (Timothy Olyphant), attempt to kill McClane and Farrell. Farrell tells McClane that the terrorists are actually in the middle of performing a crippling cyber-warfare attack on the infrastructure of the country, disrupting all power, public utilities, traffic, and other computer-controlled systems. The terrorists later take Lucy and Farrell hostage. In the end, McClane saves them and foils the terrorists' scheme.
"A Good Day to Die Hard" (2013).
On May 5, 2010, it was announced that ' and "The A-Team" writer Skip Woods were in negotiations to script a fifth "Die Hard" movie, and that the film will be produced by Alex Young. Bruce Willis will again return as John McClane, and Willis said that he would like to see "Live Free or Die Hard" director Len Wiseman return and even wishes to see the story take place outside of the United States, with a tentative title of "Die Hard 24/7". On October 5, 2010, during an MTV interview, Willis announced that a first draft of the script was finished and that shooting should begin in 2011. Regarding a possible "Die Hard 6", Bruce Willis told ShowbizSpy, "for me, I want to do "Die Hard 5", then one final "Die Hard" movie—"Die Hard 6"—before finally hanging that white vest up for good". Noam Murro was set to direct the film scripted by Woods and continue to develop the script, but he left to direct the "300" prequel, ', instead. Irish-born director John Moore was then signed on to direct. The film was said to involve John McClane and his son heading to Russia.
On October 13, 2011, the studio announced exclusively on "The Jim Rome Show" that the film would be titled "A Good Day to Die Hard" and would be released on Valentine's Day 2013. On the same day, sources at FOX Studio's indicated that Patrick Stewart was under strong consideration for the film's main villain, a disgraced Russian general who plots the assassination of the visiting U.S. President. Fox Studio was looking at Liam Hemsworth, Aaron Paul, James Badge Dale and D.J. Cotrona for the part of John McClane Jr. in the film. Shooting was set to commence in January 2012 in Budapest, Hungary. However filming was pushed back to the last week of April, to accommodate star Bruce Willis. Filming will take place in Budapest and Moscow. On February 22, 2012, it was announced that Jai Courtney would be portraying John "Jack" McClane, Jr. in the film. On April 4, 2012, it was announced that Sebastian Koch and Yuliya Snigir would portray Russian villains. Filming began as planned, on April 23, 2012 in Budapest, Hungary where filming continued until May 14, 2012. After, the production was planned to move to Belgrade, Serbia. It was reported in the set photos that Amaury Nolasco has joined the cast in an unknown role. On May 8, 2012, actor Cole Hauser was reported to have a part in the film.
Development.
"Die Hard" is adapted from the 1979 novel "Nothing Lasts Forever", by Roderick Thorp. "Nothing Lasts Forever" is a sequel to the novel "The Detective" which was also adapted into a film starring Frank Sinatra. Both novels are about a private detective named Joe Leland. "Die Hard 2" was adapted from the 1987 novel "58 Minutes", by Walter Wager. "Die Hard with a Vengeance" was adapted from a script called "Simon Says" by Jonathan Hensleigh and "Live Free or Die Hard" was based on the 1997 article "A Farewell to Arms" written for "Wired" magazine by John Carlin.
Reception.
Critical reception.
The "Die Hard" series as a whole has received generally mixed to positive reviews.
The original "Die Hard" received substantial praise. Pete Croatto of FilmCritic.com called the film "a perfect action movie in every detail, the kind of movie that makes your summer memorable." James Berardinelli wrote that the film "represents the class of modern action pictures and the standard by which they must be judged." Critic Desson Howe wrote that "Willis has found the perfect vehicle to careen wildly onto the crowded L.A. freeway of "Lethal Weapons" and "Beverly Hills Cops"." Willis was also called "perfect as the wisecracking John McClane" and "an excellent casting choice as a sardonic action hero." Alan Rickman's portrayal of villain Hans Gruber was described as "marvelous" and "a career-making performance." Gruber also ranked 46 on the villain side of AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes and Villains. In 2007, "Entertainment Weekly" ranked "Die Hard" the greatest action film of all time.
The first sequel, "Die Hard 2", received mixed to positive reviews. Despite only giving the original film two stars, critic Roger Ebert gave this film three and a half stars and called it "terrific entertainment." James Berardinelli called the film "somewhat-muddled but still entertaining." Peter Travers wrote that "however impressively made, "Die Hard 2" begins to wear thin."
The third film, "Die Hard With a Vengeance", also received mixed reviews but was generally better received than its predecessor. Owen Gleiberman of "Entertainment Weekly" stated that while "McTiernan stages individual sequences with great finesse... they don't add up to a taut, dread-ridden whole." James Berardinelli thought that the explosions and fights were "filmed with consummate skill, and were thrilling in their own right." Samuel L. Jackson also received praise for his role in the film. Desson Howe of the "Washington Post" thought that "the best thing about the movie was the relationship between McClane and Zeus," saying that Jackson was "almost as good as he was in "Pulp Fiction"." 
The fourth film, "Live Free or Die Hard", has been praised as being as good as the original. Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" claimed that the film "is the best in the series, an invigorating return to the style of blockbuster that dominated summers back in the early 1990s." "USA Today" film critic Claudia Puig said that the film "delivers when it comes to kick-butt, action-packed mayhem," but "as a convincing techno-thriller, it doesn't really work."
However, the most recent entry in the series, "A Good Day to Die Hard", was widely panned by critics for taking the series' core concept and making it into a generic and dull action film with no real mood, but audiences were far less harsh on the film. 
Other media.
Video games.
A number of video games based on the successful movie franchise "Die Hard" have been released over the years, ranging from beat 'em ups to first-person shooters. While some of the games are based directly on the movies, a few further detail the adventures of John McClane between or after the series.
Comics.
In May 2009, BOOM! Studios announced that they would be releasing an ongoing "Die Hard" comic series that would serve as a prequel to the first movie. Its story is set in 1976 and follows John McClane as a rookie cop in the NYPD, and is scripted by Howard Chaykin. The first issue of "" was released on September 30, 2009. Eight issues have been released, with the eighth released on April 12, 2010.
