The following is a list of the most populous incorporated places of the United States of America. As defined by the United States Census Bureau, an "incorporated place" includes a variety of designations, including city, town, village, borough, and municipality. A few exceptional Census Designated Places (CDPs) are also included in the Census Bureau's listing of incorporated places. Consolidated city-counties represent a distinct type of government that includes the entire population of a county, or county equivalent. Some consolidated city-counties, however, include multiple incorporated places. This list presents only that portion (or "balance") of such consolidated city-counties that are not a part of another incorporated place.
Note that this list refers only to the population of individual municipalities within their defined limits, which does not include other municipalities or unincorporated suburban areas within urban agglomerations. A different ranking is evident when considering U.S. metropolitan area populations.
__TOC__
United States.
<onlyinclude>
The following table lists the 285 incorporated places in the United States with a population of at least 100,000 on July 1, 2011, as estimated by the United States Census Bureau. A city is displayed in bold if it is a state or federal capital, and in "italics" if it is the largest city in the state. Five states, Delaware, Maine, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wyoming, have no cities with a population of 100,000 or more.
</onlyinclude>
Distribution.
For cities with populations of 100,000 or more, the following distributions hold. Smaller incorporated places are not included.
The mean density is .
The median is .
Gallery.
<onlyinclude>
Puerto Rico.
The following table lists the five municipalities ("municipios") of Puerto Rico with a population greater than 100,000 on July 1, 2011, as estimated by the United States Census Bureau.
Census-designated places.
The following table lists U.S. census-designated places (CDPs) with populations of at least 100,000 according to the 2010 Census. A CDP is a concentration of population identified by the United States Census Bureau for statistical purposes. CDPs are delineated for each decennial census as the statistical counterparts of incorporated places such as cities, towns and villages. CDPs are populated areas that lack separate municipal government, but which otherwise physically resemble incorporated places. Unlike the incorporated cities in the main list, the US Census Bureau does not release annual population estimates for CDPs.
Cities formerly over 100,000 people.
The following table lists U.S. cities that, in past censuses, have had populations of at least 100,000 but have since decreased beneath this threshold or have been consolidated with or annexed into a neighboring city.
