Jab Tak Hai Jaan (), also known as JTHJ, is a 2012 Indian romantic drama film directed by Yash Chopra and written and produced by Aditya Chopra under their production banner Yash Raj Films. The film features Shahrukh Khan, Katrina Kaif and Anushka Sharma in lead roles, making it the first film to pair Khan and Kaif and the second collaboration between Khan and Sharma after "Rab Ne Bana Di Jodi". It was Yash Chopra's fourth film to feature Shahrukh Khan in the lead role, the former returning as a director after eight years post "Veer-Zaara", which released in 2004. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" was Yash Chopra's last directorial venture before his death on 21 October 2012.
The background score and soundtrack were composed by A.R. Rahman, while the lyrics penned by Gulzar. The film released during the six-day Diwali weekend that began on 13 November 2012. 
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" received positive to mixed reviews from critics in India and positive reviews from critics overseas. It also opened well at the box office. Some sources have opined that the film might have drawn inspiration from the Graham Greene novel "The End of the Affair". Box Office India declared the film a "hit" in India and a "blockbuster" overseas. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" is the third highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time overseas after "My Name Is Khan" and "3 Idiots".
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" has been widely appreciated for its direction, cinematography and the chemistry between the lead actors with Shahrukh Khan and Anushka Sharma receiving accolades for their performances, though criticism has been generated regarding its script and plot predictability. The film received several awards at popular award ceremonies including four Filmfare trophies.
Plot.
Samar Anand (Shahrukh Khan), a major in the Indian Army, defuses a bomb showing no fear or regard for personal safety. After a while, Akira Rai (Anushka Sharma), a Discovery Channel filmmaker, dives into a river in Ladakh and is rescued by the major. Samar gives her his jacket but leaves before retrieving it. Akira finds his diary in the jacket pocket and starts reading. 
The diary recounts Samar's earlier years as a struggling immigrant in London. He worked as a musician and found other menial jobs to support him and his roommate. One day Samar is offered work as a part-time waiter where he meets Meera (Katrina Kaif) during her engagement party. In exchange for English lessons, Samar agrees to teach her how to sing. In the process, Samar and Meera fall in love. On the day Meera is supposed to tell her father about their relationship, Samar gets into a terrible accident. Meera prays to God to save his life and makes a vow to never meet him again. Soon Samar makes a speedy recovery and comes to know about the vow. In anger he tells her to go away and leaves London. Samar challenges God to keep him alive while he will risk his life everyday because he believes his death is the only way to make Meera lose her faith in the deity who stole his love. He goes to India and enlists in the Indian Army.
As Akira finishes reading the diary, she requests her supervisor to make a documentary about a bomb disposal squad and is granted permission. She approaches Samar for help and soon gets acquainted with him and his team. She starts showing romantic feelings towards Samar but he refuses to reciprocate due to his past. Akira makes the film successfully and departs for London, earning praise for her work. However, to launch the film, she needs Samar to visit the city. After she extensively tries to persuade a reluctant Samar, he finally agrees to come to London, but is hit by a car upon arrival.
Samar is diagnosed with retrograde amnesia, remembering only the events before his first accident a decade ago. Akira tracks down Meera and persuades her to aid in Samar's recovery. Meera agrees and pretends to be Samar's wife. During this time, Akira realizes that Major Samar is only a fragment of the young Samar. He used to be a jubilant social man but is now a bitter lonely individual. One day Samar comes across a bomb planted in the London Underground and helps defuse it. This event triggers his memory and he realizes Meera was lying to him. Samar confronts Meera and gives her a choice, either be with him or he will keep on risking his life until he is dead. Samar departs for Kashmir where he continues defusing bombs. During a conversation with Akira, Meera realizes that her beliefs and prayers subjected Samar to a fate worse than death. Meera, realizing her mistake, travels to Kashmir where they reunite. Samar defuses his last bomb and proposes to her on the spot.
Production.
Casting.
Aditya Chopra wanted his father to make another film in 2011 and approached him with the concept for "Jab Tak Hai Jaan". Shahrukh Khan was the first to be cast in the role of Samar Anand due to his long-standing relationship with the production company and the Chopra family. However, Khan was unable to start shooting as he was working on "Ra.One" and "Don 2" so the film had to be pushed forward. As in his previous productions, Yash Chopra wanted to introduce a fresh pairing in "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" and chose Katrina Kaif to star opposite Khan. There was also a lot of public demand to see Khan and Kaif together in a romantic project. Anushka Sharma was cast in a supporting role due to her relationship with Yash Raj Films as she had worked on many of their previous projects. The casting of the film was carried out quickly but shooting began much later because the lead actors were busy with other films.
Development.
In June 2011, Yash Raj Films released a statement announcing a new directorial venture by Yash Chopra which would coincide with the 50th anniversary of his career in Bollywood. The producers also announced that the film would release on the Diwali 2012 weekend. Yash Chopra stated that the film was untitled at that time, similar to his previous project "Veer-Zaara" which was named on the day of its submission to the Central Board of Film Certification. The producers had considered a variety of options for the title but were reportedly not satisfied with any of them. In September 2012, it was officially announced that the title of the movie was "Jab Tak Hai Jaan". The title seeming to have been inspired from a song of a similar name from the 1975 hit film "Sholay".
Filming.
Initially the film's principal photography was expected to commence in November 2011 but had to be delayed since Khan wanted to take a break after his two releases in 2011, "Ra.One" and "Don 2". Principal photography officially began on 9 January 2012 at Yash Raj Studios in Mumbai, where a significant portion of the film was also shot.
After the schedule in India, the crew began a 35 day filming schedule in London beginning on 22 February 2012. The film was shot under the working title of "Production 45". Khan arrived in London on 21 February 2012 and completed filming his appearance on 26 March 2012. During filming, photos of the actors on the sets were leaked on the Internet, inciting a camera ban by the producers and an increase in the amount of security for the film's production. A number of locations throughout the city featured in the film, including the Borough Market, Jubilee Walk, Great Conservatory, Palace of Westminster, Westminster Bridge, Trafalgar Square, Hungerford Bridge and Golden Jubilee Bridges, the O2 Arena, the Tower Bridge and Canary Wharf. A dance sequence was filmed beside the law faculty of King's College London in Somerset House. A car crash scene was filmed at Shepherd's Bush by closing down four streets in the area. The schedule was completed on 27 March 2012 at an indoor location in East London. 
The romantic scenes of the film were directed by Chopra's son Aditya Chopra to give the romance a more contemporary feel. The "Ishq Shava" song was shot with the leading duo and freestyle dancers in an underground club and on board a boat on the River Thames in London. The climax of the film, initially planned by Chopra to be shot in the mountains of Kashmir, was relocated to Ladakh. This was apparently a suggestion of Khan whose movie "Dil Se.." had been shot in the area many years earlier. However, portions of the film were later filmed in three different cities of Kashmir—Srinagar, Pahalgam and Gulmarg.
Before his death, Yash Chopra wanted to add additional scenes of the Swiss Alps in the title song ("Jab Tak Hai Jaan"). However, the scheduled shoot was cancelled after his death. Aditya Chopra wanted to keep the film as it was because he felt that doing otherwise would "tamper" with Yash Chopra's vision. Shooting officially ended on 27 October 2012.
Marketing.
A teaser trailer was released along with the theatrical release of "Ek Tha Tiger" as well as through the firm's official YouTube channel on 15 August 2012. The 1:30 minute clip showed glimpses of Yash Chopra's successful yet acclaimed directorial ventures and then highlighted his upcoming film. The trailer incorporated the prelude of the song "Challa" as the background music. Yet again, the film remained untitled as "A Yash Chopra Romance". The teaser crossed over one million views in less than three days.
The main theatrical trailer of nearly 2:30 minutes featuring the film's title was released on 20 September 2012 through Yash Raj Films' official YouTube channel. It received a million views on the first day and 30,000 likes within a week, surpassing the record held by "", making it the first film trailer in the world to achieve this number in that span of time. The trailer also recorded more than 7 million views on YouTube, making it the most watch Bollywood film trailer of all time.
After the success of the trailer, Yash Raj Films relied on releasing videos of songs as further promotional material on YouTube and Bollywood Hungama. "Challa", "Saans", "Jiya Re", "Heer" and "Ishq Shava" were all well received by the audience. The marketing of the film also involved public appearances by Katrina, Shahrukh and Anushka, as well as a "Kaun Banega Crorepati" episode dedicated to the film. A premiere of "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" was held on 12 November 2012, a day before its worldwide release, in honor of Yash Chopra. The makers of "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" relied heavily on social networking sites to create public awareness for their project.
Soundtrack.
The music and the background score for the film were composed by A.R. Rahman, who teamed up with Yash Chopra for the first time. The soundtrack features nine tracks with eight song lyrics penned by Gulzar and the title poem written by Aditya Chopra. The audio was released on YRF Music. It received positive to mixed critical reception upon release.
Release.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" released on 600 screens in overseas markets. The estimate for the number of release screens in India was around 2,500. Yash Raj Films distributed the film to 1,000 multiplexes and 1,500 single-screen theaters. In Pakistan there was a delay in certification and the film released on 16 November 2012 instead of Diwali day.
Controversy.
Two weeks before the release of "Jab Tak Hai Jaan", Ajay Devgn sent an intimation notice to Yash Raj Films at the Competition Commission of India. The notice accused Yash Raj Films of monopolistic business practices and stated that they used "their dominant position in the Bollywood film market" to secure many high quality single-screens for their release. Yash Raj Films responded by saying that they were "shocked" and questioned Devgn's "motives". The studio dismissed Devgn's claim that high quality single-screens were unavailable by pointing out that they had only booked 1,500 single-screens for "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" out of the 10,500 available in India. After the statement made by Yash Raj Films, Ajay Devgn responded by saying he only managed to book 600 single-screens for "Son of Sardaar" and would take legal action if not allotted more. He accused Yash Raj Films of signing tie-in agreements for "Ek Tha Tiger" with exhibitors that made it compulsory for them to show "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" on Diwali and keep it in cinemas for at least two weeks thereafter. A week before the release of "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" and "Son of Sardaar", the commission dismissed Devgn's claim. In an interview a commission spokesperson said, "We considered the plea application. We have not found any merit in the case as there is no case of abuse of dominant position. There is no violation." After his notice was rejected, Devgn appealed to the Appellate Tribunal against Yash Raj Films. The tribunal refused Devgn's request to nullify agreements made with single-screen exhibitors for the release of "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" but promised to reexamine the case in order to determine if Yash Raj Films engaged in anticompetitive practices. Both films released on 13 November 2012 with the number of single-screens they managed to secure.
Critical reception.
Upon release, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" received positive to mixed reviews from critics in India and positive reviews from critics overseas.
India.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" received positive to mixed reviews from critics in India. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave it 4 out of 5 stars and stated that the film was "attention-grabbing from inception till conclusion. The drama only soars higher and the complex love story gets more and more gripping as the conflict between the characters come to the fore." Rachit Gupta of "Filmfare" gave it 4 out of 5 stars and wrote, "At a gracious 3 hours runtime, "JTHJ" feels like an epic love story. And it is just that. "JTHJ" is the perfect adieu to a hallmark career. It is the best romantic film made in this generation." Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars and said "despite the lovey-dovey nothingness that drives the plot, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" has more substance than most romantic films that come out of Bollywood." Meena Iyer of "The Times of India" rated it 3.5 out of 5 stars and said "Every frame is picture perfect, the emotions are well nuanced. But there is one inherent flaw-the story by Aditya Chopra is hackneyed." Subhash Jha, also from "The Times of India" stated, ""Jab Tak Hai Jaan" makes you fall in love with love all over again." Anupama Chopra of the "Hindustan Times" gave the film 3 out of 5 stars while commenting ""Jab Tak Hai Jaan" is too tangled to transport you. But I recommend that you see it. Because only Yash Chopra could make heartache so attractive and ennobling that his characters wear it like a badge of honor." Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated, "I'm going with three out of five for the late Yash Chopra's "Jab Tak Hai Jaan". Despite its many script problems, it's a consistently watchable film that oozes with feeling and real emotion. A fitting swan song." "Open Magazine" also gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and praised Yash Chopra's direction. Ajit Duara called it " a deeply felt cinematic perspective from 80 years of living." Raja Sen from Rediff gave it 3 out of 5 stars and stated "As a swan-song for the master director, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" might only be a middling effort. But then, sometimes, all we need is a Khan-song." Shabana Ansari of "DNA India" gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and said "If you must, watch "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" for Shah Rukh, who can still convey love and passion in a fleeting look or a dimpled smile; and for Yash Chopra who gave us some of the most enduring romances of all times."
Shubhra Gupta of "The Indian Express" awarded the film 2.5 out of 5 stars remarking, "watch this one for Shah Rukh, who can still do the dimpled boy wonder and the older, mature lover with a wry smile and wounded wink and sexy nudge." Sukanya Verma also from Rediff described the film as an "an elegant, harmless entertainer for most part" and praised the visuals, acting and music. However, she criticized the screenplay and deemed that the film could have been snappier. She gave it 2.5 stars out of 5 stars. Conversely, Piyasree Dasgupta of "First Post" wrote "You have seen everything "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" has many times before, just in other films. And probably with far better music than A.R. Rahman threw into this one."
Overseas.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" received positive reviews from critics overseas. Priya Joshi of Digital Spy gave it 3 out of 5 stars and commented, "the film is invested with a healthy dose of Shah Rukh, the very heart and "saans" of Yash Chopra and the message which he lived and breathed through his films: that love is eternal." Simon Foster of the Special Broadcasting Service also gave it 3 out of 5 stars and labelled it as "a grand cinematic work boasting all the pros and cons of the genre." He observed, "Chopra fans will not hear complaints that the great producer-director had become mired in a rut, or that his films are rote melodramas reliant on boisterous music (here, a typically string-heavy work from the omnipresent A.R. Rahman) and over-active camerawork. One could argue that it’s their very vivid cinematic nature that makes them particularly noteworthy, even when the dialogue (at times, awful) and plotting (rarely based in logical realism) can test one's patience." Mark Olsen of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote, "The film has a freshness that would never lead one to think it was directed by an 80-year-old while at the same time it has a sureness of tone, a certainty about itself even at its most audacious, that only comes from the hand of a seasoned master." He remarked, ""Jab Tak Hai Jaan" serves as a fitting tribute to the career of Chopra." Lisa Tsering from "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote, "Director-producer Yash Chopra's film, his final project before he died, delivers not only the romance and human touch, but also reflects a modern sensibility." Nicolas Rapold of "The New York Times" wrote, "Even though the film drags, the magic of Bollywood is that this story's muddle of twists only clarifies the urgency behind the undying desires of all concerned parties." Mazhar Farooqui of "Gulf News" wrote, "Despite its inherent flaws, "JTHJ" comes across as a beguiling romantic film that takes you on a roller coaster ride of high emotions set amidst picture postcard locales but more than anyone the movie belongs to Chopra. In his swan song, the celebrated director once again proved why his legacy will be hard to match."
Film festivals.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" was selected to be part of the Doha Tribeca Film Festival and the Marrakech International Film Festival. The film was chosen to "honor the legacy" of Yash Chopra because it was his last project.
Awards.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" won many awards and garnered numerous nominations at popular Bollywood award shows. The film has been widely appreciated for its direction, cinematography and the chemistry between the lead actors with Shahrukh Khan and Anushka Sharma receiving accolades for their performances, though criticism has been generated regarding its script and plot predictability. The film won four Filmfare trophies, five Zee Cine awards and two Colors Screen awards. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" also received several marketing and business awards for its overseas performance, promotions, distribution and music. However, the film's leading ladies were nominated at the Golden Kela and Ghanta awards as some critics felt that the acting by Anushka Sharma and Katrina Kaif was not up to the mark. 
Box office.
Box Office India declared the film a "hit" in India and a "blockbuster" overseas. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" grossed worldwide.
Domestic.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" had 95-100% occupancy at multiplexes and single screens across India on opening day. It collected around on its first day despite Diwali festival prayers. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" showed 50% growth and made on its second day. It netted during its first three days. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" sustained well and collected during its extended six-day weekend. 
The collections on Monday showed a big drop and came in at , taking the total to in its first week of release. The film continued a good run at the box office after its first week and netted in ten days. However, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" fell in its second week collecting only nett. The film crossed the mark after twenty days of release. By the end of three weeks, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" made . The distributor share was and Box Office India declared it a "hit" in India.
While Box Office India stated that the film made around nett, trade analysts Taran Adarsh and Komal Nahta claimed it reached a figure 17% higher at around during the same time period.
Overseas.
"Jab Tak Hai Jaan" collected US$1.3 million on its first day and US$3.50 million at the end of three days in all overseas markets. After the first weekend, the film held well and made US$7.58 million in six days. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" grossed around US$11 million overseas in thirteen days before facing a decrease in the number of screens. At the end of its theatrical run, the film is estimated to have collected . Box Office India declared it a "blockbuster" overseas.
Records.
Upon release, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" became the highest weekend-grossing Bollywood film of all time overseas. It also set records for the highest opening day collections in Singapore and Pakistan by making US$100,000. In addition to that, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" became the highest-grossing Bollywood film in the United Arab Emirates and around the Middle East as it earned more than US$4 million there. "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" was the highest-grossing Bollywood film overseas for 2012.
Clash.
The business of both "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" and "Son of Sardaar" was affected due to the Diwali clash. However, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" outperformed "Son of Sardaar" by earning more than "Son of Sardaar" in India and more overseas. According to Box Office India, "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" made nett domestically towards the end of its run and "Son of Sardaar" made nett. While both films were categorized as "hits" by the website, they did note that "Son of Sardaar" failed to claim a spot in the 100 crore club. The difference between the business of the two films was greater abroad. "Son of Sardaar" managed to collect US$3 million overseas while "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" made more than US$13 million.
Home media.
Yash Raj Films launched "Jab Tak Hai Jaan" in VCD, DVD and region-free high-definition Blu-ray Disc formats on 3 January 2013. The Blu-ray Disc edition featured Dolby TrueHD 96k upsampling, DTS-HD Master Audio 5.1, Dolby Surround 5.1 sound and came with two additional DVDs.
Four hours of extra footage were included on the discs with content such as the making of the film and songs, an interview of Yash Chopra with Shahrukh Khan, deleted scenes, videos of the lead actor learning to play the guitar and ride a bike, and a preview from the film's premiere that was held in a specially constructed vintage theatre at Yash Raj Studios.
