The Western PlayStation 3 version is published by Namco Bandai Games and includes both English and Japanese voice tracks. Due to problems in translation of the magic book, there are no plans to localize the Nintendo DS version. Despite this, a collector's edition of the PlayStation 3 version that contains the translated book was released alongside the standard edition.
Gameplay.
As Oliver, the player takes part in battles using the magic book given to him by Drippy. The magic book contains various spells that are activated using drawings with the stylus. During battles, players will be able to arrange their characters anywhere on the bottom screen to implement various tactics. For example, a character that can block certain attacks can be placed in front of the others to shield them. 
In the Playstation 3 version of the game, the player explores towns, villages, dungeons, and dangerous places scattered throughout the other world. You can also travel between the other world and Oliver's hometown of Motorville in his home world by using Gateway spell. Upon leaving a town or a dangerous place, the player will enter the world screen. Here, Oliver can go to next destination on his quest. Various forms of transport will also become available to help travel around the other world more easily. The errands that can be undertaken at the request of townspeople and the bounty hunts available from the Taskmaster are collectively known as "tasks". There are all kinds of tasks available, and all kinds of rewards on offer for their completion. When tasks are completed, players will earn a number of stamps for their current merit stamp card (you will receive your first merit stamp card when reach certain point of adventure). Familiars are little creatures that you are able to send out in battle to fight for the player. They level up and evolve alongside the players, and they can recruit certain enemies to your team. Oliver can tame creatures in order to make them his familiars, and have them accompany him on his journey. 
The game's battle mode begins when the player encounters an enemy, and can also occur during certain special events. They can command a single human ally, or one of the familiars accompanying them. During this mode, the player must attempt to defeat your enemies either by controlling one of the party members, or one of the familiars they command. When all enemies are defeated, the player receives receive experience points, money, and sometimes items. If they earned enough experience, characters' levels will increase, and their and abilities improve and the if the player's allies die or if they are petrified, the game is over. Outside of battles, the player must feed and nurture your familiars, offering them sweets and buns to buff their stats to either compensate for areas of natural weakness, or to accentuate their strengths. 
The game also includes a book that is supposed to represent the magic book from the game and is required to play the game. In it players can find a bestiary, short stories that offer game hints, and other information to which the game will refer.
Plot.
Story.
"Ni no Kuni" revolves around Oliver, a resident of Motorville, whose mother, Alicia, dies from heart problems after rescuing him from drowning. As Oliver cries, his tears cause his doll, a gift from Alicia, to reveal itself as a male fairy named Drippy. He gives Oliver a book that allows him to use the power of magic and enter "Ni no Kuni," a world parallel to Oliver's reality. Drippy says Oliver may be able to find Alicia. Using the newfound power of magic, Oliver and Drippy venture into Ni no Kuni, where Oliver befriends Esther, Swaine, and other alternative versions of people (and animals) he knows.
Development.
"Ni no Kuni" was first announced in the Japanese publication "Famitsu" in September 2008. Level-5 president and CEO Akihiro Hino and Studio Ghibli producer Toshio Suzuki revealed in an interview with the magazine that development on the animation aspects of the game had begun in July 2008. In the July 2010 edition of "Famitsu", Level-5 revealed that the game was in development for the PlayStation 3. 
Formerly subtitled "Ni no Kuni: the Another World", Level-5 announced on June 24, 2010 that this title has been replaced with two separate subtitles for the DS and PlayStation 3 versions, with the subtitle of the DS version being "Ni no Kuni: Shikkoku no Madōshi" and the PlayStation 3 version titled as "Ni no Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch". Level-5 also revealed that both versions are being developed separately from scratch, and as such will feature different data, artwork, graphics, specifications and story developments, while only retaining the same "story axle". The PlayStation 3 version will feature graphics and visuals replicating Ghibli's traditional animation style and its artwork for the game.
Music.
The game features an original soundtrack by Joe Hisaishi, known for composing the scores of several Studio Ghibli feature films. All in-game music was performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra. The ending theme, "Kokoro no Kakera ~ Fragments of Hearts" is sung by Hisaishi's daughter Mai Fujisawa in the Japanese version while Chorister Archie Buchanan performed the English language version. For the orchestral music to fit onto the Nintendo DS at a high enough quality, the game was put onto a 4-gigabit game card. An album titled "Ni no Kuni: Shikkoku no Madoushi Original Soundtrack" was later released in Japan on February 9, 2011. A complete two-disc soundtrack is slated for western release in March 2013. The first disc will be a re-release of the Japanese soundtrack and the second disc will contain additional tracks from the PS3 version. It will additionally come with a 20-page booklet featuring artwork, lyrics, and background information. RPGFan wrote a positive review of the soundtrack, comparing it favorably to Koichi Sugiyama's work on the "Dragon Quest" series. Squareenixmusic.com awarded the album a perfect score, calling Hisaishi's work "his best score since "Spirited Away"."
Reception.
The DS version of "Ni no Kuni" was given 38 out of 40 by "Weekly Famitsu" magazine. The review stated, "The animation, music, and story all combine together at a high level to keep the player constantly excited. The way the game links up with the book is innovative, and there's a lot of backdrop that allows you to understand the story on a deep level." However, the publication felt that although the Japanese advertisements feature young children playing it, the game may be too complex for such audiences. RPG Land's import review was very positive, saying "Ni no Kuni is what happens when ordinary and simple pieces are put together by skilled people in wonderful ways. It sticks to simplicity, and does that better than almost any other game on the market right now." 
Japanese retailers ordered an initial shipment of 600,000 copies of the DS version of "Ni no Kuni", more than any previous Level-5 game. It was the second best-selling video game during its week of release in the region at 170,548 copies sold. Hino stated in February 2011 that the game has sold over 500,000 units in Japan.
The PlayStation 3 version of "Ni no Kuni" was critically acclaimed as well. The game scored a 36 out of 40 from "Famitsu". The magazines "PSM3" and "Computer and Video Games" gave the Japanese version of the game a 91% score, as well as the Best RPG award of E3 2012. RPGLand's review awarded Ni no Kuni's PS3 version the site's highest rating of "Legendary" and concluded, "Ni no Kuni: Wrath of the White Witch feels like the second coming of 16-bit RPG classics... It touches a deep vein of nostalgia and childlike wonder." PlayStation LifeStyle awarded the game 10/10 and said, "Virtually every aspect of Ni no Kuni is a hit. If you have ever liked a Japanese RPG at all, you owe Ni no Kuni a shot." In contrast to the DS version, its initial shipment was around 164,000, and in the first week an estimated 65,000 to 67,000 copies were sold.
IGN rated the game 9.4/10 describing it as "a beautiful mixture of the traditional makings of a JRPG combined with gorgeous graphics, a wonderful story, a great cast of characters and thoughtful gameplay."
Mobile games.
In Japan, two Ni no Kuni games were made for mobile platforms. Ni no Kuni: Hotroit Stories (二ノ国 ホットロイトストーリーズ) is an episodic RPG released for the ROID mobile platform. It is a prequel to the main games. Chapter 1, called "Oliver and Mark" (第1章〜オリバーとマーク), was released on December 9, 2010. Hotroit is the name of Motorville in the Japanese version of Ni no Kuni. The other game, Ni no Kuni: Daibouken Monsters (二ノ国 大冒険モンスターズ), is a social card game for the GREE mobile platform. It was released on May 11, 2012. 
Wizard's Edition Controversy.
Many orders of the special edition, The Wizard's Edition, in the US and Canada were cancelled due to Namco Bandai / Digital River overselling due to a glitch in their system. After mass cancellation, a backdoor link was given to a select few who called customer support so they could reorder their copy/copies giving them priority. The link was posted online, and many people who had orders and those who hadn't even placed orders to begin with were instantly placed and shipped, resulting in many long standing preorders to be cancelled. Those who had their orders cancelled are being compensated for their loss with a $20 clubNAMCO voucher with a two month expiration date, and hard cover strategy guide for the game.
In Europe, Namco Bandai also encountered problems with pre-orders. In the Netherlands (some) preorders were partially compensated with customers getting a large poster and a t5cm tall doll of the game character Mr. Drippy along with a regular version of the game.
