Lena Dunham ( ; born May 13, 1986) is an American filmmaker and actress. She wrote and directed the independent film "Tiny Furniture" (2010), and is the creator and star of the HBO series "Girls". In 2012, she was nominated for four Emmy Awards and won two Golden Globe Awards for "Girls".
Early life.
Dunham was born in New York City. Her father, Carroll Dunham, is a painter of "overtly sexualized pop art", and her mother, Laurie Simmons, is a photographer and designer who creates artistic domestic scenes with dolls. Dunham's father is Protestant, and according to Dunham, a Mayflower descendant; Dunham's mother is Jewish. She has a younger sister, Grace, who is a model and student at Brown University and who starred in Dunham's first film "Tiny Furniture". As children, both Lena and Grace were babysat by photographers Sherri Zuckerman and Catherine McGann.
Dunham attended Saint Ann's School in Brooklyn, New York, where she met "Tiny Furniture" actress and "Girls" co-star Jemima Kirke. She graduated from Oberlin College in 2008, where she studied creative writing.
Career.
Dunham's 2010 feature film, "Tiny Furniture", won Best Narrative Feature at South by Southwest Music and Media Conference. Dunham herself plays the lead role of Aura.
Dunham's television series, "Girls", was greenlit by HBO in early 2012. The show is executive produced by Judd Apatow. Three episodes were screened to positive response at the 2011 South by Southwest Festival. The first season premiered April 15, 2012, and has garnered Dunham four Emmy nominations for her roles in acting, writing, and directing the series and two Golden Globe wins for Best Comedy Series for "Girls" and for herself in Best Lead Actress in a Comedy or Musical Series. In February 2013, Dunham became the first woman ever to win a Directors Guild Award for Outstanding Director in a Comedy Series [http://www.goldderby.com/news/3961/lena-dunham-%28%27girls%27%29-makes-dga-history-as-first-female-to-win-best-tv-comedy-director.html] for her work on "Girls". 
Dunham had a cameo in the movie "Supporting Characters", along with her "Tiny Furniture" co-star Alex Karpovsky.
On October 8, 2012, Dunham signed a $3.5 million deal with Random House to publish her first book, an essay collection called "Not That Kind of Girl: A Young Woman Tells You What She's Learned". On December 7, 2012, New York-based gossip blog Gawker posted a 66-page proposal for Dunham's book on their website, criticizing various quotations from the proposal. Dunham's attorney demanded the removal of the proposal and the quotations.
Dunham appeared in a video advertisement promoting President Barack Obama's reelection, delivering a monologue to camera, which, according to a blog quoted in "The Atlantic", tried to "get the youth vote by comparing voting for the first time to having sex for the first time". Fox News reported "intense criticism" from multiple media sources, who labeled the advertisement as "tasteless and inappropriate", but added that "not everyone was so offended".
Dunham made a cameo in the opening skit of the 2012 Emmy Awards, appearing naked in a comical manner.
Personal life.
In 2012, Dunham began dating Jack Antonoff, lead guitarist of the band Fun. Dunham has stated that she will not get married until same sex marriage is legalized.
