Battleship is a 2012 American military science fiction war film loosely inspired by the classic board game. The film was directed by Peter Berg and released by Universal Pictures. The film stars Taylor Kitsch, Liam Neeson, Alexander Skarsgård, Rihanna, John Tui, Brooklyn Decker, and Tadanobu Asano.
The film was originally planned to be released in 2011, but was rescheduled to April 11, 2012, in the United Kingdom and May 18, 2012, in the United States. The film's world premiere was in Tokyo, Japan, on April 3, 2012.
Plot.
NASA discovers an extrasolar planet, called Planet-G by humans, with conditions similar to Earth and transmits a powerful signal from a communications array in Hawaii. Meanwhile slacker Alex Hopper gets arrested while attempting to impress Sam Shane, daughter of U.S. Pacific Fleet commander Admiral Terrance Shane. Stone Hopper, Alex's older brother and a Commander under Shane, is infuriated at Alex's lack of motivation and forces him to join him in the U.S. Navy. 
By the present day, Alex is a hothead lieutenant aboard the Arleigh Burke class destroyer , while Stone is the commanding officer of . Alex is in a relationship with Sam and is in danger of being discharged from the Navy. Their ships join the Rim of the Pacific Exercise (RIMPAC) in Hawaii.
During the exercises five alien spacecraft arrive in response to the NASA signal. Their communications ship crashes in Hong Kong, causing heavy damage and casualties there, while four others land in the water near Hawaii. "Sampson", "John Paul Jones", and the JMSDF Kongō class destroyer "Myōkō" investigate, but are trapped when the alien mothership creates a force field, trapping the three warships. The aliens destroy the "Sampson" and "Myōkō", and damage "John Paul Jones", killing the commanding and executive officers. Alex sees his brother die and takes command, albeit reluctantly and to the disbelief of the crew, as the most senior officer left on the ship. The "John Paul Jones" recovers survivors from "Myōkō", including Captain Nagata, with whom Alex is in a rivalry.
Meanwhile the aliens have taken over the communications array on Oahu. Nearby, Sam, a physiotherapist, is accompanying retired U.S. Army veteran and double amputee Mick Canales on a hike to help him adapt to his prosthetic legs. They run into scientist Cal Zapata, who informs them that the aliens are using the array to signal back to their home planet. He retrieves a radio that will allow Sam and Mick to contact the "John Paul Jones" and relay this information.
Back on the "John Paul Jones", the crew faces difficulty because the alien force field has disabled radar functions. Nagata suggests using NOAA's tsunami warning buoys around Hawaii to track the aliens. During a night battle, the aliens and the humans exchange shots. The "John Paul Jones" sinks two alien ships, but is unable to hit the third. After briefly capturing an alien soldier, the humans learn that the aliens are sensitive to sunlight, and decides to lure the third alien vessel close to shore, where he and Nagata shoot out its bridge windows as the sunrise blinds the aliens. In the ensuing battle, both ships are destroyed. 
Fearing the aliens are contacting a larger invasion fleet, Alex needs to destroy the alien mothership. The survivors of the "John Paul Jones" and "Myōkō" are forced to return to base and acquire the only remaining naval vessel, . Although decommissioned and turned into a museum ship, they are able to reactivate it with the aid of the retired veterans preserving her. The battleship evades the mothership's gunfire and destroys the force field and the ship's turrets. Alex uses the last shell to destroy the communications array on the island, leaving the "Missouri" defenseless. However, with the energy barrier down, jet fighters from the RIMPAC fleet arrive and save the crew by destroying the weapons fired from the vessel's last turret. The RIMPAC jets then destroy the turret itself, eliminating the alien threat. A ceremony is held to honor the Navy personnel and Alex, who is promoted to Lieutenant Commander, is presented with a Silver Star and accepts Stone's posthumous Navy Cross and is also given command of a ship of his own. After the ceremony, Alex asks Admiral Shane for his daughter's hand in marriage. The admiral initially refuses but invites Alex to lunch to discuss the matter, referencing how Alex and Sam met. 
A post-credits scene in Scotland shows three schoolchildren and a handyman running off in terror as an alien hand reaches out of an object they have just opened.
Production.
"Battleship" was to begin filming in Australia's Gold Coast in 2010, but the production company changed location due to a lack of Australian government tax incentives and a high estimated budget of $209 million.
Filming took place in the United States on the Hawaiian islands of Maui and Oahu, as well as in Sherman Oaks, California to do a few apartment scenes and in Playa del Rey, California where they filmed a driving scene along with a shootout. Some scenes were also filmed in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
The Science & Entertainment Exchange provided science consultation for the film.
A "Kongo"-class destroyer of the Japan Maritime Self-Defense Force also appeared in the film.
Casting.
Jeremy Renner was originally considered for the role of Hopper, but due to a conflicting schedule, the actor chose to star in a Paul Thomas Anderson drama filming at roughly the same time. In April 2010, it was reported that Taylor Kitsch had been cast as Alex Hopper, Alexander Skarsgård played his brother Stone Hopper, Brooklyn Decker stars as Sam, Hopper's fiancee and Liam Neeson as Admiral Shane, Sam's father and Hopper's superior officer. Barbadian R&B singer Rihanna makes her acting debut in the film, as a sailor. In an interview with "GQ", Berg explained how he came up with the idea to cast her. He realized she could act after seeing her 2009 interview about the Chris Brown assault on "Good Morning America" with Diane Sawyer during which he found her "intelligent and articulate", and her appearance on "Saturday Night Live". She accepted the role because she wanted "to do something badass" and also because it wasn't a role too big for her to play. 
Tadanobu Asano also has a role in the film as the commander of a Japanese Kongo class destroyer. Double amputee U.S. Army Colonel Gregory Gadson, who had never acted before, plays Lt Col Mick Canales. He was cast after Berg saw a picture of him in the "National Geographic Magazine".
The film marks the reunion between former co-stars Kitsch and Jesse Plemons, who previously worked together on Berg's TV series "Friday Night Lights". Berg said he loves working with friends and explained he knew how comfortable Kitsch was with Plemons, "I know that he’s really good for Taylor and he makes Taylor better. So, I wrote that whole part for Jesse." He added, "I never thought of it as a "Friday Night Lights" reunion. I thought of it as protection, bringing a trusted family member in."
Actual U.S. Navy sailors were used as extras in various parts of this film. Sailors from assorted commands in Navy Region Hawaii assisted with line handling to take in and out of port for a day of shooting in mid 2010. A few months later, the production team put out a casting call for sailors stationed at various sea commands at Naval Station Mayport, Florida to serve as extras. Sailors were also taken from various ships stationed at Naval Station Mayport, Jacksonville, Florida: , and USS were some of the ships that provided sailors.
Release.
The film's world premiere took place in Tokyo on April 3, 2012. The event was attended by director Peter Berg, actors Taylor Kitsch, Brooklyn Decker, Alexander Skarsgård and Rihanna. Later on they initiated a Press Tour visiting Madrid, London and Cartagena de Indias to promote the film.
Box office.
"Battleship" had better box office success in overseas markets than in the US where it had a moderate gross. The film earned $65,233,400 in North America and $237,602,860 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $302,836,260.
Outside North America, "Battleship" opened on Wednesday, April 11, 2012 in many countries more than five weeks before its North America release, earning $7.4 million. Through Friday, the film earned a 3-day total of $25 million. By the end of its opening weekend, it earned $55.2 million from 26 markets, ranking second behind the 3D rerelease of "Titanic". 
However, on its second weekend, it topped the box office outside North America, with $60 million. In South Korea, it achieved the highest-grossing opening day for a non-sequel and the third-highest overall ($2.8 million). In comparison to other Hasbro films, "Battleship" opening in the UK (£3.76 million) was behind the first "Transformers" (£8.72 million), but did better than "" (£1.71 million).
In North America, "Battleship" grossed $8.8 million on its opening day (Friday, May 18, 2012), with $420,000 originating from midnight showings, and finished the weekend with $25.5 million. It settled in second place for its opening day and opening weekend behind "Marvel's The Avengers". Its opening weekend grosses are well below the anticipated $35–$40 million range that Universal and director Peter Berg were hoping for.
Critical reception.
The film has received mixed to negative reviews from critics. As of May 19, 2012, Metacritic has given the film an average score of 41 out of 100 based on 39 reviews, while Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a "rotten" score of 34% based on reviews from 204 critics, and reports a rating average of 3 out of 10.
Megan Lehmann of "The Hollywood Reporter" thought that the "impressive visual effects and Peter Berg's epic set pieces fight against an armada of cinematic clichés and some truly awful dialogue." "Empire" magazine's Nick de Semlyen felt there was a lack of character development and memorable action shots, and sums up his review of the movie in one word: "Miss."
Many reviews panned the "based on a board game" concept driving the film, although some, such as Jason Di Rosso from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's Radio National, claimed the ridiculousness of the setup is "either sheer joy or pure hell – depending on how seriously you take it", while de Semlyen "had to admire film's creators jumping through hoops to engineer a sequence that replicates the board game." Several compared the film to Michael Bay's "Transformers" film series in terms of quality and cinematic style, with Giles Hardie of "The Sydney Morning Herald" claiming that the movie "finds the same balance between action-packed imagination and not taking the premise seriously that made Michael Bay's original "Transformers" such a joyride." Andrew Harrison of "Q" magazine called the film "crushingly stupid". A review written for the "L.A. Times" also implied disappointment, with writer and film critic Kenneth Turan criticizing the sci-fi action flick's "humanoid aliens", stating that they are "as ungainly as the movie itself, clunking around in awkward, protective suits." Ultimately he does give the film credit by calling the content "all very earnest", but added "it's not a whole lot of fun."
Other critics were less harsh for "Battleship": Writing for "Time", Steven James Snyder was positive because he had low expectations of the film. He wrote, "The creative team behind this ocean-bound thriller decided to fill the narrative black hole with a few ingredients all but absent from today’s summer tent poles – namely mystery, nostalgia and a healthy dose of humility" and described it as "an unlikely mix of "Independence Day", "Pearl Harbor", "Jurassic Park" and "The Hunt for Red October"". Giving it a B+ grade, Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" also praised the story saying, "For every line of howler dialogue that should have been sunk, there's a nice little scene in which humans have to make a difficult decision. For every stretch of generic sci-fi-via-CGI moviemaking, there's a welcome bit of wit." "The Washington Post" gave the film a three-star rating out of four commenting it is "an invigorating blast of cinematic adrenaline". Roger Ebert of the Chicago-Sun Times gave the movie 2 and a half stars.
Home media.
"Battleship" was released on DVD and Blu-ray disc on August 20, 2012 in the United Kingdom, and on August 28 in the United States and Canada.
Video game.
A video game based on the film, titled "Battleship: The Video Game", was released on May 15, 2012 to coincide with the film's international release. The game was published by Activision and developed by Double Helix Games for PlayStation 3, Wii, and Xbox 360, and developed by Magic Pockets for Nintendo 3DS and Nintendo DS.
Board game.
Likewise, Hasbro has re-released several editions of the classic board game: in addition to the regular fleet-vs.-fleet game, an advance version featuring the alien vessels has been released.
