Chitrangada Singh (born 30 August 1976) is an Indian film actress. She is best known for starring in "Hazaaron Khwaishen Aisi" (2005) and for her first mainstream commercial film, "Desi Boyz" (2011). She is married to Indian golfer Jyoti Randhawa.
Early life.
Chitrangada Singh was born in Jodhpur, Rajasthan to an Indian Army officer(Col Niranjan Singh) in a Jat family.Her brother is golfer Digvijay Singh. She, Digvijay and Tina are the children of an Army Officer. As a girl, she was known for looking like the late actress Smita Patil. "You have outdone Smita Patil," said Shekhar Kapur, when he saw Chitrangda Singh's performance in her debut movie "Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi" (2003). She received training in Kathak (a classical dance) and enjoyed acting.
Career.
She began her career in Mumbai as a model before making the transition to the silver screen. After completing her education, she entered modeling, where her ad credits include ICICI bank and Alukkas Jewellery, and gradually shifting to music videos, she performed in Gulzar's "Sunset Point."
It was in a music video of singer Abhijeet Bhattacharya, that she was spotted by Sudhir Mishra’s production manager. Subsequently, she made her much acclaimed debut with Sudhir Mishra's film "Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi" in 2003. The role got her wide acclaim: a "Washington Post" review noted her for giving "her character a deep sense of dignity and decency." After that Chitrangada acted in the 2005 film "Kal: Yesterday and Tomorrow". Chitrangada made her debut as an item girl in Shirish Kunder's "Joker". Also she is to lend her voice to a score in the movie.
She took a break from acting from 2005 to 2008. In 2008, she made her comeback with the leading role opposite Sanjay Suri in the director Onir's romantic-comedy, "Sorry Bhai!". Its release over the weekend of the Mumbai terror attacks proved disastrous at the box office. 
In Sudhir Mishra's movie "Yeh Saali Zindagi" (2011), Chitrangada played the role of an aspiring singer from Delhi who goes to Mumbai to get fame and money. She then starred in Rohit Dhawan's "Desi Boyz", where she played the role of an economics teacher opposite Akshay Kumar. "Desi Boyz" also starred John Abraham and Deepika Padukone.
Chitrangada is brand ambassador for Airtel, Parachute,Puma, Borges Olive Oil, Garnier, Aliva Crackers, Taj Mahal Tea and Joyalukkas Jewellers.
She unveiled Tanishq's new collection at Tote in Mumbai on Wednesday 13 Oct 2010 afternoon.
Beautiful and dusky Bollywood actress Chitrangada Singh was spotted F Lounge, Lower Parel, Mumbai, for the launch of the latest issue of Women’s Health magazine.
The gorgeous actress Chitrangada Singh graced the launch of the iconic British brand ‘Burberry’ store at the capital of our India for its niche and elite patrons. At Oberoi hotel 
Personal life.
Chitrangada Singh is married to golfer Jyoti Randhawa.
