Red Dawn is a 2012 American war film directed by Dan Bradley and written by Jeremy Passmore and Carl Ellsworth, based on the 1984 film of the same name. The film stars Chris Hemsworth, Josh Peck, Josh Hutcherson, Adrianne Palicki, Isabel Lucas, and Jeffrey Dean Morgan. The film centers on a group of young people who defend their hometown from a North Korean invasion.
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer announced its intention to remake "Red Dawn" in May 2008 and subsequently hired Bradley and Ellsworth. The principal characters were cast the following year and the film went into production in September 2009 in Mount Clemens, Michigan. Originally scheduled to be released on November 24, 2010, the film was shelved due to MGM's financial troubles. While in post-production, the invading army was changed from Chinese to North Korean in order to maintain access to China's box office. FilmDistrict bought the U.S. distribution rights in September 2011 and the film was released in the United States on November 21, 2012.
Plot.
An introductory montage shows the United States and its NATO allies weakened by the fallout of the economic crisis, an emerging alliance between an increasingly militant North Korea and ultranationalist-controlled Russia, and increased deployment of US troops abroad (and the highlighted threat of cyberwarfare) leaving the mainland vulnerable.
US Marine Jed Eckert (Hemsworth) is home on leave in Spokane, Washington. He reunites with his father, Spokane Police Sergeant Tom Eckert (Cullen) and his brother, football player Matt Eckert (Peck). The morning after a mysterious power outage, Jed and Matt are shocked to see swarms of invading North Korean paratroopers and transport aircraft. Their father tells them to flee to their cabin in the woods while he helps the townspeople. They are later joined there by Robert Kitner (Hutcherson), Daryl Jenkins (Cruise), and Pete (Lenz). Tensions build as the teens try to decide whether to surrender to the invaders or resist, with Pete in the end betraying their position. North Korean soldiers, under the command of Captain Cho (Lee), bring Sergeant Eckert and the mayor out to convince the group to surrender (with Cho shooting Eckert after he refuses to cooperate and actively encourages them to resist).
Afterwards, Jed announces that he intends to fight and the others agree to join him, calling themselves the Wolverines after their school mascot. After acquiring weapons, establishing a base in an abandoned mine, and being trained by Jed, the Wolverines begin a series of guerrilla attacks against soldiers and collaborators. The North Koreans respond by bombarding the surrounding woods to destroy the Wolverines' base. The Wolverines eventually encounter Marine Sergeant Major Andrew Tanner (Morgan) and two other Marines, Smith (Choi) and Hodges (Gerald). They reveal that the Russian-backed North Koreans launched an electromagnetic pulse (EMP) weapon that crippled the US electrical grid and military, followed by landings along the East and West Coasts (American counterattacks halted their advances and leave an area stretching from Michigan to Montana and Alabama to Arizona as "Free America"). They reveal that Captain Cho carries a suitcase containing an EMP-resistant radio telephone that would enable the US command to contact its remaining forces for a counter-offensive. The Wolverines assist Tanner, Smith, and Hodges in infiltrating the local police station, the North Koreans' center of operations, and succeed in stealing the suitcase (with Jed avenging his father's death by killing Cho). Hodges is killed in the gunfight.
After they successfully escape with the suitcase, the Wolverines regroup at their base. After a short conversation between Matt and Jed, however, the Wolverines are attacked and Jed is killed in the firefight. Visibly shaken, Matt and the rest of the Wolverines escape with the suitcase. The next day, Robert comes to the realization that during an earlier escape, Daryl had been tagged with a GPS tracking unit and has been being tracked since. After some thought, Daryl accepts the fact that they can't go on with him, so he stays behind, his fate unknown.
Sergeant-Major Tanner and Smith depart in a UH-1 with the suitcase, while the remaining Wolverines decide to stay behind and continue to fight, recruiting more members and raiding prisoner camps, with Matt now leading the effort.
Production.
In May 2008, at the Festival de Cannes, Harry Sloan and Mary Parent from MGM announced that a remake of "Red Dawn" was in the early stages of pre-production, with the remake due to be directed by Dan Bradley, who had previously worked as a second unit director and stunt coordinator on films such as "The Bourne Ultimatum," "Spider-Man 3," "Independence Day," and "Quantum of Solace." MGM subsequently announced that "Red Dawn" would be remade "keeping in mind the post-9/11 world that we're in". Later the same month, MGM announced that Dan Bradley had been confirmed as the director with Carl Ellsworth, screenwriter of "Red Eye" and "Disturbia", writing the updated screenplay. Ellsworth worked from a story written by Jeremy Passmore. Vincent Newman ("A Man Apart") was announced as the producer. Australian Chris Hemsworth was cast in a lead role: other cast members include Josh Peck, Adrianne Palicki, Josh Hutcherson, Isabel Lucas, Edwin Hodge, and Connor Cruise.
Principal photography began September 2009 in Mount Clemens, Michigan. According to photographs taken on set, the film features propaganda pamphlets, posters, and banners featuring People's Liberation Army symbols, such as the August 1 star. The posters attempt to garner support for a Chinese occupation, with slogans such as ""Rebuilding Your Reputation"", ""Repairing Your Economy"", and ""Fighting Corporate Corruption"".
In June 2010, release of the film was delayed due to MGM’s financial difficulties. The delay came amid growing controversy in China after excerpts of the script were leaked on the website "The Awl". The film drew sharp criticism from the "Global Times", one of the leading Chinese state-run newspapers, with headlines such as "U.S. reshoots Cold War movie to demonize China" and "American movie plants hostile seeds against China". One of the articles stated: "China can still feel U.S. distrust and fear, especially among its people. Americans' suspicions about China are the best ground for the hawks to disseminate fear and doubt, which is the biggest concern with the movie, "Red Dawn"."
In January 2011, the first cast photo was released along with news that MGM would release the film once their Chapter 11 restructuring is completed. "Red Dawn" was one of three already completed MGM projects scheduled to be released in 2011.
In March 2011, the "Los Angeles Times" reported that MGM changed the villains in its "Red Dawn" remake from Chinese to North Korean in order to maintain access to China's lucrative box office. The changes reportedly cost less than $1 million and involve changing an opening sequence summarizing the story's fictional backdrop (dropping the original storyline of Chinese "repossession" after the US defaults on loans for a North Korean invasion), re-editing two scenes, and using digital technology to change Chinese symbols and dialogue to Korean. The film's producer Trip Vinson stated: "We were initially very reluctant to make any changes, but after careful consideration we constructed a way to make a scarier, smarter and more dangerous "Red Dawn" that we believe improves the movie."
Release.
In September 2011, it was reported that Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer was finalizing a deal with the independent studio FilmDistrict to distribute the film in the United States. In December 2011, FilmDistrict reached a deal to distribute its 2012 films including "Red Dawn" through Open Road Films.
In September 2012, it was announced that the film would premiere on September 27, 2012 at the Alamo Drafthouse Cinema in Austin, Texas, closing out the Fantastic Fest film festival. The film was released in U.S. theaters on November 21, 2012.
Box office.
"Red Dawn" opened in theaters in the United States on 21 November 2012. The film earned $7.4 million in its first two days and finished in seventh place, earning $14.6 million in its first weekend. , "Red Dawn" has grossed $47,693,343.
Critical reaction.
"Red Dawn" has received generally negative reviews from film critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an 11% approval rating based on 109 reviews with an average score of 4/10, and a 3% approval rating among top reviewers. Frank Scheck of "The Hollywood Reporter" said, "An already silly premise is given a ham-fisted treatment in this ill-advised remake of John Milius' 1984 hit action film". Manohla Dargis of "The New York Times" said, "Bradley... handles the low-fi action well, which helps divert attention from the bargain-bin special effects, bad acting and politics". Mark Olsen of the "Los Angeles Times" said, "Reasonably dopey fun on its own, the remade "Red Dawn" simply can't stand up to the real-world issues it steps on like a land mine". Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" said, "The story's time frame is confusingly murky. How long does it take the North Koreans to land... and start running things? What is their game plan? Is this a national invasion? We're unclear what's happening in the rest of the United States".
Conversely, Joe Leydon of "Variety" gave the film a positive review, writing " battle scenes are infused with a propulsive sense of urgency, as Bradley (a vet stunt coordinator and second unit director) often achieves an effective semi-documentary look".
Home media.
"Red Dawn" is scheduled to be released on DVD and Blu-ray on March 05, 2013.
