"Supernatural" is a supernatural drama television series, created by Eric Kripke, that follows brothers Sam (Jared Padalecki) and Dean Winchester (Jensen Ackles) as they travel throughout the United States hunting supernatural creatures. Their main adversaries throughout the series are demons. The brothers first attempt to hunt down Azazel—the demon responsible for their mother's death—and then Lilith, the demon who holds the contract for Dean's soul and attempts to free Lucifer, a fallen angel. The fifth season features the rise of Lucifer, whom the Winchesters must stop to prevent the Apocalypse. The demon Crowley takes control of Hell and begins searching for Purgatory in the sixth season, while Lucifer's defeat results in a war among the angels in Heaven. The seventh season focuses on the Winchesters attempting to stop the Leviathans, creatures released from Purgatory, from taking over the world. The series borrows heavily from folklore and urban legends, and explores Pagan and Christian mythology.
In the United States, the first episode of the series originally aired on September 13, 2005. The first season was broadcast on The WB, and following The WB's merger with UPN in September 2006, "Supernatural" continued to be aired on the new network, The CW. The seventh season began airing on September 23, 2011. The first six seasons are available on DVD in Regions 1, 2, and 4 and are also available on Blu-ray. It became available on Netflix on January 30, 2012.
, 164 episodes have aired.
Episodes.
In the tables below, the number in the first column refers to the episode's number within the entire series, whereas the number in the second column indicates the episode's number within that particular season. "U.S. viewers in millions" refers to how many Americans watched the episode live or on the day of broadcast.
Season 9: 2013-14.
On February 11, 2013, CW president Mark Pedowitz confirmed early renewals of both Wednesday shows Supernatural and Arrow, which will continue to air on the same schedule next fall.
