Bed size refers to the dimensions of a mattress and the names by which standard sizes are called. Beds themselves vary widely in size according to the degree of ornamentation but are sold according to the size of mattress they take. The dimensions and names vary considerably around the world, with most countries having their own standards and terminology.
Modern sizes in metric system countries are long. The traditional "double" size standard among English speaking countries, based on the imperial measurement is 4'6" by 6'3" () but the sizes for other bed types tend to vary.
Table of common sizes.
For North American, as well as British and Irish beds, the sizes are traditionally specified in US customary units or Imperial units (the metric equivalents given here are approximate). For Latin America, mainland Europe, and Japan, the sizes are specified in metric (US/Imperial equivalents are approximate).
United States and Canada.
Modern manufacturing conventions have resulted in a limited number of standard sizes of commercial bedding for mattresses and box springs. Imported beds vary by country of origin as per the table above.
These dimensions are for the mattress—the actual bed frame will be a little larger in order to fully encompass and support the mattress. The thickness of the mattress may vary considerably.
UK and Ireland sizes.
Most modern beds/mattresses sold in the UK and Ireland are constructed using imperial dimensions but are sometimes sold in their approximate metric equivalents.
Swedish Sizes are sold in the UK; in particular they are the standard sizes supplied by IKEA. The length of "standard" single and double mattresses is 200 cm, rather than the usual 190 cm.
The European king size (160 cm × 200 cm) as well as contemporary Italian beds and furniture have become more popular.
Other sizes (bespoke beds) can be made to order; bed, mattress, and bed linen must all be of compatible size.
Mainland European sizes.
Italy.
In Italy, beds are classified by name. Most common sizes are: 
Norway.
Beds/mattresses are often available also in "extra long" 220 cm (87 in) length. 
To cover the California king size mattress, waterbeds are also sold in Europe with size of 180 cm × 210 cm. Some older beds are only 190 cm (75 in) long, while antique beds often are even shorter as, on average, people are taller now than they used to be.
New Zealand sizes.
The following bed sizes are available in New Zealand: 
Note that sizes vary slightly from bed to bed due to manufacturing tolerances, level of padding, and support type.
South African sizes.
Beds are also available in extra length, which would be 200 cm.
Singaporean and Malaysian sizes.
Ikea, unlike in Europe, sells beds and mattresses in the local 'single' and 'double' (=Queen) size. ('IKEA strives to harmonize the catalogue pages for all IKEA retailers, but local adaptation is sometimes needed due to, e.g., different color preferences, bed sizes, etc.')
Thailand sizes.
For beds manufactured in Thailand for the local market, there are four sizes that are common, all with a length of 78 in.
