Plot.
In the year 2022, the Virtual Reality Massively Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Game (VRMMORPG), Sword Art Online (SAO), is released. With the Nerve Gear, a virtual reality helmet that stimulates the user's five senses via their brain, players can experience and control their in-game characters with their minds. 
On November 6, 2022, all the players log in for the first time, and subsequently discover that they are unable to log out. They are then informed by Kayaba Akihiko, the creator of SAO, that if they wish to be free, they must reach the 100th floor of the game's tower and defeat the final boss. However, if their avatars die in-game, their bodies will also die in the real world. The story follows Kirito, a skilled player who is determined to beat the game. As the game progresses for two years, Kirito eventually befriends a female player named Asuna with whom he ultimately falls in love. After the duo discover the identity of Kayaba's avatar in SAO, they confront and defeat him, freeing themselves and the other players from the game.
Upon returning to the real world, Kirito learns that Asuna and a small group of SAO players have still not awakened yet. Following a clue about Asuna's whereabouts in another VRMMORPG called Alfheim Online (ALO), Kirito also logs in there. Helped by his sister Suguha, he learns that the trapped players in ALO are part of a plan devised by Nobuyuki Sugō to perform illegal experiments on their minds to put them under his control, including Asuna, whom he intends to marry in the real world in order to take over her family's company. After Kirito stops Nobuyuki's plans, he finally reunites with Asuna in the real world.
Soon after, Kirito plays another game called Gun Gale Online (GGO) to investigate the mysterious connection between it and deaths occurring in the real world. Assisted by a female player he meets in the game called Sinon, he identifies and exposes the culprits, who include some former members of a murderous guild he had previously encountered in SAO.
Kirito is later recruited to assist in the development of a state-of-the-art game, UnderWorld (UW), which has an interface that is far more realistic and complex than the previous games he had played. In UW, the flow of time proceeds thousands of times faster than in the real world. However, he ends up falling into a trap set by one of the murderers from GGO and wakes up inside the game, unable to log out, with his real self left in a comatose state. As he starts to question if he is the real Kirito or an artificial intelligence modeled after him, Asuna, Suguha and Sinon also log themselves into UW in an attempt to help him.
Setting.
The light novel series spans several virtual MMORPGs, not exclusively the eponymous world of Sword Art Online.
Media.
Light novels.
Reki Kawahara wrote the first volume in 2002 as a competition entry for ASCII Media Works' , but refrained from submitting it as he had exceeded the page limit. He instead published it as a web novel under the pseudonym Fumio Kunori. Over time, he added three further volumes and several short stories. In 2008, he participated in the competition again by writing "Accel World", this time winning the Grand Prize. Aside from "Accel World", he was requested to get his earlier work, "Sword Art Online", published by ASCII Media Works. Kawahara agreed and withdrew his web novel versions. The republication as a paper novel began on April 10, 2009. The paper novel excluded chapter 16.5 of volume 1 of the web novel, due to its explicit nature. On October 10, 2012, the first volume of the "Sword Art Online: Progressive" series was released. "Progressive" covers Kirito's adventures on the first and second floors of Aincrad, and includes a rewrite of two side stories, Aria in the Starless Night and Rondo of the Transient Sword.
Manga.
There are three manga adaptations of the series, which are serialized in "Dengeki Bunko Magazine". "Sword Art Online: Aincrad", illustrated by Tamako Nakamura, ran from September 2010 to May 2012 and consists of two manga volumes. A comedy four-panel manga titled "Sword Art Online 4-koma" and illustrated by Jūsei Minami, was serialized in September 2010 with one manga volume published thus far. A third manga titled "Sword Art Online: Fairy Dance" and illustrated by Hazuki Tsubasa, began serializing on May 2012 after "Sword Art Online: Aincrad" ended.
Anime.
An anime adaptation of "Sword Art Online" was announced at Dengeki Bunko Autumn Festival 2011, along with Reki Kawahara's other light novel series, "Accel World". The anime is published by Aniplex, produced by A-1 Pictures and directed by Tomohiko Ito with music by Yuki Kajiura. The anime began airing on Tokyo MX, tvk, TVS, TVA, RKB, HBC and MBS on July 7, 2012 and on AT-X, Chiba TV and BS11 at later dates. The series is also streamed on Crunchyroll and Hulu.Aniplex of America confirmed during its live streaming panel on Friday that its release of the Sword Art Online television anime series will include an English dub.Aniplex will hold an exclusive screening of the dub at Seattle's Sakura-Con convention in March, followed by a question-and-answer session with Sword Art Online light novel series creator Reki Kawahara. The anime's theme song performers Eir Aoi and Luna Haruna will also appear at the event.The opening theme song for the first 14 episodes is "crossing field" by LiSA and the ending theme song is by Haruka Tomatsu. From episode 15 onward, the opening theme is "Innocence" by Eir Aoi and the ending theme is "Overfly" by Luna Haruna. The anime has been licensed in North America by Aniplex USA. and in Australia by Madman Entertainment. The anime was simulcast by Crunchyroll.
Video game.
A video game adaptation, titled , is being developed by Namco Bandai Games for the PlayStation Portable. The game will be released in both regular and limited edition box sets on March 14, 2013.
Reception.
Richard Eisenbeis of Kotaku hails "Sword Art Online" as the smartest series in recent years, praising its deep insight on the psychological aspects of virtual reality on the human psyche, its sociological views on creating a realistic economy and society in a massively multiplayer online game setting, and the writing staff's ability to juggle a wide variety of genres within the series. Eisenbeis particularly noted how the romance between Kirito and Asuna is explored bringing "definition to exactly what love is like in a virtual world."
According to Oricon, "Sword Art Online" was the top selling light novel series of 2012, with eight volumes figuring among the top selling light novels.
