Julia Fiona Roberts (born October 28, 1967) is an American actress. She became a Hollywood star after headlining the romantic comedy "Pretty Woman" (1990), which grossed $464 million worldwide. After receiving Golden Globe Awards and Academy Award nominations for "Steel Magnolias" (1989) and "Pretty Woman", she won the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Erin Brockovich" (2000). Her films "The Pelican Brief" (1993), "My Best Friend's Wedding" (1997), "Mystic Pizza" (1988), "Notting Hill" (1999), "Runaway Bride" (1999), "Ocean's Eleven" (2001), "Ocean's Twelve" (2004), "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), "Valentine's Day" (2010) and "Mirror Mirror" (2012) have collectively brought box office receipts of over $2.6 billion, making her one of the most successful actresses in terms of box office receipts.
Roberts had become one of the highest-paid actresses in the world, topping "The Hollywood Reporter"s annual "power list" of top-earning female stars from 2005 to 2006. Her fee for 1990's "Pretty Woman" was $300,000; in 2003, she was paid an unprecedented $25 million for her role in "Mona Lisa Smile" (2003). As of 2010, Roberts's net worth was estimated to be $140 million.
Roberts has been named one of "People" magazine's "50 Most Beautiful People in the World" eleven times, tied with Halle Berry. In 2011, she was named one of the "100 Hottest Women of All-Time" by "Men's Health". In 2001, "Ladies Home Journal" ranked her as the 11th most powerful woman in the United States. Roberts has a production company called Red Om Films.
Early life and family.
Roberts was born in Atlanta, Georgia, at Crawford Long Hospital (now Emory University Hospital Midtown), to Betty Lou ("née" Bredemus) and Walter Grady Roberts. She is of English, Scottish, Irish, Welsh, German, and Swedish descent. Her father was a Baptist and her mother a Roman Catholic, and she was raised Catholic. Her older brother, Eric Roberts (from whom she was estranged until 2004), sister, Lisa Roberts Gillan, and niece, Emma Roberts, are also actors. Julia's parents, one-time actors and playwrights, met while performing theatrical productions for the armed forces. They later co-founded the Atlanta Actors and Writers Workshop in Atlanta, Georgia, off Juniper Street in Midtown. While her mother was pregnant with Julia, she and her husband ran an acting school for children in Decatur, Georgia. The children of Martin Luther King, Jr. and Coretta Scott King attended the school. As a thank-you for their service, Mrs. King paid the hospital bill when Julia's mother gave birth to Julia.
Julia's mother filed for divorce in 1971 with the divorce being finalized early in 1972. Roberts lived in Smyrna, in 1972, where she attended Fitzhugh Lee Elementary School, Griffin Middle School, and Campbell High School. Her mother married Michael Motes and had a daughter, Nancy Motes, in 1976. Julia's father died of cancer when she was ten.
Roberts wanted to be a veterinarian as a child. She played clarinet in the band in school. After graduating from Smyrna's Campbell High School, she headed to New York to pursue a career in acting. Once there, she signed with the Click Modeling Agency and enrolled in acting classes.
Career.
1987–1989.
Roberts made her first big screen appearance in the film "Satisfaction" (1988), released on February 12, 1988, alongside Liam Neeson and Justine Bateman, as a band member looking for a summer gig. She had previously performed a small role opposite her brother, Eric, in "Blood Red" (she has two words of dialogue), filmed in 1987 and released in 1989. Her first television appearance was as a juvenile rape victim in the initial season of the series "Crime Story" with Dennis Farina, in the episode titled "The Survivor", broadcast on February 13, 1987. Her first critical success with moviegoers was her performance in the independent film "Mystic Pizza" in 1988; that same year, she had a role in the fourth season finale of "Miami Vice". In 1989, she was featured in "Steel Magnolias", as a young bride with diabetes, and received both her first Academy Award nomination (as Best Supporting Actress) and first Golden Globe Award win (Motion Picture Best Supporting Actress) for her performance.
1990–2000.
Roberts became known to worldwide audiences when she co-starred with Richard Gere in the Cinderella/Pygmalionesque story, "Pretty Woman", in 1990. Roberts won the role after Michelle Pfeiffer, Molly Ringwald, Meg Ryan, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Karen Allen, and Daryl Hannah (her co-star in "Steel Magnolias") all turned it down. The role also earned her a second Oscar nomination, this time as Best Actress, and second Golden Globe Award win, as Motion Picture Best Actress (Musical or Comedy). Her next box office success was the thriller "Sleeping with the Enemy", playing a battered wife who escapes her abusive husband, played by Patrick Bergin, and begins a new life in Iowa. She played Tinkerbell in Steven Spielberg's "Hook" in 1991, and also played a nurse in the 1991 film, "Dying Young". This work was followed by a two-year hiatus, during which she made no films other than a cameo appearance in Robert Altman's "The Player" (1992). In early 1993, she was the subject of a "People" magazine cover story asking, "What Happened to Julia Roberts?" She was offered the role of Annie Reed in "Sleepless in Seattle" (1993), but turned it down.
Roberts co-starred with Denzel Washington in "The Pelican Brief" (1993), based on John Grisham's 1992 novel of the same name. In 1996, she appeared in season 2 of "Friends" (episode 13 "The One After the Superbowl"). Roberts recorded her scenes from January 6–8, 1996. She had a relationship with cast member Matthew Perry at the time, and an audience member said about their on-screen kiss, "Julia looked at Matt and said 'I'm glad we rehearsed this over the weekend'." She was offered the role of Lucy Eleanor Moderatz in "While You Were Sleeping" (1995), but also turned it down.
Roberts co-starred with Liam Neeson in "Michael Collins" (1996). Over the next few years, she starred in Stephen Frears' "Mary Reilly" (1996), followed by "My Best Friend's Wedding" in 1997. In 1998, she appeared on "Sesame Street" opposite the character Elmo, demonstrating her ability to change emotions. She was offered the role of Viola de Lesseps in "Shakespeare in Love" (1998), but turned it down. She starred with Hugh Grant in "Notting Hill" (1999). That same year she also starred in "Runaway Bride", her second film with Richard Gere. Roberts was a guest star on the "Law & Order" television series episode "Empire" with series regular Benjamin Bratt (at that time her boyfriend). She earned an nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series. Also in 1999 she starred in the critically panned film "Stepmom" (1998) alongside Susan Sarandon.
2001–2005.
In 2001 Roberts received the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Erin Brockovich, who helped wage a successful lawsuit against energy giant Pacific Gas & Electric. While presenting the Best Actor Award to Denzel Washington the following year she made a gaffe, saying she was glad that Tom Conti wasn't there. She meant the conductor, Bill Conti, who had tried to hasten the conclusion of her Oscar speech the previous year, but instead named the Scottish actor. Roberts teamed with "Erin Brockovich" director Steven Soderbergh for three more films: "Ocean's Eleven" (2001), "Full Frontal" (2002), and "Ocean's Twelve" (2004). Later in 2001 she starred in the road gangster comedy, "The Mexican", giving her a chance to work with long-time friend, Brad Pitt. In 2005 she was featured in the music video for the hit single "Dreamgirl" by the Dave Matthews Band; it was her first music video appearance.
2006–present.
Roberts had two films released in 2006, "The Ant Bully" and "Charlotte's Web". Both films were animated features for which she provided voice acting. Her next film was "Charlie Wilson's War" (2007), with Tom Hanks and Philip Seymour Hoffman, directed by Mike Nichols and based on the book by former CBS journalist George Crile; it was released on December 21, 2007. "Fireflies in the Garden" (2008), also starring Ryan Reynolds and Willem Dafoe, was released at the Berlin International Film Festival in February 2008 and was subsequently shown in European cinemas; it did not get a North American release until 2011.
Roberts made her Broadway debut on April 19, 2006 as Nan in a revival of Richard Greenberg's 1997 play "Three Days of Rain" opposite Bradley Cooper and Paul Rudd. Although the play grossed nearly US$1 million dollars in ticket sales during its first week and was a commercial success throughout its limited run, her performance drew criticism. Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" described Roberts as being fraught with "self-consciousness (especially in the first act) only glancingly acquainted with the two characters she plays." Brantley also criticized the production of "Greenberg's slender, elegant play," writing that “it's almost impossible to discern its artistic virtues from this wooden and splintered interpretation, directed by Joe Mantello." Writing in "The New York Post", Clive Barnes declared, "Hated the play. To be sadly honest, even hated her. At least I liked the rain—even if three days of it can seem an eternity." "Three Days of Rain" received two Tony Award nominations in stagecraft categories. In 2009, Lancôme announced that Roberts would become their global ambassador for their company. Julia starred with Clive Owen in the comedy-thriller "Duplicity" for which she received her seventh Golden Globe nomination. In 2010, she appeared in the ensemble romantic comedy "Valentine's Day", with Cooper, and starred in the film adaptation of "Eat Pray Love". "Eat Pray Love" had the highest debut at the box office for Roberts in a top-billed role since "America's Sweethearts". Later in the year, she signed a five-year extension with Lancôme for  million ( million). In 2011, she co-starred as Mercedes Tainot opposite Tom Hanks who directed and played the title role in the romantic comedy "Larry Crowne". The movie has received generally bad reviews with only 35% of the 175 Rotten Tomatoes reviews giving it high ratings, although Roberts's comedic performance was praised. Roberts appeared in the 2012 Tarsem Singh adaptation of "Snow White", called "Mirror Mirror", playing the Evil Queen.
American Girl films.
Roberts has brought to life some of the books from "American Girl" as films, serving as executive producer alongside her sister Lisa. The company's product lines and services are focused on pre-teen-girl characters from various periods of American history, embodied as dolls and featured in narratives including books and movies. Roberts has produced four movies.
Personal life.
Relationships and marriages.
Roberts has reportedly had romantic relationships with actors Jason Patric, Liam Neeson, Dylan McDermott, and Matthew Perry. She was briefly engaged to actor Kiefer Sutherland; they broke up three days before their scheduled wedding on 11 June 1991. On June 25, 1993, she married country singer Lyle Lovett; the wedding took place at St. James Lutheran Church in Marion, Indiana. They separated in March 1995 and subsequently divorced. From 1998 to 2001, Roberts dated actor Benjamin Bratt. 
Roberts and her present husband, cameraman Daniel Moder, met on the set of her film "The Mexican" in 2000, while she was still dating Bratt. At the time, Moder was married to Vera Steimberg. He filed for divorce a little over a year later, and after it was finalized, he and Roberts wed on July 4, 2002, at her ranch in Taos, New Mexico. Together, they have three children: twins Hazel Patricia Moder and Phinnaeus "Finn" Walter Moder (b. 2004) and Henry Daniel Moder (b. 2007).
Beliefs.
Roberts disclosed in a 2010 interview for "Elle" magazine that she believes in and practices Hinduism. Roberts is a devotee of Neem Karoli Baba (Maharaj-ji). A picture of Neem Karoli Baba drew Roberts to Hinduism.
Charities.
Roberts has given her time and resources to UNICEF as well as to other charitable organizations. On May 10, 1995, Roberts arrived in Port-au-Prince, as she said, "to educate myself". The poverty she found was overwhelming. "My heart is just bursting", she said. UNICEF officials hoped that her six-day visit would trigger an outburst of giving: $10 million in aid was sought at the time.
In 2000, Roberts narrated "Silent Angels", a documentary about Rett syndrome, a neurodevelopmental disorder, which was shot in Los Angeles, Baltimore and New York. The documentary was designed to help raise public awareness about the disease. In July 2006, Earth Biofuels announced Roberts as a spokeswoman for the company and as chair of the company's newly formed Advisory Board promoting the use of renewable fuels.
