Sex is a coffee table book written by Madonna with photographs by Steven Meisel Studio and film frames taken from film shot by Fabien Baron. The book was edited by Glenn O'Brien. "Sex" was released on October 21, 1992 by Warner Books. The book was released by Madonna as an accompaniment to her fifth studio album "Erotica", which was released a day earlier.
The extremely controversial book featured strong adult content and softcore pornographic photographs depicting simulations of sexual acts, which included sadomasochism and analingus. Madonna wrote the book as a character named Mistress Dita, inspired by 1930s film actress Dita Parlo.
Featured in the book, aside from unknown models, are actress Isabella Rossellini, rappers Big Daddy Kane and Vanilla Ice, model Naomi Campbell, gay porn star Joey Stefano, actor Udo Kier, socialite Tatiana von Fürstenberg, and nightclub owner Ingrid Casares.
For the release of "Sex" Madonna gave a party at New York City's Industria Superstudio, which she attended dressed as Little Bo Peep with a stuffed toy lamb.
History.
Warner Bros. Records and Time Warner executives were reluctant to allow Madonna to create such a book, and although they eventually gave her permission, they remained greatly opposed to the idea. Madonna was made to sign an agreement that forbade her from including any photographs depicting children, religious imagery and bestiality. 
Not long after signing this agreement Madonna founded Maverick, a multi-media entertainment company. Since by contract she had total artistic control over any of the work released by Maverick, the agreement she signed with Time Warner concerning what not to do in "Sex" became obsolete. The book's editor Glenn O'Brien suggested the title "Sex", which was the name of Mae West's first Broadway play. As a "tongue-in-cheek" way of demonstrating her power to the executives who had so vehemently opposed the book, Madonna included two photographs that "broke the rules"—a photo where she is tied à la S&M on a low cross-shaped table surrounded by candles with a large cross displayed on the wall behind her, and another photo of her kneeling on the ground with a dog underneath her on its back, creating the impression that she is straddling the animal while it is giving her oral sex. 
Warner Bros. commented that "Sex" was very difficult to produce, requiring contributions from many different printing and publishing companies, with Mighty Dimension Inc. coordinating the project—LTI, Bishop Studio, Master Eagle Graphic Design, and Shorewood Packaging, all based in New York City; as well as Laserscan Inc. in Phoenix, Arizona; Benson and Palmer in Newport, Rhode Island; Mohawk Papermills in Cohoes, New York; C&H Packaging Company Inc. in Merrill, Wisconsin; and Nicholstone in Nashville, Tennessee. At some point while the book was being produced some of the photographs were stolen, prompting an FBI investigation that quickly recovered the photos. In the credits of the book Madonna thanks the FBI for "" ... rescuing photographs that would have made J. Edgar Hoover roll over.""
Madonna had originally intended to call the book "X" but changed her mind when Spike Lee's upcoming film "Malcolm X" began to be promoted. The film was released three weeks after the book, and inspired the fashion trend of wearing hats and shirts with a large X in honor of Malcolm X. Madonna wanted the book to be of an oval shape, but the printing and manufacturing of such a book would have been too expensive. In the end, the original design for the "X" title and shape of the book were only retained on the back cover (see below) and on the accompanying CD and its packaging.
The book was shot during the summer of 1992 in New York City and Miami. Locations in New York City included the Hotel Chelsea and Times Square's all-male burlesque Gaiety Theatre (dancers from theatre participated in one of the book's photo sessions). In Miami, the majority of the sessions were shot at Madonna's home and on various beaches and streets. Aside from Steven Meisel himself, photographers from his studio were also employed. The book credits Michael Stratton, Darren Lew, Line Barzudkas, Stephen Callaghan and Chris Hobson. Fabien Baron, one of the book's designers, also shot many of the photo sessions on film. Photographers Stephen Callaghan and Darren Lew were also credited for filming. Many of the book's photographs are actually stills taken from this footage, which was done almost entirely on Super 8mm.
Design and printing.
"Sex" was designed by Madonna and Baron & Baron Inc. 
(consisting of Fabien Baron and the photographer Siung Fat Tjia), 
who also designed the packaging for Madonna's "Erotica" album and single. The book is largely presented in a style not far off from Andy Warhol's works, namely the famous shot on the metallized plastic cover of the book (a colored reverse negative), which Madonna also used as the cover of her "Erotica" album.
Certain pages included collages of ripped and pasted prints (including 
some that were stapled together), proof sheets and entire pages in both 
monochrome & full color. The text of the book varies from 
handwritten to printed, with eye-bending styles of typefaces and colors.
In the non-English versions of the book any printed text that was not 
printed in these complex typefaces had the relevant translation printed 
over it, and any text that could not have the translated text printed 
over it was included at the back of the book on additional pages. In the
Japanese version, Madonna had any photos that included visible 
genitalia "scribbled out".
Included with the book was a CD packaged in silver mylar packaging that 
resembled a condom. The CD contains a stripped down version of 
"Erotica", titled "Erotic". Although the sound is 
similar to Erotica, the song's lyrics consist of passages read by 
Madonna from the book.
There is a small photonovella-style comic bound into the back of the 
book titled "Dita in "The Chelsea Girl"" which depicts a party at the 
Hotel Chelsea in New York City. Allegedly Madonna created the 
dialogue of the comic book when photographer Steven Meisel placed a 
stack of randomly ordered photos from one of the book's photo sessions 
on her desk. He suggested she conjure up a story while maintaining the 
random order of the photos.
The English language release of "Sex" was printed in 
1.5 million copies in its first edition and another 
1.5 million in its second (Madonna herself is said to own the 
very first printed copy of the first edition.). The Japanese and French 
language releases received a 1 million copy printing each for the first 
edition. Since the Japanese version was banned shortly after its 
release, it did not receive a second edition printing like the English 
and French versions did. The English version was the only version 
printed in the United States, while the English, French, Spanish, 
Italian, German and Japanese versions were printed in their respective 
countries. Aside from the translated text and differences in paper 
quality, they are identical to the English language version. The 
Japanese version was printed on art paper of far higher quality than 
that of the English and other versions.
The Japanese version was the only release of "Sex" to be put into a 
box. Although all of the other official releases of the book include the
title on the metallized plastic cover as ""Madonna Sex"", the 
Japanese language release had the title printed as ""Sex by Madonna"" 
on the metallized plastic cover.
Books
that were printed in languages such as Thai, or 
Russian are all unofficial and were manufactured without the consent of 
Madonna or Warner Bros. These versions of the book were printed in a 
variety of styles, with varying covers and quality.
The book was sold for $49.95 in the United States, £25.00 in the United 
Kingdom, Pts 7,500 in Spain, 300F in France, 99 DM in Germany, and 
L75,000 in Italy.
Release.
The book was published on October 21, 1992, generating international publicity. Several organizations tried to boycott the sale of the book, while many book stores refused to carry it. There were many negative essays by critics that considered "Sex" to be a calculated controversy timed to boost sales of Madonna's new album. 
In spite of the controversy and negative reviews, "Sex" sold 150,000 copies on the day of its release in the USA alone. Three days later all 1.5 million copies of the first edition were sold out worldwide, making "Sex" the most successful coffee table book ever released. The bookstore chain Waldenbooks sold 22,000 copies of the book on the day of its release, and commented to MTV that they had never once seen a book sell out so quickly.
The day after the release of the book MTV aired a special called "The Day In Madonna" hosted by Kurt Loder (the title of this special was a pun of the title of the channel's daily show "The Day In Rock"), which profiled the release of Madonna's "Sex" and her new album "Erotica", even taking the book to the streets to allow people, including a sex therapist and group of real-life New York City dominatrices, to view it. MTV also interviewed many people who had viewed the book on the day of its release at the HMV music store in New York City. In celebration of the release of the book, the store held a Madonna look-alike contest and set up a booth where people could view the book for $1.00 a minute, with all of the proceeds going to Lifebeat, the music industry organization founded to help fund AIDS research.
Since all of the first edition copies of the book sold out so quickly, there was a huge demand for additional copies, with Warner Books deciding to print a second edition of the book.
The Japanese version of the book was released on December 1, 1992, and after a week of being for sale in Japan the book was banned, leaving many book and music chains that purchased copies of the book unable to sell them.
Now long out of print, "Sex" is very valuable—prices for a brand-new unopened first edition can start at $150USD on Amazon.com or eBay.com. As a result of the Japanese version of the book only being printed in 1,000,000 copies and being banned shortly after its release, an unopened edition can start at prices as high as $120USD. But in Brazil, for example, these prices can be higher. The book was not sold in Brazil and the only version that can be found in rare bookstores is the American one and it can cost from $250USD to $400USD.
Madonna later responded to the negative publicity and controversy with her 1994 song "Human Nature", which was included on her album "Bedtime Stories'(Cite references)
According to the BookFinder.com, "Sex" was the most requested out of circulation publication.
Video.
Many of the photos in the book "Sex" are actually stills. Photographers from Steven Meisel Studio shot many of the sessions with regular photography, while fashion photographer Fabian Baron, Stephen Callaghan and Darren Lew shot a number of the sessions on video as well as Super 8-mm film to recreate the gritty look of a vintage stag movie. 
Much of this footage was utilized for the video for the single "Erotica", which Baron directed. Grainy black and white film of Madonna as a dominatrix with male slaves and as a pony-girl in a leather harness and bridle were filmed at New York's S&M club The Vault. (Photos taken at The Vault also appear in the book.) An hour of this footage was then compiled for a film that Madonna had played during a party she gave for the release of "Sex" at New York City's Industria Superstudio. Madonna also had 100 copies of the film made to give to her closest friends. This film boasted a soundtrack of vintage French chansons from the 1930s through the 1960s by such singers as Charles Trenet, Gilbert Bécaud, Charles Aznavour, Johnny Hallyday, Édith Piaf, Françoise Hardy, Maurice Chevalier and Josephine Baker. Generally known as "The Making of Sex", copies of the film still occasionally turn up for sale. The original 60-minute edit with the French noir soundtrack once went for prices as high as $1,250 U$—costing even more than the book itself.
Modern culture references.
In a deleted scene from a 1993 episode ("Krusty Gets Kancelled") of the animated sitcom "The Simpsons", aired as part of "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular", Krusty the Clown attempts to market a book extremely similar to "Sex" as a means of resolving his financial woes. Krusty is seen in a suggestive pose on the front cover. Unlike Madonna, however, Krusty apparently never appeared fully nude, as he quickly claimed that he "used a stunt butt."
In the 2004 episode of "South Park" titled "Pre-School", Kyle Broflovski uses the "Sex" book as a visual aid for his friends, who are attempting to draw a pair of female breasts on Eric Cartman's buttocks as part of a practical joke.
In 2010, writer-performer Greg Scarnici released a book parody of "Sex" titled "Sex in Drag"—which was shot entirely on Fire Island, NY.
Reception.
The book received generally a negative reaction from critics.
