An emoticon () is a pictorial representation of a facial expression using punctuation marks, numbers and letters, usually written to express a person's feelings or mood.
Emoticons are often used to alert a responder to the tenor or temper of a statement, and can change and improve interpretation of plain text. The word is a portmanteau word of the English words "emotion" and "icon". In web forums, instant messengers and online games, text emoticons are often automatically replaced with small corresponding images, which came to be called "emoticons" as well. Emoticons for a smiley face codice_1 and sad face codice_2 appear in the first documented use in digital form. Certain complex character combinations can only be accomplished in a double-byte language, giving rise to especially complex forms, sometimes known by their romanized Japanese name of kaomoji.
The use of emoticons can be traced back to the 19th century, and they were commonly used in casual and humorous writing. Digital forms of emoticons on the Internet were included in a proposal by Scott Fahlman of Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in a message on 19 September 1982.
History.
Antecedents.
The "National Telegraphic Review and Operators Guide" in April 1857 documented the use of the number 73 in Morse code to express "love and kisses" (later reduced to the more formal "best regards"). "Dodge's Manual" in 1908 documented the reintroduction of "love and kisses" as the number 88. Gajadhar and Green comment that both Morse code abbreviations are more succinct than modern abbreviations such as LOL.
A "New York Times" transcript from an Abraham Lincoln speech written in 1862 contains "(applause and laughter codice_3"; there is some debate as to whether it is a typo, a legitimate punctuation construct, or an emoticon.
Four vertical typographical emoticons were published in 1881 by the U.S. satirical magazine "Puck", with the stated intention that the publication's letterpress department thus intended to "lay out... all the cartoonists that ever walked." In 1912, Ambrose Bierce proposed "an improvement in punctuation – the snigger point, or note of : it is written thus \___/! and presents a smiling mouth. It is to be appended, with the full stop exclamation mark as Bierce's later example used, to every jocular or ironical sentence".
Emoticons had already come into use in sci-fi fandom in the 1940s, although there seems to have been a lapse in cultural continuity between the communities.
The September 1962 issue of MAD Magazine published an article titled "Typewri-toons." The piece, featuring typewriter-generated artwork credited to "Royal Portable," was entirely made up of repurposed typography, including a capital letter P having a bigger bust than a capital I, a lowercase b and d discussing their pregnancies, an asterisk on top of a letter to indicate the letter had just come inside from a snowfall, and a classroom of lowercase n's interrupted by a lowercase h "raising its hand." Two additional "Typewri-toons" articles subsequently appeared in "Mad", in 1965 and 1987.
In 1963 the "smiley face", a yellow button with two black dots representing eyes and an upturned thick curve representing a mouth was created by freelance artist Harvey Ball. It was realized on order of a large insurance company as part of a campaign to bolster the morale of its employees and soon became a big hit. This smiley presumably inspired many later emoticons; the most basic graphic emoticon that depicts this is in fact a small yellow smiley face.
In a "New York Times" interview in April 1969, Alden Whitman asked writer Vladimir Nabokov: "How do you rank yourself among writers (living) and of the immediate past?" Nabokov answered: "I often think there should exist a special typographical sign for a smile – some sort of concave mark, a supine round bracket, which I would now like to trace in reply to your question."
Creation of :-) and :-(.
Scott Fahlman was the first documented person to use the emoticons codice_1 and codice_2, with a specific suggestion that they be used to express emotion. The text of his original proposal, posted to the Carnegie Mellon University computer science general board on 19 September 1982 (11:44), was thought to have been lost, but was recovered 20 years later by Jeff Baird from old backup tapes.
Read it sideways. Actually, it is probably more economical to mark
things that are NOT jokes, given current trends. For this, use
</pre>
Within a few months, it had spread to the ARPANET and Usenet. Many variations on the theme were immediately suggested by Scott and others.
Western style.
Usually, emoticons in Western style have the eyes on the left, followed by nose and the mouth. The two character version codice_6 which omits the nose is also very popular.
Common western examples.
The most basic emoticons are relatively consistent in form, but each of them can also be transformed by being rotated (making them tiny ambigrams), with or a without hyphen (nose).
There are also some possible variations to emoticons to get new definitions, like changing a character to express a new feeling, or slightly change the mood of the emoticon. For example codice_7 equals sad and codice_8 equals very sad or weeping. A blush can be expressed as codice_9. Others include wink codice_3, a grin codice_11, smug codice_12, and tongue out codice_13 for disgust or simply just to stick the tongue out for silliness, such as when blowing a raspberry. An often used combination is also codice_14 for a heart, and codice_15 for a broken heart. A representation of a cat face can be expressed like this: codice_16, along with a mustache emoticon codice_17 or codice_18.
A broad grin is often shown with crinkled eyes to express further amusement; codice_19 and the addition of further "D" letters can suggest laughter or extreme amusement e.g. codice_20. There are hundreds of other variations including codice_21 for an evil grin or codice_22 for anger, which can be, again, used in reverse, for an unhappily angry face, in the shape of codice_23. codice_24 for vampire teeth, codice_25 for grimace, and codice_26 can be used to denote a flirting or joking tone, or may be implying a second meaning in the sentence preceding it.
Variation.
An equal sign is often used for the eyes in place of the colon, seen as codice_27, without changing the meaning of the emoticon. In these instances, the hyphen is almost always either omitted or, occasionally, replaced with an "o" as in codice_28 . In most circles it has become acceptable to omit the hyphen, whether a colon or an equal sign is used for the eyes, but in some areas of usage people still prefer the larger, more traditional emoticon codice_1. Similar-looking characters are commonly substituted for one another: for instance, codice_30, codice_31, and codice_32 can all be used interchangeably, sometimes for subtly different effect or, in some cases, one type of character may look better in a certain font and therefore be preferred over another. It is also common for the user to replace the rounded brackets used for the mouth with other, similar brackets, such as codice_33 instead of codice_34.
Some variants are also more common in certain countries due to keyboard layouts. For example, the smiley codice_27 may occur in Scandinavia, where the keys for codice_36 and codice_34 are placed right beside each other. However, the codice_6 variant is without a doubt the dominant one in Scandinavia, making the codice_27 version a rarity. Diacritical marks are sometimes used. The letters codice_40 and codice_41 can be seen as an emoticon, as the upright version of codice_42 (meaning that one is surprised) and codice_11 (meaning that one is very happy) respectively.
Some emoticons may be read right to left instead, and in fact can only be written using standard ASCII keyboard characters this way round; for example codice_44 which refers to being shocked or anxious, opposite to the large grin of codice_11.
Japanese style.
Users from Japan popularized a style of emoticons that can be understood without tilting one's head to the left. This style arose on ASCII NET of Japan in 1986. Similar looking emoticons were used by Byte Information Exchange (BIX) around the same time.
These emoticons are usually found in a format similar to codice_46. The asterisks indicate the eyes; the central character, commonly an underscore, the mouth; and the parentheses, the outline of the face.
Different emotions such as codice_47, are expressed by changing the character representing the eyes, for example "T" can be used to express crying or sadness codice_48. T_T may also be used as meaning 'unimpressed'. The emphasis on the eyes is reflected in the common usage of emoticons that use only the eyes, e.g. codice_49. Looks of stress are represented by the likes of codice_50 while codice_51 is a generic emoticon for nervousness, the semicolon indicating sweat that occurs during anxiety. Repeating the /// mark can indicate embarrassment by symbolizing blushing. Characters like hyphens or periods can replace the underscore; the period is often used for a smaller, "cuter" mouth or to represent a nose, e.g. codice_52. Alternatively, the mouth/nose can be left out entirely, e.g. codice_53. The parentheses also can often be replaced with braces, e.g. codice_54. Many times, the parentheses are left out completely, e.g. codice_49,codice_56, codice_57, codice_58, codice_59 and/or codice_60. A quotation mark ", apostrophe ', or semicolon ; can be added to the emoticon to imply apprehension or embarrassment, in the same way that a sweat drop is used in popular and common Asian animation.
Microsoft IME 2000 (Japanese) or later supports the use of both forms of emoticons by enabling Microsoft IME Spoken Language/Emotion Dictionary. In IME 2007, it was moved to Emoticons dictionary.
Further variations of emoticons may be produced by using combining characters, e.g.codice_61 and codice_62.
Common eastern examples.
All of these can be used also with [ ] instead of ( ), or without the parentheses at all in some of the cases.There is also the \(0O0)\, indicating a hooligan or crazed behaviour, and the (ﾉ◕ヮ◕)ﾉ*:･ﾟ✧.
Western use of Japanese style.
English-language anime forums adopted those emoticons that could be used with the standard ASCII characters available on western keyboards. Because of this, they are often called "anime style" emoticons in the English-speaking Internet. They have since seen use in more mainstream venues, including online gaming, instant-messaging, and other non-anime related forums. Emoticons such as codice_63, codice_64, codice_65, codice_66, codice_67 or codice_68 which include the parentheses, mouth or nose, and arms (especially those represented by the inequality signs < or >) also are often referred to as "Kirbies" in reference to their likeness to Nintendo's video game character, Kirby. The parentheses are sometimes dropped when used in the English language context, and the underscore of the mouth may be extended as an intensifier, (e.g. codice_69 for very happy) for the emoticon in question. This emoticon codice_70 uses the eastern style, but incorporates a depiction of the western "middle-finger flick-off (commonly known as 'the bird')" using a "t" as the arm, hand, and finger. Also, one of the newer ones, codice_71, as such for a "vampire" or other mythical beasts with fangs.
Mixture of Western and Japanese style.
Exposure to both Western and Japanese style emoticons or emoji through blogs, instant messaging, and forums featuring a blend of Western and Japanese pop culture, has given rise to emoticons that have an upright viewing format. The parentheses are similarly dropped in the English language context and the emoticons only use alphanumeric characters and the most commonly used English punctuation marks. Emoticons such as codice_72, codice_73, codice_74, codice_75, codice_76, codice_77, codice_78, and codice_79 are used to convey mixed emotions that are more difficult to convey with traditional emoticons. Characters are sometimes added to emoticons to convey an anime or manga-styled sweat drop, for example: codice_80 or codice_81 as well as: codice_82, codice_83 and codice_84
The equal sign can also be used for closed, anime looking eyes, for example: codice_85, codice_86, codice_87, codice_88 and codice_89.
There are also more faces along those lines likecodice_90using the ; as a sweat mark, and the o as a mouth, and the inequality signs as the eyes, it shows stress, or slight confusion. The number of emoticons that can be made are limitless, and all have their own meaning.
In Brazil, sometimes combining character (accent) are added to emoticons to represent eyebrows, like: codice_91, codice_92, codice_93, codice_94 or codice_95. They can also replace (or add) codice_36 or codice_97 withcodice_98, for examplecodice_99,codice_100,codice_101,codice_102,codice_103 orcodice_104.
2channel style.
The Japanese language is usually encoded using double-byte character codes. As a result there is a bigger variety of characters that can be used in emoticons, many of which cannot be reproduced in ASCII. Most kaomoji contain Cyrillic and other foreign letters to create even more complicated expressions analogous to ASCII art's level of complexity. To type such emoticons, the input editor that is used to type Japanese on a user's system is equipped with a dictionary of emoticons, after which the user simply types the Japanese word (or something close to it) that represents the desired emoticon to convert the input into such complicated emoticons. Such expressions are known as Shift JIS art.
Users of 2channel in particular have developed a wide variety of unique emoticons using characters from obscure languages, such as Kannada: codice_105 (for a look of disapproval, disbelief, or confusion); these were quickly picked up by 4chan and spread to other Western sites soon after. Some have taken on a life of their own and become characters in their own right, like Mona.
Korean style.
In South Korea, emoticons use Korean Hangul letters, and the Western style is rarely used. The structures of Korean and Japanese emoticons are somewhat similar, but they have some differences. Korean style contains Korean jamo (letters) instead of other characters. There are countless number of emoticons that can be formed with such combinations of Korean jamo letters. Consonant jamos : ㅅ or ㅁ or ㅂ as the mouth/nose component and ㅇ,ㅎ,ㅍ for the eyes. For example: codice_106, codice_107, codice_108 and codice_109. Faces such as codice_110, codice_111, codice_112 and codice_113, using quotation marks " and apostrophes ' are also commonly used combinations.
Vowel Jamos : such as ㅜ,ㅠ depicting a crying face. Example: codice_114, codice_115 and codice_116 (same function as T in western style). Sometimes ㅡ ( not underscore but a vowel Jamo) or comma or underscore is added, and the two letters can be mixed together, as in codice_117, codice_118, codice_119, codice_120, codice_121 and codice_122. Also, semicolons and carets are commonly used in Korean emoticons; semicolons mean sweating (embarrassed). If they are used with ㅡ or - they depict bad feeling. Examples: codice_123, codice_124, codice_125 and codice_126. However, codice_49 means smile (almost all people use this without distinction of sex or age). The rest include: codice_128, codice_129, codice_130, codice_131, ...etc.
Chinese ideographic style.
The character 囧 (U+56E7), which means "bright", is also used in the Chinese computing community for a frowning face. It is also combined with posture emoticon Orz, such as 囧rz. The character existed in Oracle bone script, but its use as emoticon was documented as early as January 20, 2005.
Other ideographic variants for 囧 include 崮 (king 囧), 莔 (queen 囧), 商 (囧 with hat), 囧興 (turtle), 卣 (Bomberman).
The character 槑 (U+69D1), which sounds like the word for "plum" (梅 (U+FA44)), is used to represent double of 呆 (dull), or further magnitude of dullness. In Chinese, normally full characters (as opposed to the stylistic use of 槑) may be duplicated to express emphasis.
Posture emoticons.
Orz.
Orz (also seen as and ) is an emoticon representing a kneeling or bowing person, with the "o" being the head, the "r" being the arms and part of the body, and the "z" being part of the body and the legs. This stick figure represents failure and despair. It is also commonly used for representing a great admiration (sometimes with an overtone of sarcasm) for someone else's view or action.
It was first used in late 2002 at the forum on Techside, Japanese personal website. At the "Techside FAQ Forum" (TECHSIDE教えて君BBS(教えてBBS) ), a poster asked about a cable cover, typing to show a cable and its cover. Others commented that it looked like a kneeling person, and the symbol became popular. These comments were soon deleted as they were considered off-topic. However, one of the first corresponding reactions can be found on the thread on , on December 23, 2002. By 2005, Orz spawned a subculture: blogs have been devoted to the emoticon, and URL shortening services have been named after it. In Taiwan, Orz is associated with the phrase "nice guy"that is, the concept of males being rejected for a date by girls they are pursuing with a phrase like "You are a nice guy."
Orz should not be confused with which means "Thank you" or an apology.
Multimedia variations.
A portmanteau of "emotion" and "sound", an emotisound is a brief sound transmitted and played back during the viewing of a message, typically an IM message or e-mail message. The sound is intended to communicate an emotional subtext. Many instant messaging clients automatically trigger sound effects in response to specific emoticons.
Some services, such as MuzIcons, combine emoticons and music player in a Adobe Flash-based widget.
In 2004, The Trillian chat application introduced a feature called "emotiblips", which allows Trillian users to stream files to their instant message recipients "as the voice and video equivalent of an emoticon".
In 2007, MTV and Paramount Home Entertainment promoted the "emoticlip" as a form of viral marketing for the second season of the show "The Hills". The emoticlips were twelve short snippets of dialogue from the show, uploaded to YouTube, which the advertisers hoped would be distributed between web users as a way of expressing feelings in a similar manner to emoticons. The emoticlip concept is credited to the Bradley & Montgomery advertising firm, which hopes they would be widely adopted as "greeting cards that just happen to be selling something".
In 2008, an emotion-sequence animation tool, called FunIcons was created. The Adobe Flash and Java-based application allows users to create a short animation. Users can then email or save their own animations to use them on similar social utility applications.
Emoticons and intellectual property rights.
In 2000, Despair, Inc. obtained a U.S. trademark registration for the "frowny" emoticon :-( when used on "greeting cards, posters and art prints." In 2001, they issued a satirical press release, announcing that they would sue Internet users who typed the frowny; the joke backfired and the company received a storm of protest when its mock release was posted on technology news website Slashdot.
A number of patent applications have been filed on inventions that assist in communicating with emoticons. A few of these have issued as US patents. , for example, discloses a method developed in 2001 to send emoticons over a cell phone using a drop down menu. The stated advantage over the prior art was that the user saved on the number of keystrokes though this may not address the obviousness criteria.
In Finland, the Supreme Administrative Court ruled in 2012 that the emoticon cannot be trademarked, thus repealing a 2006 administrative decision trademarking the emoticons :-), =), =(, :) and :(. The emoticon :-) was also filed in 2006 and registered in 2008 as a European Community Trademark (CTM).
In 2008, Russian entrepreneur Oleg Teterin claimed to have been granted the trademark on the ;-) emoticon. A license would not "cost that muchtens of thousands of dollars" for companies, but would be free of charge for individuals.
Unicode.
Emoticons are introduced in Unicode Standard version 6.0 (published in October 2010). It covers unicode range from 1F600 to 1F64F.
