Sandra Annette Bullock (; born July 26, 1964) is an American actress and producer who rose to fame in the 1990s after roles in successful films such as "Demolition Man", "Speed", "The Net", "Hope Floats", "A Time to Kill", and "While You Were Sleeping". In the new millennium, she appeared in such films as "Miss Congeniality", "The Lake House", and "Crash", the third of which received critical acclaim. In 2007, she was ranked as the 14th richest female celebrity with an estimated fortune of US$85 million. In 2009, Bullock starred in two of the more financially successful films of her career, "The Proposal" and "The Blind Side". Bullock was awarded a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress, a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role, and the Academy Award for Best Actress, for her role as Leigh Anne Tuohy in "The Blind Side". She is listed in the 2012 edition of the "Guinness Book Of World Records" as the highest-paid actress, with $56 million.
Early life.
Sandra Annette Bullock was born in Arlington, Virginia, a suburb of Washington, D.C. Her father, John W. Bullock (born 1925), was a United States Army employee and part-time voice coach from Birmingham, Alabama; her mother, Helga D. Meyer (1942–2000), was a German opera singer and voice teacher. Bullock's maternal grandfather was a rocket scientist from Nuremberg, Germany. Bullock's father John, then in charge of the Army's Military Postal Service in Europe, was stationed in Nuremberg when he met his wife. They married in Germany and moved to Arlington, where John worked with the Army Materiel Command, before becoming a contractor for The Pentagon. Bullock has a younger sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, who was formerly the vice-president of Bullock's production company Fortis Films, and is now a pastry chef in Vermont. 
As a child, Bullock frequently accompanied her mother on European opera tours. She spent time in Salzburg and Nuremberg, where she stayed with her aunt and grandmother and became fluent in German. Bullock studied ballet and vocal arts as a child, taking small parts in her mother's opera productions. She sang in the operas children's choir at the Staatstheater Nürnberg. The scar above her left eye was caused when she fell into a creek as a child.
Bullock attended Washington-Lee High School, where she was a cheerleader and performed in high school theater productions. After graduating in 1982, she attended East Carolina University in Greenville, North Carolina, where she received a degree in drama in 1986. She then moved to Manhattan and supported herself as a bartender, cocktail waitress, and coat checker while auditioning for roles.
Acting.
While in New York, Bullock took acting classes with Sanford Meisner. She appeared in several student films, and later landed a role in an Off-Broadway play "No Time Flat". Director Alan J. Levi was impressed by Bullock's performance and offered her a part in the TV movie "Bionic Showdown: The Six Million Dollar Man and the Bionic Woman" (1989). Afterward, she was cast in a series of small roles in several independent films as well as in the lead role of the short-lived NBC television version of the film "Working Girl" (1990). She later appeared in several films, such as "Love Potion No. 9" (1992), "The Thing Called Love" (1993) and "Fire on the Amazon". A prominent supporting role in the science-fiction/action movie "Demolition Man" (1993) led to her breakthrough performance in "Speed" the following year. She became a movie star in the late 1990s, carrying a string of successes, including "While You Were Sleeping", and "Miss Congeniality" in 2000. Bullock received $11 million for ', which she agreed to star in for financial backing for her own project, "Hope Floats", and has revealed she regrets making the sequel. She later received $17.5 million for '. 
Bullock was selected as one of "People" magazine's 50 Most Beautiful People in the World in 1996 and 1999, and was also ranked #58 in "Empire" magazine's Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time list. She was presented with the 2002 Raúl Juliá Award for Excellence for her efforts, as the executive producer of the sitcom "George Lopez", in helping expand career openings for Hispanic talent in the media and entertainment industry. She also made several appearances on the show as Accident Amy, an accident-prone employee at the factory Lopez's character manages. In 2002, she starred opposite Hugh Grant in "Two Weeks Notice" and in the film "Divine Secrets of the Ya-Ya Sisterhood".
In 2004, Bullock had a supporting role in the film "Crash". She received positive reviews for her performance, with some critics suggesting that it was the best performance of her career. In 2005, she was a co-recipient of the Women in Film Crystal Award.
In 2008, Sandra Bullock was announced as "the face" of prestigious cosmetic brand Artistry. 
Bullock later appeared in "The Lake House", a romantic drama also starring her "Speed" co-star, Keanu Reeves; it was released on June 16, 2006. Because their film characters are separated throughout the film (due to the plot revolving around time travel), Bullock and Reeves were only on set together for two weeks during filming. The same year, Bullock appeared in "Infamous", playing author Harper Lee. Bullock also starred in "Premonition" with Julian McMahon, which was released in March 2007. 2009 proved to be especially good for Bullock, giving the actress two record highs in her career, as earlier in the year she released "The Proposal", with co-star Ryan Reynolds, a huge hit that took in more than $314 million at the box office worldwide, making it her most successful picture to date.
In November 2009, Bullock starred in "The Blind Side", which opened at #2 behind "New Moon" with $34.2 million, making it her highest opening weekend ever. "The Blind Side" is unique in that it had a 17.6% increase at the box office its second weekend, and it took the top spot of the box office in its third weekend. The movie cost $29 million to make according to the Box Office Mojo. It has grossed over $309 million to date, making it her domestic highest grossing film and the first movie in history to pass the $200 million mark with only one top-billed female star. She won the award for Best Actress at the Golden Globes, Academy Awards, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for her performance in "The Blind Side". Bullock had initially turned down the role three times due to a discomfort with portraying a devout Christian. Winning the "Oscar" also gave her another unique distinction — since she won two "Razzies" the day before, for her performance in "All About Steve", she is the only performer ever to have been named both "Best" and "Worst" for the same year. Sandra was asked to return her 2009 "Worst Actress of the Year" Razzie award; however, this wasn't because of a change of heart for Bullock's performance but because Bullock personally accepted her Razzie and accidentally took the original one-of-a-kind prototype Razzie, as opposed to the cheap trinket normally handed out to celebrities.
Recognition.
As of 2009, Bullock's films have grossed over $3.1 billion worldwide. According to "The Numbers", her total domestic gross stands at $1.7 billion, placing her among the Top 100 Stars at the Box Office.
Critics, while praising her screen persona, have been less receptive to her films. As of the 2009 release of "The Proposal", Mark Kermode said she's made only three "good" films in her career—"Speed", "While You Were Sleeping", and "Crash", and says "she's funny, she's gorgeous, it's impossible not to love her and yet she makes rotten film after rotten film after rotten film." As of December 2009, Bullock has appeared on three "Entertainment Weekly" covers. She was selected by "People" Magazine as its "Woman of the Year" for 2010. She was ranked #12 on "People"'s Most Beautiful 2011 list.
Entrepreneurship.
Bullock runs her own production company, Fortis Films. Bullock was an executive producer of the "George Lopez" sitcom, which garnered a lucrative syndication deal that banked her some $10 million (co-produced with Robert Borden). Bullock tried to produce a film based on F.X. Toole's short story, "Million-Dollar Baby", but could not interest the studios in a female boxing drama. The story was eventually adapted and directed by Clint Eastwood as the Oscar-winning film, "Million Dollar Baby" (2004). Bullock's production company, Fortis Films, also produced "All About Steve", which was released in September 2009. Her father, John Bullock, is the company's CEO, and her sister, Gesine Bullock-Prado, is the former president.
Since November 2006, Bullock founded a popular Austin, Texas restaurant, Bess Bistro. She later opened another business across the street in a building she extensively renovated downtown called Walton's Fancy and Staple a bakery, upscale restaurant and floral shop that also offers services such as event planning.
Personal life.
Relationships and children.
Bullock was once engaged to actor Tate Donovan, whom she met while filming "Love Potion No. 9"; their relationship lasted four years. She previously dated football player Troy Aikman, Austin musician Bob Schneider (for two years), and actors Matthew McConaughey and Ryan Gosling.
Bullock married motorcycle builder and "Monster Garage" host Jesse James on July 16, 2005. They first met when Bullock arranged for her ten-year-old godson to meet James as a Christmas present.
In November 2009, Bullock and James entered into a custody battle with James' second ex-wife, former pornographic actress Janine Lindemulder, with whom James had a child. Bullock and James subsequently won full legal custody of James' five-year-old daughter.
In March 2010, a scandal arose when several women claimed to have had affairs with James during his marriage to Bullock. Bullock cancelled European promotional appearances for "The Blind Side" citing "unforeseen personal reasons". On March 18, 2010, James responded to the rumors of infidelity by issuing a public apology to Bullock. He stated, "The vast majority of the allegations reported are untrue and unfounded" and "Beyond that, I will not dignify these private matters with any further public comment." James declared that "There is only one person to blame for this whole situation, and that is me", and asked that his wife and children one day "find it in their hearts to forgive me" for their current "pain and embarrassment". James’ publicist subsequently announced on March 30, 2010, that James had checked into a rehab facility "to deal with personal issues" and "save his marriage" to Bullock. However on April 28, 2010, it was reported that Bullock had filed for divorce on April 23 in Austin. Their divorce was finalized on June 28, 2010, with "conflict of personalities" cited as the reason.
Bullock announced on April 28, 2010, that she had proceeded with plans to adopt a baby boy born in January 2010 in New Orleans. Bullock and James had begun an initial adoption process four years earlier. The child began living with them in January 2010, but they chose to keep the news private until after the Oscars in March 2010. However, given the couple's separation and then divorce, Bullock continued the adoption of the baby, named Louis Bardo Bullock, as a single parent.
Vehicular accidents.
On December 20, 2000, Bullock and another passenger survived the crash of a chartered business jet during an attempted night landing at Jackson Hole Airport. The pilots were unable to activate the runway lights due to having out-of-date approach plates, but continued the landing. The aircraft landed in the airport's graded safety area between the runway and parallel taxiway and hit a snowbank. The accident caused a separation of the nose cone and landing gear, partial separation of the right wing, and a bend in the left wing.
On April 18, 2008, while Bullock was in Massachusetts shooting the film "The Proposal", she and her then-husband were in an SUV that was hit head-on (driver's side offset) at moderate speed by a drunken driver. Vehicle damage was not major and there were no injuries.
Legal matters.
In October 2004, Bullock won a multimillion-dollar judgment against Benny Daneshjou, the builder of her Lake Austin, Texas home; the jury ruled the house was uninhabitable. It has since been torn down and rebuilt.
Stalking.
On April 22, 2007, Marcia Diana Valentine was found lying outside James and Bullock's Southern California home in Orange County. When James confronted the woman, she ran to her car, got behind the wheel, and tried to run over James. The woman is said to be an obsessed fan of Sandra Bullock. The woman was charged with one felony count each of aggravated assault and stalking, while Bullock obtained a restraining order to bar Valentine from "contacting or coming near her home, family or work for three years." Valentine pleaded not guilty to charges of aggravated assault and stalking. Valentine was subsequently convicted of stalking and was sentenced to three years of probation.
Charity work.
Bullock has been a public supporter of the American Red Cross, having donated $1 million to the organization at least four times. Her first public donation of that amount was to the Red Cross's Liberty Disaster Relief Fund. Three years later, she sent money in response to the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunamis. In 2010, she donated $1 million to relief efforts in Haiti following the Haiti earthquake, and again donated the same amount following the 2011 Japan Earthquake.
Along with other stars, Bullock did a PSA urging people to sign a petition for clean-up efforts of the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico.
