An electronic cigarette, also known as an e-cigarette, personal vaporizer or PV, is an electronic inhaler that vaporizes a liquid solution into an aerosol mist, simulating the act of tobacco smoking. Electronic cigarettes are no longer marketed as smoking cessation aids or tobacco replacement in most countries. There may be similarities between conventional and some electronic cigarettes in the physical design and the nicotine release, which may approximate the same amount of nicotine as a conventional cigarette. There are also many electronic cigarettes which do not resemble conventional cigarettes at all. The amount of nicotine contained can also be chosen by the user, with some people choosing no nicotine at all.
The benefits and risks of electronic cigarette use are a subject of uncertainty among health organizations and researchers. Limited controlled studies are available due to the relatively recent invention of the device. Laws vary widely concerning the use and sale of electronic cigarettes and accompanying liquid solutions, with pending legislation and ongoing debate in many regions.
History.
The earliest concept of an electronic cigarette can be traced to an idea by Herbert A. Gilbert, who in 1963 patented a device described as "a smokeless non-tobacco cigarette" that involved "replacing burning tobacco and paper with heated, moist, flavored air." This device heated the nicotine solution and produced steam. In 1967, Gilbert was approached by several companies interested in manufacturing it, but it was never commercialized and disappeared from the public record after 1967.
Hon Lik, a Chinese pharmacist, is widely credited with the invention of the first generation electronic cigarette. In 2000, he came up with the idea of using a piezoelectric ultrasound-emitting element to vaporize a pressurized jet of liquid containing nicotine diluted in a propylene glycol solution. This design produces a smoke-like vapor that can be inhaled and provides a vehicle for nicotine delivery into the bloodstream via the lungs. He also proposed using propylene glycol to dilute nicotine and placing it in a disposable plastic cartridge which serves as a liquid reservoir and mouthpiece. These inventions are the basis of the present-day electronic cigarettes. 
The device was first introduced to the Chinese domestic market in May 2004 as an aid for smoking cessation and replacement. The company that Hon Lik worked for, Golden Dragon Holdings, changed its name to Ruyan (如烟, literally "Resembling smoking"), and started exporting its products in 2005–2006 before receiving its first international patent in 2007.
The second generation electronic cigarette, or modern electronic cigarette, was invented and introduced to market in 2008 by Dr. Yunqiang Xiu before receiving its international patents in 2009 & UK patent in 2011. The modern electronic cigarette featured the "tankomizer" (or sealed tank system and sealed atomizer technology). This is more useful for pharmaceutical and medical devices industries.
Components.
An electronic cigarette contains three essential components: A plastic cartridge that serves as a mouthpiece and a reservoir for liquid, an "atomizer" that vaporizes the liquid, and a battery.
Cartridge.
The cartridge, a small plastic container with openings on each end, serves as both a liquid reservoir and mouthpiece. It allows the passage of liquid to the atomizer and vapor from the atomizer back to the user's mouth, without leaking liquid into the mouth.
Most models adopt a plastic sponge to keep the liquid in place, but it is also common to use a refillable tank to hold the liquid, with a separate tunnel connecting to the atomizer. When the liquid is depleted, users can refill it or replace with another pre-filled cartridge. Some users forgo the use of liquid reservoirs and drip liquid directly onto the atomizer in a method known as "dripping".
A single cartridge can be the equivalent of 40 cigarettes.
Atomizer.
The atomizer contains a small heating coil that vaporizes the liquid, and generally consists of a simple filament and wicking metal mesh or silica wick to draw the liquid in. It is positioned in the center of the three components that make up the entire electronic cigarette cylinder, as the cartridge attaches to one end, and the power unit to the other. The atomizer's filament will lose efficiency over time due to a buildup of sediment, or "burns out" entirely, requiring replacement. In some models, the cartridge and atomizer component are integrated, known as a cartomizer.
Battery.
Most portable power units contain a lithium-ion rechargeable battery and makes the largest component of an electronic cigarette. This may contain an electronic airflow sensor so that activation is triggered simply by drawing breath through the device. Other models come with a power switch, which must be held during operation. A LED to announce activation may also be equipped in the front of power unit casing.
Batteries are usually charged via AC outlet, car or USB. Some manufacturers also offer a cigarette-pack-like portable charging case (PCC), which contains a larger battery to charge smaller batteries of individual e-cigarettes.
Liquid.
Liquid for producing vapor in electronic cigarettes, known as e-juice or e-liquid, is a solution of propylene glycol (PG) and/or vegetable glycerin (VG) and/or polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG400) mixed with concentrated flavors, and optionally, a variable percent of a liquid nicotine concentrate.
They are often sold in a bottle or as pre-filled disposable cartridges. Many manufacturers offer dozens of flavors which resemble the taste of regular tobacco, menthol, vanilla, coffee, cola and various fruits, but nicotine concentrations vary by manufacturers. The standard notation "mg/ml" is often used in labeling, sometimes shortened to a simple "mg". Nicotine-free solutions are also common.
Some electronic cigarette users opt to make their own e-juice in a form known as "DIY".
Kits.
Most electronic cigarette users initially purchase starter kits that contain a battery, USB charger and a selection of cartomizers (cartridges). Some kits also include a portable charging case (PCC).
Health concerns.
Proponents of electronic cigarettes often claim that electronic cigarettes deliver the experience of smoking while eliminating the smell and health risks associated with tobacco smoke. The base liquids - which include propylene glycol (PG), vegetable glycerin (VG), and sometimes polyethylene glycol 400 (PEG400) - have been widely used as a food additive, as a base solution for personal care products such as toothpaste, and in medical devices such as asthma inhalers. However, the health effects of inhaling nicotine vapor into lungs are a subject of uncertainty. The health effects of exhaled nicotine and other substances present in the vapor are also uncertain but seem likely to be far less harmful than tobacco smoke.
The fact that e-cigarettes may resemble real tobacco cigarettes has been noted by both supporters and detractors. While e-cigarettes may give nicotine addicts more or less the same amount of nicotine as a conventional cigarette, they do not produce the same toxic smoke that can cause lung disease and cancer when inhaled over time. Since there are no products of combustion to be inhaled, no tobacco toxins are inhaled besides nicotine.
World Health Organization.
The World Health Organization stated in September 2008 that no rigorous, peer-reviewed studies have been conducted showing that the electronic cigarette is a safe and effective nicotine replacement therapy. WHO does not discount the possibility that the electronic cigarette could be useful as a smoking cessation aid, but insisted that claims that electronic cigarettes can help smokers quit need to be backed up by clinical studies and toxicity analyses and operate within the proper regulatory framework.
Food and Drug Administration.
In May 2009, the US Food and Drug Administration (USFDA) Division of Pharmaceutical Analysis tested 19 varieties of electronic cigarette cartridges produced by two vendors NJoy and Smoking Everywhere. Diethylene glycol, a poisonous and hygroscopic liquid, was detected in one of the cartridges manufactured by Smoking Everywhere . Tobacco-specific nitrosamines (TSNAs), known cancer-causing agents, were detected in all of the cartridges from one brand and two of the cartridges from the other brand. Nicotine can also be traced in some claimed nicotine-free cartridges. Further concerns were raised over inconsistent amounts of nicotine delivered when drawing on the device. In some e-cigarettes, "Tobacco-specific impurities suspected of being harmful to humans—anabasine, myosmine, and β-nicotyrine—were detected in a majority of the samples tested." None of these chemicals, however, was detectable in exhaled vapor.
In July 2009, the FDA publicly discouraged the use of electronic cigarettes and raised concerns that electronic cigarettes may be marketed to young people and lack appropriate health warnings. 
The Electronic Cigarette Association criticized the FDA testing as too "narrow to reach any valid and reliable conclusions." Exponent, Inc., commissioned by NJOY to review the FDA's study in July 2009, objected to the FDA analysis of electronic cigarettes lacking comparisons to other FDA-approved nicotine replacement therapy products where similar levels of TSNA were detected. Exponent concluded that the FDA's study did not support the claims of potential adverse health effects from the use of electronic cigarettes. 
Furthermore, FDA methods "have been lambasted in journals" by some medical and health research experts who noted that potentially harmful chemicals were measured at "about one million times lower concentrations than are conceivably related to human health."
Additionally, The Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee of the FDA is alleged to have several members who maintain consulting relationships with various pharmaceutical companies who manufacture smoking cessation products. If these allegations are true this certainly might represent a potential conflict of interest.
American Association of Public Health Physicians.
As of April 2010, The American Association of Public Health Physicians (AAPHP) supports electronic cigarettes sales to adults "because the possibility exists to save the lives of four million of the eight million current adult American smokers who will otherwise die of a tobacco-related illness over the next twenty years." However, the AAPHP is against sales to minors. The AAPHP recommends that the FDA reclassify the electronic cigarette as a tobacco product (as opposed to a drug/device combination).
Boston University School of Public Health study.
A study by researchers at the Boston University School of Public Health in 2010 concluded that electronic cigarettes were safer than real cigarettes and may aid in breaking the habit of smoking. Researchers said that while further studies on electronic cigarettes were needed, "few, if any, chemicals at levels detected in electronic cigarettes raise serious health concerns." Electronic cigarettes were found to be "much safer" than traditional tobacco ones, and had a level of toxicity similar to existing nicotine replacements.
According to this report, the level of carcinogens in electronic cigarettes is up to 1,000 times lower than regular cigarettes, and early evidence shows that electronic cigarettes may help people to stop smoking by simulating a tobacco cigarette.
Health Canada.
On 27 March 2009, Health Canada issued an advisory against electronic cigarettes. The advisory stated, "Although these electronic smoking products may be marketed as a safer alternative to conventional tobacco products and, in some cases, as an aid to quitting smoking, electronic smoking products may pose risks such as nicotine poisoning and addiction."
Health New Zealand.
In 2008, Dr. Murray Laugesen of Health New Zealand Ltd. published a report on the safety of Ruyan electronic cigarette cartridges. His study was funded by e-cigarette manufacturer Ruyan, but Laugesen claims that his research is independent. The presence of trace amounts of TSNAs in the cartridge solution was documented in the analysis. The results also indicated that the level of nicotine in the electronic cigarette cartridges was not different from the concentration of nicotine found in nicotine patches. John Britton, a lung specialist at the University of Nottingham, UK and chair of the Royal College of Physicians Tobacco Advisory Group, commented, "If the levels are as low as in nicotine replacement therapy, I don’t think there will be much of a problem." The study's detailed quantitative analysis concluded that carcinogens and toxicants are present only below harmful levels. It concluded: "Based on the manufacturer’s information, the composition of the cartridge liquid is not hazardous to health, if used as intended."
Other reports.
According to Cancer Research UK, "For a smoker, the health hazards of continuing to smoke greatly outweigh any potential risks of using nicotine replacement therapy".
A recent Greek study found that e-cigarettes are no threat to the heart. Dr. Konstantinos Farsalinos of the Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center in Athens told the annual meeting of the European Society of Cardiology that "Electronic cigarettes are not a healthy habit but they are a safer alternative to tobacco cigarettes. ... Considering the extreme hazards associated with cigarette smoking, currently available data suggest that electronic cigarettes are far less harmful and substituting tobacco with electronic cigarettes may be beneficial to health." Farsalinos and his team examined the heart function of 20 young smokers before and after smoking one tobacco cigarette against that of 22 e-cigarette users before and after using the device for seven minutes. While the tobacco smokers suffered significant heart dysfunction, including raised blood pressure and heart rate, those using e-cigarettes had only a slight elevation in blood pressure. The Greek clinical study was the first in the world to look at the cardiac effects of e-cigarettes. Another small study, also in Greece, reported earlier in 2012 the devices had little impact on lung function.
A report from a UK Government advisory unit favoured the adoption of "smokeless nicotine cigarettes" over the traditional "quit or die" approach, believing this would save more lives.
While electronic cigarettes may deliver nicotine to the user in a manner similar to that of a nicotine inhaler, no electronic cigarette has yet been approved as a medicinal nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) product or subjected to the necessary clinical testing for such approval. Doubts have even been raised as to whether electronic cigarettes actually deliver any substantial amount of nicotine.
Research carried out at the University of East London on the effects of using an electronic cigarette to reduce cravings in regular tobacco smokers showed that there was no significant reported difference between smokers who inhaled vapour containing nicotine and those who inhaled a placebo vapour containing no nicotine. The report concluded that although electronic cigarettes can be effective in reducing nicotine-related withdrawal symptoms, the nicotine content does not appear to be of central importance, and other smoking related cues (such as taste or vapour resembling smoke) may account for the reduction in discomfort associated with tobacco abstinence in the short term.
Though some manufacturers have marketed electronic cigarettes as an aid to stopping smoking cigarettes, the World Health Organization has stated they know of no evidence confirming these claims. 
In an online survey from November 2009 among 303 smokers, it was found that e-cigarette substitution for tobacco cigarettes resulted in reduced perceived health problems when compared to smoking conventional cigarettes (less cough, improved ability to exercise, improved sense of taste and smell). 
Trace amounts of 'volatile organic compounds', namely formaldehyde, as well as traces of ketones, mercury and tetramethylpyrazine, have been found in electronic cigarette vapour, but the quantities are significantly smaller than the quantities found in tobacco smoke and do not pose a significant health risk.
Legal history.
Because of the relative novelty of the technology and the possible relationship to tobacco laws and medical drug policies, electronic cigarette legislation and public health investigations are currently pending in many countries. As flavored tobacco cigarettes (except menthol) have been banned in the US, and roll-your-own (RYO) products are seeing massive increases in taxes (e.g., Iowa), electronic cigarettes remain a viable alternative to tobacco for many Americans.
European Union.
The EU Directive 2001/95/EC(6) on general product safety, applies in so far as there are no specific provisions with the same objective in other EU law. This directive provides for restrictive or preventive measures to be taken if the product is found to be dangerous to the health and safety of consumers.
Whether electronic cigarettes could be regarded as falling under Directive 93/42/EEC on medical devices depends on the claimed intended use and whether this intended use has a medical purpose. "It is for each national authority to decide, account being taken of all the characteristics of the product, whether it falls within the definition of a medicinal product by its function or presentation."
Because of this vague EU position, member countries in the European Economic Area currently have varying rules.
United States.
Individual states have differing legal treatment of electronic cigarettes. 
On 22 September 2009, under the authorization of the Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act, the FDA banned flavored tobacco (with the notable exception of menthol cigarettes) due to its potential appeal to children. Wagner says that the use of flavorings, such as chocolate, could encourage childhood use and serve as a gateway to cigarette smoking.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) classified electronic cigarettes as drug delivery devices and subject to regulation under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FDCA) prior to importation to and sale in the United States. The classification was challenged in court, and overruled in January 2010 by Federal District Court Judge Richard J. Leon, citing that "the devices should be regulated as tobacco products rather than drug or medical products." Judge Leon ordered the FDA to stop blocking the importation of electronic cigarettes from China and indicated that the devices should be regulated as tobacco products rather than drug or medical devices. 
In March 2010, a US Court of Appeal stayed the injunction pending an appeal, during which the FDA argued the right to regulate electronic cigarettes based on their previous ability to regulate nicotine replacement therapies such as nicotine gum or patches. Further, the agency argued that tobacco legislation enacted the previous year "expressly excludes from the definition of 'tobacco product' any article that is a drug, device or combination product under the FDCA, and provides that such articles shall be subject to regulation under the pre-existing FDCA provisions." On 7 December 2010, the appeals court ruled against the FDA in a 3–0 unanimous decision, ruling the FDA can only regulate electronic cigarettes as tobacco products, and thus cannot block their import. The judges ruled that such devices would only be subject to drug legislation if they are marketed for therapeutic use – E-cigarette manufacturers had successfully proven that their products were targeted at smokers and not at those seeking to quit. The District of Columbia Circuit appeals court declined to review the decision blocking the products from FDA regulation as medical devices on 24 January 2011.
Concerns about public safety have been raised. However, some former smokers say they have been helped by e-cigarettes, and scientists at the University of California, Berkeley said that e-cigarettes had great potential for reducing the morbidity and mortality related to smoking.
