"America's Next Top Model, often abbreviated as ANTM or Top Model", is a reality television series in which a number of women compete for the title of "America's Next Top Model" and a chance to start their career in the modeling industry. It was created by talk-show host and model Tyra Banks, who also serves as the host, head judge, and executive producer. She co-produces the show with Ken Mok and Anthony Dominici. Banks also performs the opening theme, which is produced by Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins.
The first "cycle" premiered on May 20, 2003 on UPN and became one of the network's highest-rated shows. The series moved to UPN's succeeding network, The CW, for the seventh cycle, and is currently the network's highest rated series. Advertisers pay $61,315 per 30-second slot during the 2011–12 television season, the highest of any series on The CW. On October 16, 2012, The CW renewed the show for a 20th season, which will premiere in summer 2013 and will feature female and male contestants for the first time, so it will be called America's Next Top Model: Guys & Girls The show is now in an HDTV format.
Format.
Each season of "America's Next Top Model" has from 9–13 episodes and starts with 10–14 contestants. Each episode, one contestant is eliminated, though in rare cases a double elimination or no elimination was given by consensus of the judging panel. Makeovers are administered to contestants early in the season (usually after the first or second elimination in the finals,) and a trip to an international destination is scheduled at about two-thirds of the way through the season (usually with five or six contestants remaining.)
Judges.
The current judging panel consists of Banks, fashion PR maven Kelly Cutrone and male supermodel Rob Evans. Previous judges included fashion icon Twiggy, models Janice Dickinson and Paulina Porizkova, fashion stylist Nolé Marin, runway coach J. Alexander, designer Kimora Lee Simmons, fashion editors Beau Quillian and Eric Nicholson, "Vogue" editor André Leon Talley, and fashion photographer Nigel Barker. Though not a judge, Jay Manuel was featured in every episode as the photo shoot director. From Cycles 1–18, an additional guest judge sat in on the panel every week. In Cycle 19, top fashion blogger Bryanboy, served as the social media correspondent. 
It was announced in April 2012 that Barker, Alexander, and Manuel would not be returning to the show for the nineteenth season, as their contracts were not renewed. Banks stated that it was a difficult decision but the show needed a "new boost" and that she hoped to work with "her guys" in the near future.
Network.
It was announced on January 24, 2006, that "Top Model" would be part of the new The CW network, a merger between UPN and The WB, when the seventh cycle started in September airing on Wednesdays. The series became the first series among regular programming to air on the network. Prior to the announcement of merging with The CW, UPN had committed to renewing the series through its ninth cycle on January 20, 2006, for which casting was conducted throughout mid-2006. "ANTM" is the only show left on the network that was originally from UPN.
With the start of the eighteenth "British Invasion" cycle, the program converted to high definition, becoming the second-to-last primetime show on the five major English-language broadcast networks in the United States to make the switch, and the last to air in the regular season to do so.
To celebrate its tenth cycle, "ANTM" aired a special installment called "America's Next Top Model: Exposed" in two parts on the CW on Wednesday, February 6 & 13, 2008. It reviewed the best cat fights, mishaps and most memorable photoshoots, personalities, defining moments and contained other segments about the show since Cycles 1 to 9, and featured a special opening fusing all three openings together. Camille McDonald (Cycles 2 and 17), Toccara Jones (Cycle 3), Eva Pigford (Cycle 3 winner), Bre Scullark (Cycles 5 and 17), Cassandra Whitehead (Cycle 5), Joanie Dodds (Cycle 6), Jael Strauss (Cycle 8), Dionne Walters (Cycle 8), Heather Kuzmich (Cycle 9), and Bianca Golden (Cycles 9 and 17) all returned to comment on events that happened in their or other cycles.
After announcing that the seventeenth season will be an All-Stars version, Tyra Banks said on The CW upfronts in May 2011, that there won't be a "normal" season of the show anymore.
Syndication.
The show is syndicated to NBCUniversal's cable division, with Oxygen as well as Style Network carrying the series, usually in marathon form throughout the daytime period on either network, and running through most of or an entire cycle. Bravo, MTV and VH1 have also aired the series in the past.
"The Tyra Banks Show".
"America's Next Top Model" was also very connected with Tyra Banks' talk show: several contestants have made appearances on it, most notably Natasha Galkina (Cycle 8), who worked as a correspondent for the show. The show's stage was also used for the Cycle 5 reunion show.
Tyra launched a new reality show inside the "Tyra Show", called "Modelville" which featured Renee Alway, Bianca Golden, Dominique Reighard, Fatima Siad and Lauren Utter vying for a $50,000 contract. Dominique won and received a contract from Carol's Daughter.
Writers' labor dispute.
On July 21, 2006, the writers of "America's Next Top Model" went on strike while working on Cycle 7, set to premiere on the new CW Network in September 2006. The writers sought representation through the Writers Guild of America, West, which would allow them regulated wages, access to portable health insurance, and pension benefits. These benefits would be similar to those given to writers on scripted shows. The strike was the focus of a large rally of Hollywood writers coinciding with the premiere of the new network on September 20, 2006. The dispute was chronicled in a July 24 interview on the website Television Without Pity with Daniel J. Blau, a former TWoP recapper who covered the series, and at the time was an "ANTM" show producer. In November 2006, the writers on strike were taken off payroll.
Partnership with Walmart.
The "ANTM" franchise has released a clothing and accessories line based on the television show. The line is sold at most Walmart stores. The line ranges from cosmetic products to handbags.
Cycles.
The first three cycles of "America's Next Top Model" were filmed in New York City and it was relocated there in cycles 10, 12 and 14. Los Angeles has been filmed throughout most of the cycles starting with the fourth cycle.
Reception.
Ratings.
For the 2006–2009 and 2010–2011 television seasons, "America's Next Top Model" was the No.1 show in average viewers on The CW.
"America's Next Top Model, Cycle 1" does not have a ranking for the 2003 season because it aired in the summer of 2003 and not within the official 2002–2003 U.S. television season.
The finale for "Cycle 14" was actually on May 12, 2010. The recap was shown a week after the actual finale.
Episodes aired Wednesdays at 8:00 pm during from February 23 to April 13, 2011, when the show moved to 9:00 pm at the following week. Re-airing of previous week's episode took the old time slot to avoid clashing with "Survivor", "Minute to Win It", and "American Idol".
Criticism.
Yahoo!'s "Shine" lifestyle website blasted the show's cruelty and elements of humiliation, saying that some of the girls' critiques from the "cruel and unusual" judges are "really cruel and cringe-inducing," and that the show "humiliates and degrades young women." They created a list called ""10 reasons why 'America's Next Top Model' is bad for women, humans,"" citing such things as giving an unrealistic vision to girls (both on the show, and watching) about what life as a model is like, and ""always espousing empowerment and female strength and then forcing the contestants into embarrassing scenarios far outside the realm of real-life modeling."" One such scenario highlighted was when two final contestants ""were made to wear bikinis so skimpy that the producers had to blur out Allison's butt cheeks"," and performed a "creepily sexual mud fight," after which the contestant Teyona Anderson was ""commended for taking her weave in her hand and whipping it around on the runway like a sexy feather boa.""
"Allure" magazine criticized the show in its October 2006 issue, saying that "ANTM" "hasn't exactly produced any actual supermodels."
Ken Mok and Tyra Banks noticed that most of Cycle 8's girls were unusually heavy smokers. "Tyra and I understand the influence 'Top Model' has on a generation of young people, and we want to make sure we get the right message to our audience," Mok said, which then prompted the "green" theme of Cycle 9.
The winner of Cycle 9, Saleisha Stowers, was discovered to have been in a Wendy's commercial, on a catwalk in the Cycle 6 show and an episode of Tyra Banks Show prior to the Cycle 9 event. The CW network said she had revealed her role in the Wendy's commercial, and "after reviewing the commercial, it was determined that her appearance did not amount to 'modeling' experience, and therefore did not exclude her from participating in the show."
After filming Cycle 10, the producers of "America's Next Top Model" were served with a lawsuit from Michael Marvisi who owns the loft used as the Top Model house. The lawsuit claims that the contestants as well as the production crew caused an estimated $500,000 in damages to the loft. Marvisi claims the contestants engaged in food fights, made holes in the walls, caused water damage to the bathroom, damaged a $15,000 chandelier beyond repair, and caused $90,000 worth of damage to an electrical store. Also, the production crew has been accused of damaging the flooring and making holes in the ceiling for lighting equipment.
Influence on pop culture.
The show has been referred to in many series, such as ABC Family's "GREEK" and "The Big Bang Theory" and Fox's "Family Guy". It also had its own "E! True Hollywood Story" episode, featuring past contestants Ebony Haith, Giselle Samson, Elyse Sewell, Adrianne Curry, Camille McDonald, April Wilkner, Mercedes Scelba-Shorte, Toccara Jones, Ann Markley, Amanda Swafford, Eva Pigford, Michelle Deighton, Brittany Brower, Naima Mora, Ebony Taylor, Lisa D'Amato, Kim Stolz and Bre Scullark as well as judges & personals Janice Dickinson, Tyra Banks, Nigel Barker, J. Alexander, Jay Manuel, Ken Mok and Michelle Mock-Falcon. It covered the first five cycles and recently reaired with a few added minutes of footage which cover cycles 6 to 10 and "Stylista".
Oxygen Network, which has acquired the cable rights of "ANTM", is going to air a series of documentary called "Top Model Obsessed", featuring past contestants Lisa D'Amato, CariDee English and Bianca Golden.
The show has even inspired a game of the same name. The game was released on May 23, 2010.
Spin-off.
In October 2008, The CW announced that it had ordered a spinoff pilot of "America’s Next Top Model", titled "Operation Fabulous". The proposed show would have starred "ANTM" creative director Jay Manuel and runway coach Mrs. J. Alexander as they travel the country to provide makeovers to everyday women. Tyra Banks and Ken Mok would have served as executive producers for the new show. However, The CW ultimately declined to pick up the show.
International broadcasts.
The channel in bold also broadcasted their own version of Top Model.
Home video releases.
Until 2012, only season 1 of ANTM had been released domestically on DVD. This is because the home video license was formerly held by UPN, and was distributed for them by Paramount Home Entertainment. Since the series is now independently produced, the video rights to the remaining seasons have, until recently, been open for acquisition (and therefore, the remaining seasons had yet to be issued on DVD or Blu-ray). However, on May 30, it was announced on the CW that Cycles 2 & 3 were available to pre-order on DVD via new licensee CBS Home Entertainment. They are now available for purchase on Amazon.com
