Ryan Lewis (born March 25, 1988) is an American music producer, musician, music video director, photographer, graphic designer, rapper and DJ currently based in Seattle. He is best known for his collaboration with American rapper Macklemore (Ben Haggerty) producing "Macklemore & Ryan Lewis — The VS. EP" (2009), "The Heist" (2012) and a handful of other singles and his album "Instrumentals" . Since the beginning of their collaboration in late 2008, Ryan has produced, recorded, engineered and mixed all of the music, directed music videos "Same Love", "Thrift Shop", "And We Danced", "Otherside (Remix), designed visuals (album art, web design, posters) and DJed the live show.
In a recent mini-documentary, Lewis recalled meeting Macklemore for the first time. "When I met him, it was a really different time. It was less than a year after "Language of My World" had come out. So he had buzz. For me being a young kid, it was very exciting to link with him. The bulk of our original relationship was photo shoots. I became kind of his photographer."
Early life and influences.
Ryan Lewis was born on the 25th of March, 1988 and was a single child in Seattle, Washington. He attended a public school down the street where he had lived. Ryan Lewis had a profession of becoming a photographer when he grew up. While Ryan Lewis was growing up he had started to hear stories about a new young rapper called Macklemore. Macklemore had just released his new album "The Language of my World" on January 1, 2005. . Macklemore had been musically active for 5 years with performances limited to the greater Seattle area. Ryan Lewis met Macklemore for the first time over a beat. Even though Macklemore took drugs and eventually went to Rehab, Ryan Lewis looked up to him as the brother he never had. Ryan Lewis and Macklemore were friends and Ryan presented some of his photography work to Macklemore. Ryan Lewis started to take photos for Macklemore in the summer of 2006. The duo started to become very good friends because of their photo shoots. Across time the duo made some small songs together. Macklemore noticed Ryan Lewis had musical talent and the two have been together ever since.
Music career.
"Instrumentals".
After Ryan Lewis started producing music with Macklemore he was still working with other artists. In the summer of 2008 Ryan Lewis started to work on his album. The album instrumentals consists of 4 songs made by Ryan Lewis and Budo which is based off many different trpes of instrumental music. The album was released on January 1, 2009. The album "Instrumentals" is the reason Macklemore found a musical interest in Ryan Lewis, Macklemore started working with Ryan Lewis a month after the album came out.
"The VS. EP".
On November 27, 2009 Ryan Lewis produces the first of his two EP's with Macklemore. The two singers came together in the winter of 2008 to start working on the EP. The EP was based off the idea to try new music directions from contemporary bands such as Arcade Fire or The Red Hot Chili Peppers. . When they finished the album in the summer of 2009 the EP consisted of 7 songs. These songs are based on the violence, drug abuse and struggle for power happening on "the streets" which explain the effects that rappers have on kids. Itunes awarded the EP spot No.7 on their hip hop chart later that year.
"The VS. ".
After the first EP was out on the iTunes market for almost a year, Ryan Lewis and Macklemore had received music reviews over their EP concerning the variety of music artists in their songs. The objective of the redux was to bring new remixed versions of the songs with new top artists consisting of Jake One who made a remix of the song "Crew Cuts" adding a more instrumental and bass direction to the song. Another version of "Crew Cuts" consisted of Xperience (2) helping Macklemore and Ryan Lewis. Buffalo Madonna who assisted in another remixed version of the song "Kings" who gave the song a faster and bigger pace to the song. With all the new remixes Ryan Lewis felt obliged to make his own, Ryan Lewis chose to make his own remix of the song "Vipasanna".
"The Heist".
On October 9, 2012, Macklemore & Ryan Lewis released "The Heist". The album debuted at #2 on the "Billboard" charts and #1 on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums and Top Rap Albums, selling 78,000 copies in the first week. The album also debuted at #1 on iTunes Digital Albums chart. The duo's album has received more than 1 million plays on SoundCloud, over 120 million YouTube views and was accompanied by a sold-out 50-date U.S. and Canadian tour.
Recognition and awards.
Ryan Lewis was not featured in any magazines or charts by himself. After he had teamed up with Macklemore and the completion of their album "The Heist", the duo popped in a lot of music charts for Hip Hop. One of their songs, "Thrift Shop" feat. Wanz, made it onto spot No.1 on Triple J's Hottest 100 of 2012. They had made a lot of top songs in their new album "The Heist", another song that made the Hottest 100 of 2012 was "Same Love" feat. Mary Lambert, which reached No.15 on the Hottest 100 of 2012.. The two songs had attracted attention from the Rolling Stone, NPR, TIMEand GQ. The album was also shown on the Billboard 200 when it earned the spot No.2 on the chart. Their album "The Heist" sold 78,000 copies on iTunes in the first week.
Tours and performances.
Ryan Lewis has had a couple performances in the years 2009 and 2010 were he only focused on his own albums. He performed only in his home town area in these years. in 2011 he started performing his EP's internationally and stopped performing in Seattle, Washington. He had performed his EP's with Macklemore at the Sasquatch Music Festival in Washington and another big performance in San Francisco, California at the Outside Lands Music Festival.. Ryan Lewis and Macklemore started selling tickets to their tours heavily in the start of 2011. In the city of Pullman, Washington they had started a multiple city-tour around america..
Macklemore and Ryan Lewis had nearly finished their first tour of America so they decided to head over to the United Kingdom and in Ireland to start their tour and to continue their tour in North America. Their first performance of the tour was on September 17, 2011. This tour was mostly based on their "VS. album. Many artists from the VS. [Redux performed on stage with Macklemore and Ryan Lewis such as Jake one and Xperience. Since there were so many top artists performing as a result over half of their 27 venues were sold out. 18 shows were completely sold out before the end of the tour, The tour ended on December 17, 2011.
Before Macklemore and Ryan Lewis started working on "The Heist" they performed there prior main album songs once more in may 2012 at the annual Sun God Festival by the University of California, San Diego.
Macklemore and Ryan Lewis had already started making singles for "The Heist" album in 2010 to 2011 such as "My Oh My" or "Can't Hold Us" In the summer of 2012 Macklemore and Ryan Lewis started to work on their first studio album known as "The Heist". In the fall of 2012 the album war released. Macklemore and Ryan Lewis started their tour in November 2012 in America. They had many concert all over the world starting with Europe and then heading down to North America. Some of their concerts have been in Houston, Texas all the way to Amsterdam. He has been on tour for almost 5 months and he has been scheduled to stop his tour in the summer of 2013.
