The Eurovision Song Contest 2013 will be the 58th annual Eurovision Song Contest. The contest will take place in Malmö, Sweden, following Loreen's win in the 2012 Contest with the song "Euphoria". Sveriges Television (SVT) chose Malmö Arena as the venue following the consideration of several venues within Sweden. The dates set for the two semi-finals are 14 May and 16 May 2013, with the final taking place on the evening of 18 May 2013. There will be one host for this contest which was announced on 28 January as comedian Petra Mede. Thirty-nine countries will participate, including Armenia, who were last represented in 2011. Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portugal, Slovakia and Turkey have announced their withdrawal from the 2013 Contest. The design of the contest is built around the theme "We are one", as highlighting equality and unity of all the participating countries alongside the cultural diversity and influence of each participant.
Location.
On 8 July 2012, Swedish broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT) announced that Malmö Arena in Malmö would be the host venue for the 2013 Eurovision Song Contest. This will be the fifth time after 1975, 1985, 1992 and 2000 that the competition will be held in Sweden and the second time, after 1992, that it will be held in Malmö.
Malmö, in the southern province of Scania, is Sweden's third largest city by population after Stockholm and Gothenburg, and is one of the largest cities in Scandinavia. It is also a part of the Øresund Region, and Copenhagen, the capital of Denmark, is only a trainride of about half an hour away. Malmö is the seat of the Malmö Municipality and the capital of Skåne County. The administrative entity for most of the city is Malmö Municipality, which has 303,873 inhabitants in eight different localities, with 30% being of foreign origin (either born outside of Sweden or having both parents born abroad). Part of Malmö is also formally situated in Burlöv Municipality. The total population of the urban area was 280,415 in December 2010.
Bidding phase.
On the night of the final for the 2012 Contest, the chief executive of SVT, Eva Hamilton, stated to the Swedish media that various venues in Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö were being considered for hosting the 2013 Contest. The host arena used for the 2000 Eurovision Song Contest, the Ericsson Globe, is booked for the 2013 World Ice Hockey Championships, and will not be available to host the contest on the scheduled dates. 
One alternative put forward in the "Expressen", was to hold the competition at three different venues – the semi-finals in Gothenburg and Malmö, and the final in Stockholm. This proposal was dismissed as unfeasible by SVT, which declared that the contest would be hosted in only one city.
On 20 June 2012, it was announced that Gothenburg had withdrawn from the bidding process due to the city being the host of the Göteborg Horse Show in late April 2013. There were also concerns about the availability of hotel rooms due to a variety of other events taking place in the same time frame as the Eurovision Song Contest.
The following candidate cities had provisionally reserved venues and hotel rooms, as part of their bids to host the 2013 Contest. On 8 July 2012, Malmö Arena was confirmed as the host venue for the contest.
SVT had expressed the desire to host the contest at a slightly smaller venue than previous years, and this was a factor in the choice of Malmö Arena as the host venue. The executive producer for the 2013 Contest, Martin Österdahl, told Swedish press that he did not like the decisions made by previous hosts to hold the contest in larger arenas, stating that he and SVT wants the 2013 Contest to be "more close and personal". SVT has also claimed that the European Broadcasting Union (EBU) wanted the 2013 Contest to be "smaller" due to the escalating costs of previous contests.
Format.
Host.
On 17 October 2012, executive producer, Martin Österdahl, told Swedish newspaper "Dagens Nyheter" that SVT plans for the 2013 Contest to have only one presenter for the entire contest, unlike previous years where there were up to three presenters per show. The last time there was just one presenter was in the 1995 Contest, when the solo host was Mary Kennedy. Petra Mede was announced as the host for the 2013 contest on 28 January 2013.
Graphic design.
The visual look of the contest was assigned to Gothenburg-based branding agency Happy F&B.
On 17 January 2013, at the semi-final allocation draw, The EBU revealed the graphic design, created by Happy F&B for the 2013 contest, featuring a butterfly and slogan "We Are One". The butterfly features an array of colours and textures, it also represents something small which can start powerful and big movements, a phenomenon known as the butterfly effect, indicating that a flap from one butterfly can – at least – start a hurricane.
Ticket sale.
On 11 July 2012, show producer, Christer Björkman, advised the public not to buy tickets for the 2013 Contest that are currently in circulation and instead wait for tickets to be released through official channels. Björkman said that official tickets had not yet been released, as necessary decisions over the stage and seating plans had not yet been made. Björkman also gave reassurance that accommodation would be available, as while the organizers had booked a large quantity of hotel rooms, some may be made available to the general public. On 21 November 2012, SVT officially announced the launch of ticket sales.
Sponsors.
Official sponsors of the broadcast are the main Swedish telecommunication company TeliaSonera, and the German cosmetics company Schwarzkopf.
Semi-final allocation draw.
Unlike previous years, the running order will not be decided by the drawing of lots, but instead by the producers, with the aim of making the shows more exciting and ensuring that all contestants have a chance to stand out, preventing entries that are too similar cancelling each other out. The decision elicited mixed reactions from both fans of the contest and participating broadcasters. On 3 January 2013, the EBU announced that the semi-final allocation draw would be held on 17 January 2013 at the old Malmö City Hall. The running order will be decided and presented in April.
To create more excitement, like past years, the 30 countries were allocated to five pots based on voting patterns from the previous nine years. The pots were calculated by the televoting partner Digame and were as follows: 
Participating countries.
21 December 2012 brougth the announcement that 39 countries would compete in the Eurovision Song Contest 2013. Armenia (which was last represented in 2011, by Emmy, with the song "Boom Boom") confirmed that it will be returning to the contest following a one-year break. Since Malmö is geographically close to both Denmark and Norway, it was decided that both countries would perform in different semi-finals to maximise the availability of tickets for visitors from both countries. A draw at the EBU headquarters determined that Denmark will perform in the first semi-final, while Norway will perform in the second semi-final.
Returning artists.
Valentina Monetta will be representing San Marino for the second year in a row, after previously representing them in the 2012 Contest. Elitsa Todorova and Stoyan Yankoulov are returning as a duo, having previously represented Bulgaria in 2007.
Semi-finals.
Semi-final 1.
Italy, Sweden and the United Kingdom will vote in this semi-final.
Semi-final 2.
Germany, France and Spain will vote in this semi-final.
