Hayden Leslie Panettiere (, ; born August 21, 1989) is an American actress, singer and model. She began her acting career by playing Sarah Roberts on "One Life to Live" (1994–1997), and Lizzie Spaulding on "Guiding Light" (1996–2000), before starring at age 10 as Sheryl Yoast in the Disney feature film "Remember the Titans". Her most notable role to date is that of cheerleader Claire Bennet on the NBC series "Heroes" (2006–2010), for which she won several awards. Other recent roles include her portrayal of the title character in true crime drama "" and Kirby Reed in the slasher film "Scream 4". In October 2012, she began starring as Juliette Barnes in the ABC musical drama series "Nashville", for which she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film in 2012.
Early life.
Panettiere was born in and partly raised in Palisades, New York, the daughter of Lesley R. Vogel, a former soap opera actress, and Alan Lee "Skip" Panettiere, a fire department lieutenant. She has one younger brother, fellow actor Jansen Panettiere. Panettiere has Italian ancestry, and her surname means "baker" in Italian. Her mother's family is from Indiana. 
Although Panettiere attended South Orangetown Middle School in New York, she was homeschooled from grade nine to the completion of high school.
Career.
Acting.
Television.
Panettiere first appeared in commercials at 11 months, beginning with an advertisement for Playskool. She landed a role as Sarah Roberts on the ABC soap opera "One Life to Live" from 1994 to 1997, which was followed by Lizzie Spaulding on the CBS soap opera "Guiding Light" in 1996, and again from 1997 to 2000. While on "Guiding Light," Panettiere's character Lizzie battled leukemia. For drawing the attention of daytime viewers to the disease, and for improving national awareness, the Leukaemia & Lymphoma Society gave her its Special Recognition Award.
For her performance in Lifetime Television's 1999 TV movie "If You Believe", she was nominated for the Young Artist Award for Young Actress Age Ten or Under in the category of Best Performance in a TV Movie or Pilot. Panettiere appeared on Fox's "Ally McBeal" as the title character's daughter, had a recurring guest role on "Malcolm in the Middle" and guest starred in "" in two different roles.
Panettiere became most prominent as Claire Bennet in the NBC series "Heroes," which was created by Tim Kring, as a high school cheerleader with regenerative healing powers. Thanks to her role on "Heroes," she became a regular on the science fiction convention circuit, invited to attend conventions around the world in 2007, including Gen Con, New York Comic Con, and Fan Expo Canada. Panettiere has complained that her acting options are sometimes limited because "people look at as either the 'popular cheerleader' type or just 'the blonde.'"
In early 2007, Panettiere appeared on the MTV show, "Punk'd". The appearance was engineered by her mother and involved a male "fan" discussing her work with her, instigating a jealous reaction from the man's spouse. In April 2012 she hosted an episode of the new series.
In March 2012 it was announced Panettiere had been cast opposite Connie Britton on the upcoming ABC musical drama pilot "Nashville" and will portray Juliette Barnes. In May 2012 ABC bought the pilot as a series. The series reunites Panettiere with Burgess Jenkins from "Remember the Titans".
Films.
Panettiere has appeared in over a dozen full-length feature films, starting for film debut, "A Bug's Life". in 1999, she portrayed the girl on a sinking sailboat in "Message In A Bottle". She played the role of Coach Yoast's daughter, Sheryl, in the 2000 Disney film "Remember the Titans." She also starred in "" as a cheerleader and had a supporting role as Adelaide Bourbon in the independent film "Shanghai Kiss". In 2004, she appeared in the Disney Channel film "Tiger Cruise", and in "Raising Helen" as Kate Hudson's adolescent niece. In 2005, she was the title character's rival in a skating contest in "Ice Princess". In the same year she starred in the film "Racing Stripes" where she played the character Channing Walsh.
In June 2007, she signed with the William Morris Agency, after previously being represented by United Talent Agency. Forbes estimated that she earned $2 million in 2007.
In 2008, Panettiere appeared in the drama "Fireflies in the Garden" as a younger version of Emily Watson's character, Jane Lawrence. In September 2008, she appeared in a satirical video, a mock-PSA (public service announcement) on funnyordie.com entitled "Hayden Panettiere PSA: Your Vote, Your Choice." Again, in October, Panettiere appeared in another satirical PSA video on funnyordie.com entitled "Vote for McCain: He's just like George Bush, except older and with a worse temper."
In July 2009, Panettiere starred in the teen comedy "I Love You, Beth Cooper." In September 2010, she was signed to star as Amanda Knox in the controversial "".
Panettiere also provided the voice of Kate, along-side Justin Long in 2010's "Alpha and Omega".
In April 2011, Panettiere appeared in the "Scream" sequel, "Scream 4", playing Kirby Reed. The same year she replaced Anne Hathaway as the voice of Red for the animated sequel "Hoodwinked Too! Hood vs. Evil". In 2012 "The Forger", in which she played the role of Amber, was released direct to DVD (both this and "Hoodwinked Too! Hood vs. Evil" were made in 2009).
Video games.
Panettiere voiced Kairi in "Kingdom Hearts" and "Kingdom Hearts II". While she was replaced by Alyson Stoner in ' and "Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days", she reprises her role in "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep" and also voices Xion in '.
Singing.
Panettiere was nominated for a Grammy in 1999 for "A Bug's Life Read-Along" (2000). In 2004, she recorded a song entitled "My Hero Is You" with a video for the Disney Channel film she starred in, "Tiger Cruise." The next year she recorded a song entitled "I Fly" for the Disney film "Ice Princess" in which she also co-starred. She recorded a song for the Hollywood Records compilation "Girl Next" (2006) and another song entitled "Go to Girl" for "Girl Next 2" (2007). Also in 2007, she recorded a cover for "Cruella De Vil" for "DisneyMania 5", "Try" for the "Bridge to Terabithia" soundtrack and a ballad called "I Still Believe" for "".
Panettiere's first single, "Wake Up Call", was digitally released on August 5, 2008. The clothing brand Candie's announced that it was premiering an ad campaign for the single in late July. Similarly, Candie's would also provide additional promotion for the single with a television advertisement and a music video.
She has recorded several songs for "Nashville", released as singles and on the show's soundtrack.
Modeling.
In late 2006, Neutrogena made Panettiere the cover girl for their new worldwide ad campaign; following in the footsteps of actresses Kristin Kreuk, Josie Bissett, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Mandy Moore, Mischa Barton, Gabrielle Union and Jennifer Freeman. In September 2007, Panettiere appeared in a "Heroes"-themed Got Milk? ad for which the photographs were shot by Annie Leibovitz. In February 2008, Kohl's announced that Panettiere would be their next Candie's spokesperson.
Personal life.
Panettiere dated her "Heroes" co-star Milo Ventimiglia from December 2007 to February 2009. She has dated heavyweight boxing world-champion Wladimir Klitschko. She was ringside for his knockout victory over Samuel Peter on September 11, 2010. The actress confirmed on May 12, 2011 that she and Klitschko had broken up amicably after two years together. Both cited the long-distance nature of their relationship as the reason, and said they would remain close friends. She dated NFL player Scotty McKnight from June 2011 to December 2012. As with her relationship with Klitschko, the breakup was an amicable one based on distance.
Panettiere has a tattoo of the Italian words "Vivere senza rimipianti" running down her left side. The word "rimpianti" is misspelled in what otherwise would mean "Living Without Regrets". She followed a vegetarian diet while she starred in "Heroes" but has since added chicken and fish to her diet, stating that she "didn't respond well" to a vegetarian diet, and she had "low-energy".
Activism.
In 2007, Panettiere became an official supporter of Ronald McDonald House Charities and is a member of their celebrity board, called the Friends of RMHC.
On October 31, 2007, Panettiere joined with The Whaleman Foundation to try to disrupt the annual dolphin hunt in Taiji, Wakayama, Japan. She was involved in a confrontation between Japanese fishermen and five other surfers from Australia and the United States (including former "Home and Away" star Isabel Lucas) of the group. The confrontation lasted more than 10 minutes before the surfers were forced to return to the beach, after which they left the country. Parts of the confrontation can be seen on the award-winning Sundance Film Festival documentary film, "The Cove". The fishermen consider the condemnation as an attack on their culture.
Panettiere told E! News that an arrest warrant has been issued in Japan for her interference in the dolphin hunt, but her claim was later dismissed by the Japanese Fisheries Agency. In November 2007, she was awarded the "Compassion in Action Award" from the animal rights group PETA for her efforts to stop the dolphin hunt in Japan.
On January 28, 2008, Panettiere handed a letter of protest to the Norwegian ambassador in the United States arguing that Norway should stop its hunt for whales. She also delivered a letter to the Japanese ambassador calling for the end of Japan's hunting of whales. At a 2007 Greenpeace event in Anchorage, Alaska, Panettiere defended aboriginal whaling, saying that there is a difference between commercial whaling and the whaling practiced by aboriginal tribes in the United States.
In May 2008, Panettiere was involved in an eBay auction to benefit Save The Whales Again, a campaign of The Whaleman Foundation. The auction included tickets to a fundraising dinner hosted at the Hollywood restaurant Beso, owned by Eva Longoria, and a whale watching tour, with Panettiere, off the coast of Santa Barbara. The same month, during an interview with "Teen Vogue", Hayden explained how her fame gives her a platform for her activism: "The show ["Heroes"] put me in a place to speak for things that I'm passionate about."
In September 2008, Panettiere launched her own line of calfskin leather bags for the company Dooney & Bourke. In October 2008, Panettiere delved into the presidential election, releasing a public service announcement through the website Funny or Die. In this video Panettiere mocked Republican candidate John McCain for his age and temper. She subsequently made clear her intention to vote for Barack Obama, and urged other young people to vote.
Panettiere also appeared in a public service announcement with DC Shadow Senator Paul Strauss endorsing voting rights for the District of Columbia. She is also a teen ambassador for the Candie's Foundation, whose mission is to prevent teen pregnancy. On May 6, 2009, she participated in a town hall meeting in New York City alongside Bristol Palin and then-Tampa Bay Rays and current Chicago Cubs pitcher Matt Garza on the issue of teen pregnancy.
