Malcolm James McCormick (born January 19, 1992), known by his stage name Mac Miller (previously Easy Mac), is an American rapper from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He is signed to Rostrum Records and released his debut album, "Blue Slide Park", on November 8, 2011.
Early life.
Malcolm James McCormick was born on January 19, 1992, the son of Karen Meyers, a photographer, and Mark McCormick, an architect. His father is Christian and his mother is Jewish; Miller was raised Jewish and had a Bar Mitzvah. He was raised in the Point Breeze part of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Miller attended Winchester Thurston School and Taylor Allderdice High School. In high school, Miller decided to focus on his hip hop career, later noting, "Once I hit 15, I got real serious about it and it changed my life completely ... I used to be into sports, play all the sports, go to all the high school parties. But once I found out hip-hop is almost like a job, that's all I did." Miller, a self-taught musician, plays piano, guitar, drums, and bass.
Career.
2007-2010: Career beginnings.
Miller first started rapping at the age of fourteen. Before that, he wanted to be a singer-songwriter. Prior to changing his name to Mac Miller, he was known as EZ Mac and released the mixtape "But My Mackin' Ain't Easy" in 2007 at the age of fifteen. Miller was also part of rap group The Ill Spoken together with fellow Pittsburgh rapper, Beedie. The Ill Spoken released the mixtape "How High" in 2008. In 2009 Mac Miller released two mixtapes "The Jukebox: Prelude to Class Clown" and "The High Life" before getting signed to Rostrum Records. In 2009 at age 17, he made it to the final four in Rhyme Calisthenics, the MC competition at Shadow Lounge.
In early 2010, Miller signed with Rostrum Records. Rostrum president Benjy Grinberg met Miller while recording with Wiz Khalifa at ID Labs. Although Grinberg started giving Miller advice, he didn't show any interest in getting involved with his career until the artist began work on the "K.I.D.S." mixtape, when, as he later told HitQuarters, Grinberg "noticed a maturation in his sound and approach to his music." By that point Miller had started attracting interest from different record companies but chose Rostrum due to its location in his hometown and association with Wiz Khalifa. K.I.D.S. was released by the label in August 2010. The mixtape was inspired by the movie Kids. A significant breakthrough came in late 2010 when Miller embarked on his first tour, the Incredibly Dope Tour, selling out every location. In 2010, he won two awards at the Pittsburgh hip hop awards.
2011: "Best Day Ever", "On And On And Beyond" and "Blue Slide Park".
Miller's fifth release was the "Best Day Ever" mixtape featuring the single "Donald Trump" and hit songs "Wear My Hat" and "All Around The World". The mixtape featured mainstream producers such as Just Blaze, 9th Wonder, and Chuck Inglish. On November 22, 2010 his first single "Knock Knock" premiered its video on YouTube. On March 29, 2011, he released an EP called "On And On And Beyond". The six-track work was produced by Rostrum Records.
On July 5, 2011, Miller announced the title of his first album "Blue Slide Park" on his YouTube channel, set for a Fall release. In September 2011 it was revealed that Miller would release a mixtape titled "92 Til Infinity" hosted by DJ Jazzy Jeff prior to the release of "Blue Slide Park". However, the release did not happen, and it was since then left in planning.
Miller featured on Maroon 5's remix of their hit song "Moves Like Jagger".
On October 14, 2011, Mac Miller released a 13 song mixtape called "I Love Life, Thank You", featuring Sir Michael Rocks of The Cool Kids, Talib Kweli, and Bun B.
On November 2011, "Blue Slide Park" debuted at number 1 on the "Billboard" 200 with first week sales of 144,000 copies. This was the first independently distributed debut to take the number one spot on the Billboard albums chart since since Tha Dogg Pound’s 1995 release Dogg Food. In 2011 Miller was one of eleven rappers featured in XXL magazine's Freshman Class of 2011. In 2011, his first TV appearance took place in the VH1 show Single Ladies; he played a fictionalized version of himself that succeeded in selling one of his mixtapes to one of the main characters. Also in 2011, he was a part of MTV Jams Fab Five artists.
2012-present: "Macadelic", and "Watching Movies with the Sound Off' '.
On February 15, 2012 Mac Miller uploaded a trailer on YouTube for his long anticipated music video "Missed Calls". It was released on his official YouTube channel on June 22, 2012. On March 23, 2012, Mac Miller released his seventh mixtape called "Macadelic". He released "Loud" as a single off the mixtape as well as making a music video. "Loud" peaked at #53 on the Billboard Hot 100. Miller also released a video for "Thoughts From A Balcony".
In June 2012 Mac Miller made the song "Onaroll" available on YouTube. "Onaroll" is performed by Mac Miller and produced by Pharrell, from a future collaboration EP titled "Pink Slime".
On August 7, 2012 Miller released a further single from "Pink Slime", "Glow", available for free download. On September 1, Miller released another free song called "PlaneCarBoat" which features West Coast rapper Schoolboy Q and was produced by himself.
On October 14, Miller announced "Pink Slime" would be released before the end of 2012 and that his second album, "Watching Movies with the Sound Off", will be released in early 2013. "Watching Movies With the Sound Off" will feature Schoolboy Q, Ab-Soul, Cam'ron, Earl Sweatshirt, Tyler, the Creator, Action Bronson and Gucci Mane. When speaking of the album Miller said that it is "very introspective and very personal so it’s kind of throwing it all out there and seeing what happens."
On November 11, 2012 Miller released a free EP entitled "You" under the name Larry Lovestein & The Velvet Revival. Rather than rap, the EP features Miller crooning over lounging jazz instrumentals. Soon after he also announced his plans to finally release "92 Til Infinity" with DJ Jazzy Jeff in early 2013 prior to his release.
Mac Miller will be featured on a six-episode reality series titled "Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family". It will feature the production of "Watching Movies With the Sounds Off" and will premiere on February 26, 2013 at 11:30 p.m. EST. The first trailer was released on January 20, 2013. In March 2013 Miller will go on a tour of Europe with fellow rappers Lil Wayne and 2 Chainz. He is also starting his own record label, REMember Music, named after a friend who died, whose initials were REM He is producing Odd Future affiliate Vince Staples' upcoming EP, "Tales of A Stolen Youth", under his production alias, Larry Fisherman.
Legal issues.
In February 2011, while on tour in Upstate New York, Miller and his friends were arrested for posession of marijuana for which they had to spend the night in jail. The case was settled.
In June 2012, producer Lord Finesse filed an exorbitant $10 million lawsuit against Mac Miller, Rostrum Records and DatPiff for the use of a sample of Finesse's song "Hip 2 Da Game" used in Miller's 2010 mixtape song "Kool-Aid and Frozen Pizza", even though the song was not commercially released and Finesse was given credit for the sample from the beginning. A case can be made that the song "made money through YouTube ads and Lord Finesse could be entitled to some of those, but instead Finesse believes that his beat has been instrumental to all of Mac's success." This was done even though the song is itself based on a Oscar Peterson sample, which he himself never paid for. In January 2013 the lawsuit was settled outside of court with actual legal results not revealed.
Influences.
Mac Miller includes Big L, Lauryn Hill, the Beastie Boys, Outkast, and A Tribe Called Quest among his influences. He also has a close relationship with fellow Pittsburgh rapper Wiz Khalifa, saying "Wiz has been a big brother to me with this music thing so far. Our relationship is beyond music. He really is just my homie, whether I will be making music or not."
Personal life.
At the time of Miller's addiction, his childhood friend, Jimmy Murton, said: "I saw him in that mentality I remember being in—you’re getting fucked up because you feel like you need to. You’re trying to get away from everything. For how much he was drinking, it’s unbelievable that he stopped. It’s definitely one of the most impressive things he’s ever done." Miller quit taking promethazine in November 2012 before he started the shooting of his upcoming reality show, "Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family".
