Josh James Brolin (; born February 12, 1968) is an American actor. He has acted in theater, film and television roles since 1985. He is known primarily for his roles in the films "The Goonies", "W.", "No Country for Old Men", "Milk", "True Grit", "Men In Black 3", and "Gangster Squad".
Early life.
Brolin was born in Santa Monica, California, the son of Jane Cameron Agee, a wildlife activist who was a native of Corpus Christi, Texas, and actor James Brolin. Brolin was raised on a California ranch with little exposure to his father's acting career. His parents divorced when he was 16. His stepmother is singer/actress Barbra Streisand. He became interested in acting after taking an improv acting class in high school.
Acting career.
Brolin started his career in TV movies and guest spots on TV shows before getting a more notable role as Brand Walsh in the Richard Donner-directed movie "The Goonies" (1985). He was considered for the role of Tom Hanson in the series "21 Jump Street"; he and Johnny Depp were the finalists for the role, and at that time the two became close and remained friends even after the role was ultimately awarded to Depp. Brolin guest-starred in an episode of the show in its first season.
Brolin implied that he turned away from film acting for years after the premiere of his second film, "Thrashin"', where he witnessed what he called "horrendous" acting on his part. For several years, he appeared in stage roles in Rochester, New York, often alongside mentor and friend Anthony Zerbe. One of Brolin's more prominent roles early in his career was that of Wild Bill Hickok in the ABC western TV series "The Young Riders", which lasted three seasons (1989–92). Two other TV series he was involved in include the Aaron Spelling production "Winnetka Road" (1994) and "Mister Sterling" (2003), both of which were cancelled after a few episodes.
Brolin's extensive film work consists of many villainous roles in recent films including "Planet Terror" (one of two feature-length segments of the Quentin Tarantino/Robert Rodriguez collaboration "Grindhouse"), Gus van Sant's "Milk", "American Gangster", and Oliver Stone's "". He also played the lead role in the Coen brothers' Academy Award-winning film "No Country for Old Men".
Brolin received an Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actor for his role in Gus Van Sant's biopic "Milk" as city supervisor Dan White, who assassinated San Francisco Supervisor Harvey Milk and Mayor George Moscone. He made news by wearing a White Knot to the Academy Awards ceremony to demonstrate solidarity with the marriage equality movement. Brolin told an interviewer that costar Sean Penn, who portrayed Milk, decided to dispel any nerves the actors had about playing gay men by grabbing the bull by the horns. At the first cast dinner, which included castmates James Franco, Emile Hirsch and Diego Luna, Brolin said, " walked right up and grabbed me and planted a huge one right on my lips." Brolin has received critical acclaim for his performance and, in addition to his Oscar nomination, received NYFCC and NBR Awards for Best Supporting Actor and a nomination for a SAG Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role. He portrayed Jonah Hex in the film of the same name.
Brolin played a younger Agent K in "Men in Black 3" released in May 2012.
Writing and directing.
In 2009, Brolin executive produced and performed in "The People Speak" a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's "A People's History of the United States".
Brolin wrote and directed the short film "X", as his directorial debut. The film, about an inmate who escapes prison to reunite with his daughter and search for her murdered mother, was the opening film at the first annual Union City International Film Festival in Union City, New Jersey in December 2010.
Other activities.
During an interview in 2010, Brolin claimed to be a member of punk rock band Rich Kids on LSD in the early 1980s.
Brolin has hosted "Saturday Night Live" twice; once in October 2008, and again in April 2012.
Personal life.
Marriages and family.
Brolin was married to actress Alice Adair from 1988 to 1994; they have two children, Trevor Mansur (born June 1988) and Eden (born 1994). He was engaged to actress Minnie Driver for six months. He has been married to actress Diane Lane since August 15, 2004. Brolin and Lane filed for divorce in February 2013.
Legal issues.
On December 20, 2004, Brolin's wife, Diane Lane called the police after an altercation with Brolin and he was arrested on a misdemeanor charge of domestic battery. Lane declined to press charges and the couple's spokesperson characterized the incident as a misunderstanding.
On July 12, 2008, Brolin was arrested, along with actor Jeffrey Wright and five other crew members of "W.", after an altercation at the Stray Cat Bar in Shreveport, Louisiana. Brolin was released after posting a cash bond of US$334. When talking of his arrest, Brolin said to a reporter, "It was nice to be in jail knowing that I hadn’t done anything wrong. And it was maddening to be in jail knowing that I hadn’t done anything wrong." Charges against all seven men were later dropped by Shreveport prosecutors.
He was arrested for public intoxication on New Year's Day, 2013, in Santa Monica.
Business interests.
When he is not acting, Brolin is an active stock trader and was co-founder of the site MarketProbability.com. The site has since shut down.
