"Asia's Next Top Model, Cycle 1" (abbreviated as "AsiasNTM" or "AsNTM") is a reality television show in which a number of women compete for the title of "Asia's Next Top Model" and a chance to start their career in the modeling industry. The show features aspiring models from the entire Asia-Pacific region. The international destinations for this cycle were Batam, Indonesia and Hong Kong.
The winner of the competition was 27 year-old Jessica Amornkuldilok from Thailand.
Episode summaries.
Episode 1: Which Girl Can Handle the Limelight?
The chosen fourteen girls were met by host Nadya Hutagalung at a high-end shopping district along Orchard Road in Singapore where she introduced the cycle's judging panel. Nadya then revealed that the girls would immediately get the competition started with a runway challenge. Some of the girls struggled with their outfit and walk, but ultimately it was Trang that was declared the winner, winning a $5,000 shopping spree from Wisma Atria for a new wardrobe. 
After the challenge, the girls then move to their new house where they start to choose rooms and settle down.
The next day, the girls were brought to Little India for their first photo shoot where they were greeted by judge Daniel Boey along with designers Afton Chen and Louis Koh from Reckless Ericka. The girls were then ecstatic upon finding out that judge Todd Anthony Tyler would be their photographer for the shoot. They were then asked to model clothes from Reckless Ericka while working a prop and being quirky. While Stephanie, Rachel, Jessica, and Helena impressed Tyler, most of the girls struggled to be quirky while working their prop.
After the shoot, Trang goes on a shopping spree as her prize for the challenge. Upon returning back to the house, she brings presents for all the girls, to everyone's delight.
At panel, most of the girls received negative feedback from their shots. Stephanie, Rachel, and Helena impressed the judges for embracing the point of the shoot. Melissa expressed how she lacked experience in the industry but planned to absorb as much information as she could. Kyla was criticized for posing awkward instead of quirky during the shoot. Nadya asked Kate to present herself more properly when being called forward for critique. Ultimately, Melissa's inexperience and Kyla's flat performance landed them in the bottom two. In the end, Melissa was deemed to have more potential, and Kyla became the first girl to be eliminated.
Episode 2: Which Girl Can Stand Out?
The remaining girls were greeted by runway coach Joey Mead King and runway trainer Adam Williams for a runway tutorial, then the girls were introduced to their challenge which is a fashion show for Singaporean designer Thomas Wee at the L’Atelier de Joël Robuchon located within Resorts World Sentosa. Although some of the girls improved their walk, Trang emerged victorious and won the reward challenge, which is a gown to be made especially for her by Thomas Wee and dinner with two friends at the L’Atelier de Joël Robuchon. She chooses Aastha and Stephanie to join her for the reward challenge dinner which disappoints Helena who was celebrating her birthday at that time.
Back at the house, tensions were flaring when the girls from the reward challenge return as the other girls are celebrating Helena's birthday. Some of the girls expressed that it was unfair for them to have Trang, who had prior modelling experience, to compete with them in the competition.
The photo shoot takes place at former Tanjong Pagar railway station, the girls worked in groups wearing Prada while portraying virtual princesses. The best group photo would have their photo featured as an editorial in Harper's Bazaar. 
Trang's shoes dragged her down on her shoot, Jee and Stephanie both got bad critiques on their shoot, and Filantropi was told that she was the worst of the bunch. After the photo shoot, Monica received news that her father was ill and she had to go to him, which led to her withdrawal from the competition.
At panel, group 2 received the most praise, specifically Aastha and Sofia, while Trang received nice. In group 1, Helena shone while Filantropi was heavily critiqued. In group 3, Jessica received praise while Jee and Stephanie both received bad feedback. Although Rachel's picture received praise as well, she was taken out of the panel after collapsing to receive medical attention.
Ultimately, the second group won and their picture was chosen to be featured on Harpers Bazaar. Jee and Stephanie landed in the bottom two for their lackluster photographs, but Nadya then announced that no one would be going home since Monica had decided to leave the competition, sparing both girls from elimination.
Episode 3: Which Girl Can Own a New Look?
After being in the bottom two, Jee celebrated her birthday. Stephanie, who was also in the bottom two, revealed that she already had a daughter. The girls were surprised to find out that they would be having their makeovers. At the salon, Jessica and Rachel embraced their new short hair, while Aastha complained about it. Kate received honey blonde hair, Jee received very fiery red hair, Helena received a Victoria Beckham inspired look, while Trang and Filantropi both received a similar haircut.
For the photo shoot, the remaining models traveled to Hong San See temple and embodied the twelve Chinese zodiac animals in the Chinese calendar.
Jee and Stephanie impressed everyone during the shoot, Helena got into her wild character, while Aastha, Bei Si and Trang struggled. At panel, most of the girls received good critique. Helena received a second first call-out, while Aastha and Bei Si landed in the bottom two for their mediocre photographs. Aastha was saved and Bei Si was sent home.
Episode 4: Which Girl Exudes Sexy?
The girls were taught by model mentor Joey Mead King on how to pose sexily in pictures. At the challenge, Joey asked the girls to dress up sexy for their challenge, which was to bring any object and make sexy poses with it. Aastha and Jessica impressed Joey, but it was Helena who won the challenge. As her prize, she was able to go out to dinner with Joey and Todd Anthony Tyler. She choose Rachel and Jee to accompany her for the dinner. During the dinner, Helena dominated the conversation and talked about herself and promoted herself to the judges. The two judges and the other girls seemed uncomfortable. The girls thought that Helena's poses were not that great, and they all agreed that she simply 'got lucky' because she had chosen a phone as her prop.
At the photo shoot, the girls were asked to pose with celebrity and hot host Jason Godfrey. Trang had a wardrobe malfunction, as she forgot to bring tampons during her period. Kate played boxing when she was waiting for her turn. Both were heavily scolded by Daniel. Some of the girls excelled in the shoot, Jee found it awkward, Filantropi struggled, and Helena pushed her sexiness too far. Kate was castigated for being too jolly and stiff at the shoot.
At panel, Sofia received the best photo for achieving the sexiest photograph. Aastha redeemed herself after being in the bottom two the previous week. Melissa was again praised for her photo. Although Kate received good feedback for her photo, she was noticed for being uptight at the panel and slowly losing her personality. She read a personal letter aloud to the judges in order to prove that she was serious about the competition. Filantropi and Jee found themselves in the bottom two. In a shocking twist, Nadya announced that both of them would be eliminated, saying that there was no more time for either of them to improve.
Episode 5: Style & Taste.
Filantropi left a letter on the fridge door. She gave advice and motivations to the girls. She told Helena that she understood her competitiveness but she told Helena not to be mean to the girls especially Melissa. Helena seemed shock and upset. She told the other girls to be confident and work hard. The girls met Joey Mead King and Jeannie Mai for a challenge in Parco Next, where they were split up into groups of three, and were assigned to style themselves in different categories.
The quirky group became uncoordinated with their styles, while the sexy group went against the style they were assigned. In the edgy group, Trang told Jessica to change her pink outfit for a black one (since Kate and herself were wearing black), but Jessica ignored Trang and kept her style instead. The edgy group won the overall challenge, but it was Jessica who won individually.
The girls traveled to Nongsa Point Marina and Resort located at Batam, Indonesia for their photo shoot, which was to embody a refined French Rivera woman. Kate excelled during the shoot, Stephanie had a hard time opening her eyes, and Jessica inspired the photographer with her performance. Trang struggled to understand the photographer which angered Daniel because Trang wasn't able to communicate well.
At the panel, Kate received the best photo. Aastha and Jessica followed her suit while Melissa and Trang landed in the bottom. Melissa for not looking like a model in person and Trang because of her poor communication in English and for not asking when she didn't understand instructions. In the end, Melissa was saved by the judges, and Trang was eliminated from the competition.
Episode 6: Good Hair Day.
After Trang went home, all of the remaining models were shocked. A close friendship brewed between Rachel and Kate. For the reward challenge, the girls were asked to write their own script and perform a commercial for TRESemmé. Aastha and Helena shone; however, it was Aastha who ultimately won the challenge, which made Helena jealous. 
Later, the girls had a beauty shoot for TRESemmé. Most of the models performed well. Kate and Rachel struggled, while Helena was reprimanded for being overly sexy. 
At panel, Jessica, Stephanie and Aastha were highly praised, while Melissa was told that she was beginning to improve. The judges deemed Sofia's photograph to be the best, and she received her second first call-out. Helena was warned about her over-sexiness in photos. Rachel and Kate found themselves in the bottom two, both for being plain. Ultimately, Kate was saved and Rachel was sent home because the judges felt she wasn't standing out and progressing as the competition went on. 
Episode 7: Face Value.
When Rachel left, Kate felt that she lost some of her strength. Then the girls were taught all about runway makeup by some experts with Joey Mead King. After the tutorial, Joey announced to the girls that their challenge was to recreate the makeup they had seen during the tutorial. Sofia won the challenge, and she chose Kate to accompany for a spa treatment at Resorts World Singapore. 
Back at the house, Sofia also received a gift, but some of the girls hid her prizes and replaced them with toilet paper and slippers which made Sofia feel disrespected.
For the photo shoot, the girls were asked to do an environmental campaign. Jessica and Stephanie both impressed everyone. Kate received remarks about her arms, while Aastha, Helena, Melissa, and Sofia struggled.
At panel, few of the girls impressed the judges. Helena said that her bad shoulder was to blame for her poor performance during the shoot, but the judges did not believe her. Jessica received best photo for her stunning and believable shot, while Helena and Melissa were placed in the bottom two for their weak photographs. Before saving Helena, Nadya scolded Helena for her bad attitude at panel and she sent Melissa home. After Melissa's departure, Helena began to have a panic attack.
Episode 8: Mannerism & The Big Red Dress.
The episode starts with Helena's panic attack issue, but fortunately it is revealed that she's alright all along. She then commented on how she didn't need the judges' advice because she knew what she did. Later on, both Nadya and Joey dropped on their house to invite the girls to join them in a mini-challenge about how to act gracefully as a model in an event. They are taught how to do a good model, either at photoshoot or at an event. Aastha struggles with chopsticks, Helena is surprisingly calm after her whole issue last panel, but ultimately Jessica won the challenge for being the most graceful from the remaining girls. She won the reward of spa treatment with Nadya.
Then the main challenge is up, which is a red carpet event for Farah Khan. Kate, Aastha, Helena, Jessica and Sofia all shone, while Stephanie struggles all alone. In the end, it was revealed that Helena won her third challenge, and her prize was a Farah Khan dress she wore for the party. All the girls seem happy for her except Sofia. This lead Sofia to confront Helena in front of the other girls back at home, and while Helena thought Sofia is mean, Sofia herself thought that Helena is fake. The discussion ended shortly after, which left Sofia in disgust of Helena's attitude.
The next day, the girls were brought up to the Universal Studios Singapore, where they greeted by Daniel Boey and their photographer for the day, Toons. The photoshoot was about a haute couture red dress, with length approximately 100 metres and weight 15 kilograms. Helena was first, and was noted by Daniel by looking like a ballerina but not a model. Aastha was concerned about her dead-eyes habit again, while Sofia manages to posing with her armpit facing the camera all the time. Jessica owned the dress and consistently kept her strong facial expression, while Stephanie was an epic fail, both the dress and the expression. The last one, Kate, brought so much humor and energy to the set, and getting better after falling down the stairs.
During the judging panel, all the girls except Stephanie received praise from the judges. Helena was told she looks like a Bird of paradise, but was warned that is was only a lucky shot. Sofia was told she looks like an Angry Bird, while Kate was universally praised for her outstanding photo. Jessica received similar praise as well, for owning the dress and her face, while Aastha was told she need to keep her energy during the shoot. Stephanie, however was told that she has slipping down and her photo is clearly the worst out of the sea of amazing photos this week.
In the end, Jessica received her second consecutive best photo, and she was quickly followed by Kate. Aastha was surprisingly called third, and Helena joins them after. Which leaves Sofia and Stephanie in the bottom two, Sofia for her inability to master her angles and Stephanie for performing the worst the whole week, in the challenge and the photoshoot. In the end, the judges thought that both still have many things to prove and they were saved. This marks Stephanie's second time in the non-elimination bottom-two, after episode 2.
Episode 9: Beyond Comfort.
The girls relieved their stress with a jump to the pool. The next day, Joey told the girls they would each be shooting a TV commercial for Playboy fragrance. Jessica acts with no script, Stephanie did not look sexy, Kate does a creative take on her commercial and Helena impressed in front of the camera. In the end, Helena won the challenge and got the prize of a Playboy fragrance bunch and an exclusive perfume with Swarovski elements.
Reward challenge winner: Helena Chan
For the photo shoot, it was revealed that they have to do a mermaid-themed underwater shoot in a pool, wearing the creation of Filipino designer Michael Cinco. Aastha was worried about the theme since she cannot swim, while Jessica was determined to get another best photo. First to go was Kate, who Daniel complimented for her confidence. Jessica received praise from both Daniel and Aaron for following every advice and giving many different poses. Helena interpreted the shoot as being Medusa, which Daniel noted as an interesting take, but Aaron felt that her poses are not high-fashion. Aastha managed to overcome her fear of swimming, while Sofia did not fare too well though made a lucky shot. Stephanie felt a bit uneasy underwater, which stemmed from a past incident during scuba diving, in which she almost drowned. 
Jessica's determination proved right as she received her third consecutive best photo, while Sofia bounced back as the runner-up, though the judges advised her about having only one good shot. Kate's pose was deemed too athletic but landed her third, with Aastha fourth. Stephanie and Helena landed in the bottom two, for having an awkward pose and for not following the theme, respectively. In the end, Nadya gave the last photo to Stephanie. Helena first hugged her closest friend Stephanie, then she left the panel with no hugs.
Episode 10: Girls on the Move.
Helena's elimination draws mixed reactions from the remaining girls. Kate and Sofia rejoice Helena's elimination, but Stephanie and Aastha receive a note from Helena and are saddened with her leaving. At dinner, Sofia praises Jessica's photo, while Kate asks Jessica about getting awarded "Best Photo" three weeks in a row. Kate asks Jessica to teach her, but Jessica feels that she already "gives" everything to Kate. The girls get Nadya Mail, and the girls guess it will be commercial or acting. Kate feels confident because she knows that she is better than Jessica in that field.
The girls meet Joey and Sheena Seah, an international choreographer at Danz People. Sheena teaches them how to pose and how to move gracefully. Afterwards, the girls are asked to walk one by one and sit whilst exuding poise and grace. Kate feels as if she will be the best at this, but is taken by surprise with how well Jessica performed. Then, the girls meet Paula Taylor, a popular model and a well-known VJ in Thailand, and Jessica gets excited since Paula Taylor is very popular in Thailand, where she is from. Paula teaches to combine poses with facial expression to get the emotion.
The girls then arrive at Subaru, where they meet with Todd, Daniel and the executive director of Subaru, Glenn Tan. They are told that their challenge is to make a motion editorial for the Subaru XV sports utility vehicle. Daniel tells them that their motion editorial will be evaluated and taken into consideration in this week's judging panel. Each of the girls are assigned a persona to be portrayed. Sofia as a corporate business woman, Stephanie as a fashionable shopper, Jessica as a sophisticated lady of leisure. At first she does not know what that means exactly, so Daniel explains that her character is "a very rich woman who does nothing but lay by the pool, and sip champagne all day". Kate as a fun and easygoing nature lover and Aastha as glamorous partygoer. At Stephanie's taping, Daniel feels that Stephanie doesn't look like a shopper who hasn't shopped enough, but like a harassed housewife. Stephanie feels as if she's doing the best that she can do and she can't see what she's doing wrong. Daniel tries to give her more direction but Stephanie fails to interpret his feedback.
During Sofia's shoot, Todd is concerned that Sofia may not be able to make her persona, a corporate businesswoman, interesting. However when they finish, Todd feels as if she nailed it. Aastha had problems using her props (her purse wasn't opening), but after some direction from Daniel advice, she starts to look classy and sell everything. At Jessica's taping, she tries to channel Paris Hilton and Daniel is impressed with that. Impressed with her performance he only needed to give her very little direction. For her motion editorial, Kate jumps and feels the wind, sitting on the hood of the car but Todd feels as if she looked more orgasmic rather than enjoying nature.
Back at Subaru, Daniel announces that the winner of the challenge is Jessica. She gets a Subaru package and $1,000 shopping spree at Tyan Boutique at the ION Orchard. 
With Jessica always winning, Kate does not want to talk more to her anymore, while Stephanie feels bad and feels that she is the weakest of the bunch. Stephanie calls her partner and her son and expresses that she felt like giving up and got frustrated after being placed in the bottom two for two consecutive weeks and she starts to feel homesick. 
At their photo shoot, the photographer is judge Todd Anthony Tyler. The theme is about movement and passion, trying to give good poses but with strong expression in the face. Kate is very excited and starts to practice her expressions in the mirror, and Aastha is given a long, wavy wig for the shoot, but during hair and makeup Stephanie starts to feel overwhelmed and cries, saying that she feels homesick and thinks about possibly quitting the competition
At the shoot, Kate jumps and moves around the set freely, where at one point she flashes her underwear but says she does not care. Todd feels her passion for the shoot and he enjoyed shooting her, saying that there will be something good in her film once he edits it. Sofia got good feedback but Todd felt as if she was limiting herself to one space. Aastha complained that her dress and hair were hard to work with and Daniel told her that her poses were good, but her face hasn't changed since the first shot. When she asks if the wig could be taken off, Daniel agrees to take it off and she continues her photo in her real hair. Daniel says she performed better, but her face was still blank. Jessica looked passionate from the beginning and used all her space, jumping and giving good facial expressions. Todd did not expect that and was impressed. Stephanie was feeling bad before the shoot but Daniel tells her that she shouldn't let that affect her shoot and she did well but Todd said she needed more fire in her eyes and that her passion wasn't showing even though he was sure she has that deep inside.
At panel, they were first judged for their motion editorials. Sofia, Jessica and Aastha received praise for giving convincing commercials. Kate was told by Daniel that she looked as if she was "high on magic mushrooms" but was praised for giving energy, albeit it being the wrong type of energy. When asked about how she was feeling, Stephanie told the judges that she was feeling better compared to last week, and was advised by Nadya to just keep pushing harder. However, her motion editorial was criticized by Todd for being boring. 
When they started judging the photos, Kate's and Jessica's photos were recognized as the most passionate. Sofia's and Stephanie's shots were generally well-received, but were still chastised for lacking the passion and energy that Kate and Jessica showed in their pictures. Aastha was criticized for her demeanor at panel and on set and for her photo that, although had a great pose, her face was still blank. As the judges were deliberating they noticed a dichotomy in the shots, "the girls who were passionate and gave their all" (Jessica and Kate) and "the girls who posed well and looked beautiful" (Sofia, Stephanie and Aastha), the judges liked Jessica's and Kate's pictures equally, as with Stephanie's and Sofia's but Todd felt that he received a better vibe from Stephanie's.
The girls were called back and Jessica receives her fourth consecutive first call-out. She was then followed by Kate, and Sofia was called third. Stephanie lands in the bottom two for the fourth time with Aastha. Stephanie was castigated for always playing it safe and while the judges were glad to see her make progress, they were concerned if she would be able to catch up with the other girls. Aastha was called an exotic beauty but was chided for her attitude. In the end, Aastha was sent home because of her lack of confidence and for not showing much enthusiasm despite a stellar portfolio.
Episode 11: The Story So Far - The Road To Top 4.
As seen on other Top Model competitions, this cycle features a recap episode where it shows a flashback of the moments that happened the entire season. Especially Kate's attitude that exudes the great personality among other girls in the competition. The episode has shown five sets of never-before-seen footage which includes Monica's playful character as she made fun of the girls when she looked like a clown. It also shows how the girls called their loved ones. Jessica's talk with her boyfriend made her strong and fight, Helena missed her boyfriend and cried over the phone, and Kate's hilarious conversation with her boyfriend was the highlight of the recap episode.
In episode 8, after Helena's alleged panic attack, she was then visited by model mentor Joey Mead King who she gave a shoulder to cry on. In episode 9, Helena also entertained the girls by reenacting the judges. Meanwhile in episode 10, Joey gives a surprise by serving first class meal by celebrity chef, Emmanuel Stroobant. Joey shared her stories and experiences during their dinner.
When the episode came to its close, Daniel visited the Top 4 girls and gave advice and tips about how the girls should dress for casting. Kate had a feeling that Daniel had a secret, and she guessed that they would be going somewhere. She was very confident about that. Kate expected to see herself on London's streets. As the show closed, the girls were left with a surprise box and it showed that they are all beaming with happiness. In the next episode, it is expected that the final four girls will go to Hong Kong for their next shoot as they all take their high fashion profiles to the next level.
Episode 12.
Kate and Sofia were eager to break Jessica's best photo record. Aastha left a letter and told Kate that she sometimes annoy people. Kate was surprised and asked Sofia if it was true and Sofia reluctantly said 'sometimes'. Stephanie and Jessica who were there as well kept quiet. Kate who was very upset simply ignored Sofia. The girls then found out that they are going to Hong Kong. Best photo last week, Jessica receives a spa treatment as a bonus. Kate declined Sofia's invitation to try the Jacuzzi, since she still felt upset about what she had said earlier. 
Later on, Nadya brought a special guest star, the model Cara Grogan to give the girls some tips. Then they are introduced to their challenge, which is to attend go-sees around Hong Kong. Jessica impresses most of the clients, Stephanie excels only at the runway-based castings, Kate often gets noted for her over-the-top personality. One of the clients was impressed with Sofia but she didn't get the booking because her height was above 180cm. In the end, Jessica won the challenge by booking three of the castings, and won a two-night stay at Hotel Mira. Stephanie and Kate both book two castings while Sofia, the one arguably looking like a model the most, booked none.
Nadya told Sofia that she should not worry about not booking any jobs, because she may not be suitable for the ads or campaign that those particular clients were looking for. Sofia said that she understand that but it was very obvious that she was very disappointed with herself. As a bonus, Nadya treats the girls for a night-out in Hong Kong, where they enjoy themselves by cruising around, and having a great time together.
The photo shoot is next, it's about 1920-inspired modern Chinese screen goddesses in the streets of Hong Kong. Akif Hakan returned as their photographer after having previously taken their pictures for the Chinese Zodiac shoot in Episode 3. Jessica manages to own the streets even though it's quite crowded. Stephanie is the exact opposite, she falls flat even though there are barely any people on her set. Kate's arms start to go crazy but then she hold a pole with one hand and swings the dress with another, and making it work. Sofia has a very hard time on set mainly because of her dress was too long and hit the floor making her very hard to pose especially when the dress was very tight and so she failed to impress.
At judging the judges are all equally pleased by the girls' photos and congratulate Jessica for booking the most jobs. Kate's photo is universally praised and she's announced as the first finalist. Jessica shortly followed Kate, leaving Stephanie and Sofia facing the bottom two together for the second time. The two male judges preferred Sofia while both the female judges liked Stephanie's photo. Stephanie was once again saved and was chosen as the third finalist for her hidden potential the judges seemed to see. Despite having a stronger portfolio, Sofia was eliminated for not being able to book a single job and having the arguably weakest photo. Stephanie made an all-time record in the Top Model franchise by surviving a total of five bottom two appearances before the finale.
Episode 13.
The final three did a commercial for Canon IXUS, and a shoot for Harper's Bazaar Singapore. 
Kate is first. Nadya makes sure that Kate follows the brief. Kate follows the brief, but she looks nervous and she needs to be more fun. In the end, she shows more energy. Jessica says her line for a few times, but it ends good. Nadya thinks that her commercial is tiny bit posey. Stephanie forgets her line all the time and she looks trying to remember her line. In the end, Nadya likes Stephanie's smize and she is the most calm among the girls.
The girls have their own runway show in the house with weird outfit. The girls received their Nadya Mail as they will prepare for the next photo shoot in Harper's Bazaar Singapore. The girls talk about their own improvement during this competition. Kate admits that she wanted to be singer or dancer, but people around her asked her to shut up. Stephanie says that Kate should be an actress. Jessica also admits that she wants to be Hollywood star. She does not care if she is rejected as long as she tries. Jessica becomes insecure about her age because she is the oldest girl in the bunch.
The girls meet Daniel Boey and Kenneth Goh, fashion director of Harper's Bazaar. Kenneth also appeared in episode 2. He is the one with hilarious comment. Joey is also there, but she is in different room with Joe (Jessica's boyfriend), Kim (Stephanie's boyfriend) and Inan (Kate's brother).
Stephanie is nervous because her photoshoot with Kenneth went bad. Jessica worries about the competition, she worries if she will not win the competition and she needs to start again from the bottom. Kate becomes more nervous because she sees Jessica cries.
Kate's dress is too tight. She can not give much variation on her poses, but Kate starts to get better. Kenneth realizes that Kate tries so hard. After the photoshoot, Kate meets Joey and was surprised when Inan, Kate's brother is there. They both talk in Portuguese. Joey also tells Kate that Inan cried when he was watching her photoshoot. Kate does not expect that because her brother is in Brazil.
Stephanie does not work well with her outfit. She does not make Chanel gown looks expensive. After the photoshoot, she comes to Joey and cries because her photoshoot does not go well. Mir Kim, Stephanie's boyfriend is also there. Her boyfriend makes her calm and shows her pictures of her child which made her calm and focus the competition.
Jessica feels better after she cries. She becomes focus. Joey and her boyfriend, Joe Pao-In feel her focus. Kenneth thinks that she gives the right curve for Harper's Bazaar. She gives S curve that Harper's Bazaar looking for. She also make her outfit looks very expensive. After the photoshoot, she cries when she meets Joey because she is happy. She cries harder after she sees her boyfriend. Her boyfriend gives her a bracelet as a present.
The girls were met again with Daniel as he reveal that the girls would walk in a final runway show. They get surprise visit from friends and relative during photo shoot. At the fashion show, they are joined by eliminated contestants Trang, Sofia, Aastha, Filantropi, Kyla, Helena and America's Next Top Model, Cycle 18 winner Sophie Sumner.
Kate asks for advice from Sophie in the backstage. Kate finds her similarity in Sophie because both of them are crazy and Kate believes that they will be even more similar if Kate wins the title. Tyra Banks appeared in the show and she opens the runway with her short speech. 
After the runway, the girls meet Nadya and Tyra. Tyra notices that they have different kind of walk. Stephanie's is pure, like a baby, Jessica's is more sultry, while Kate's looks like she is skating. Tyra asks about their age and she notices that Jessica wass the oldest girl. Tyra also sees Kate's excitement to win this competition.
Stephanie was called first to be deliberated. Tyra thinks that her runway walk was spectacular. She gives sass and sweet walk, but she does not have to go with the beat of the music. Marina was very impressed with her walk. In her commercial, Nadya thinks that she is likeable and approachable. Todd is surprised with her line and he thinks that she did a good job and improved immensely throughout the competition. For the photoshoot, Nadya tells that her photo needs to be cropped. Kenneth explains more about the cropping. Tyra gives advice that she should model H2T from head to toe and loves the spark in her eyes.
Tyra does not like Kate's walk, but she does not hate it either. Nadya says that she is a roller skate Kate now. Kenneth feels her improvement. For her commercial, Marina thinks that her commercial is not believable. Todd does not see crazy Kate in the commercial. Nadya thinks her photo is beautiful but it is not high fashion. Tyra likes that every part of her body doing something.
Nadya thinks Jessica's walk is dramatic. Marina feels that she is one her favorite. In her commercial, Nadya likes how she pays attention in every word and she feels her line. Kenneth thinks that she is likeable and it will be huge selling point that can sell anything. Nadya loves the shape and her expression in the cover. Tyra loves her strong body, but she wants to see more sparkle in her eyes. Kenneth thinks that she did superbly well and the outfit looks million bucks. 
During deliberation, Tyra Banks together with Nadya, Todd Anthony and the guest judges considered who should be the first ever Asia's Next Top Model. They were unsure if Jessica can do it since she's old, despite a great portfolio. They compared Jessica for being the verb definition of a model, and Stephanie for being the noun definition of a model. Ultimately, being the only contestant in the series to have never been in the bottom two, Jessica was revealed to be the first winner of the competition.
