Spring Breakers is a 2012 American comedy-drama film written and directed by Harmony Korine, starring James Franco, Selena Gomez, Vanessa Hudgens, Ashley Benson, and Rachel Korine. The film follows four college-aged girls who decide to rob a fast food restaurant in order to pay for their spring break.
The film was selected to compete for the Golden Lion at the 69th Venice International Film Festival.
Plot.
Faith, Candy, Brit, and Cotty have been best friends since grade school. They live together in a college dorm and want to go on an adventure. Wishing to go to Florida for their vacation but lacking funds for it, they decide to rob a restaurant to finance their trip. While in Florida, they are arrested at a party for drugs and land in jail. A drug and arms dealer named Alien bails them out in order to hire them to do some prostitution work for him.
Production.
According to Harmony Korine, he wrote the film partially to make up for his own spring breaks, as he had been fully devoted to skateboarding, and therefore missed out on what he saw as opportunities for hedonistic pursuits. The original lineup for the lead girls were Selena Gomez, Vanessa Hudgens, Rachel Korine, and Emma Roberts. Rachel Korine was the first to be confirmed in the project. Roberts dropped out in early 2012 due to "creative differences that couldn't be resolved." Director Korine had purposely collected a group of well-known young actresses with a similar reputation to Roberts in Hollywood.
James Franco's character in the film is based on underground rap artist Dangeruss. There was much speculation that his character was based around another rap artist by the name of Riff Raff. Speaking to the "GQ" magazine in May 2012, Franco said: "Of course Harmony and I looked at some of Riff Raff's videos as inspiration, but he was one of a number of people we looked at. I would say the biggest influence on the role was this local Florida rapper named Dangeruss. He's fairly unknown, but he was down there in the place, living the life, and he became the biggest model for me and he's in the movie." The film was shot in March and April 2012 in and around St. Petersburg, Florida. Skrillex has been confirmed to be producing the score for the film.
Release.
A three-minute preview of "Spring Breakers" was released at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival in May 2012. The entire film premiered at the 69th Venice International Film Festival on September 4, 2012. The film will be released in New York and Los Angeles on March 11, 2013. The film will be released worldwide on March 22, 2013. The film is set to be released in the UK on April 5, 2013.
Reception.
The film has received mixed to negative feedback from critics. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives a score of 58% "rotten" based on reviews from 12 critics, with a rating average of 5.9 out of 10.
Xan Brooks of "The Guardian" said the film is Korine's "most fully realised, purely satisfying feature film since "Gummo"." Emma Seligman of "The Huffington Post" described the film as ""Scarface" meets Britney Spears." Guy Lodge of "Variety" gave it a negative review saying, "this attractively fizzy pic may be a shock to the system for fans of teen queens Selena Gomez and Vanessa Hudgens, but remains pretty toothless titillation by its writer-helmer's standards." David Rooney of "The Hollywood Reporter" noted that James Franco gives one of his more bizarre performances in his unpredictable career, saying "he's a cross between Bo Derek in "10" and Richard Kiel in "Moonraker"."
