Travis Landon Barker (born November 14, 1975) is an American musician, producer and entrepreneur, most noted as the drummer for the American rock band Blink-182. Barker has also performed as a frequent collaborator with hip-hop artists, and with the alternative rock band +44, the rap rock group The Transplants, and the alternative rock band Box Car Racer. He was a frequent collaborator with the late DJ AM, and together they formed TRV$DJAM. 
After the split of his first band, Feeble, Barker began playing for The Aquabats in 1996 as The Baron Von Tito. He recorded one album with them, "The Fury of The Aquabats!", in 1997. His career took off when he joined up with Blink-182 in 1998. Barker has since established himself as a versatile drummer, producing and making guest appearances in music projects of numerous music genres including hip hop, alternative rock, pop and country. He has gained significant acceptance within the hip-hop community in particular and often collaborates with artists to compose rock-tinged remixes to their songs. Barker collaborated with artists (including Game, Yelawolf, Tom Morello, Corey Taylor, Slaughterhouse, Raekwon, RZA, Slash, and other musicians) for his solo debut album, "Give the Drummer Some", which was released on March 15, 2011.
Aside from drumming, he founded clothing company Famous Stars and Straps in 1999 and LaSalle Records in 2004. Companies such as DC Shoes and Zildjian cymbals have co-designed products in his name. "Rolling Stone" referred to him as "punk's first superstar drummer."
Life and career.
Early life.
Travis Barker was born to Randy and Gloria Barker in Fontana, California. His father worked as a mechanic and his mother babysat. When Barker was four, his mother gave him his first kit, which was the only one he would have until he was fifteen. Barker began taking drum lessons at age five with a drummer named Thomas Hogan, who would expose young Barker to many different playing styles. At this time, he also began taking trumpet lessons. In junior high, Barker learned to play the piano and briefly tried singing, joining the madrigals men and women's choir. In addition, Barker had non-musical aspirations; he also was interested in becoming a professional surfer and skateboarder. However, Barker states that "I always migrated back to drums, though. That was the one direction that kind of felt like I was connected to and I could kind of understand. I could express myself better through my drums than I could anything else."
His mother, who had been diagnosed with cancer three months earlier, died the day before he started going to high school. She told him to keep playing music and to follow his dreams. Barker attended Fontana High School, where he played in the jazz ensemble and marching band. He gained a lot of experience performing at regional competitions and festivals. During his senior year, he passed up drum corps tryouts to tour with a rock band. Barker did go back to drum corps for his age out year in 1996, to audition with the Blue Devils Drum and Bugle Corps, but was ultimately cut and did not march. Barker was much-enamoured of a variety of styles including military and jazz rhythms, but was most taken by the driving rhythms of hip-hop and punk rock.
Musical beginnings.
After high school, Barker worked as a trash man in Laguna Beach and played with bands Snot, and later, Feeble, a Fontana-based band where he met Chad Larson. Larson went on to co-found the ska punk group The Aquabats in 1994. After local shows and demo tapes, the band recruited Barker through Larson's connection. Barker, who was "sleeping on friend's couch" and still working as a trash man, only intended to fill-in for a few days but ended up joining the band. The group then went into the studio with veteran producer Jim Goodwin to record "The Fury of the Aquabats!". Barker's speed and accuracy meant that once his parts were recorded he was free to head off and rehearse (and sit in with other bands). He'd picked up a nickname with The Aquabats—Baron Von Tito—the reasons for which are lost to history as none of the members recall why.
After the October 1997 release of "The Fury of the Aquabats!", the group toured nationwide with San Diego-based Blink-182, who had recently completed their sophomore effort "Dude Ranch". The exhausting touring schedule began to take a toll on Blink-182 and tensions flared. The trio's drummer, Scott Raynor, announced to his fellow members that he would depart following the SnoCore Tour in February 1998. For many shows during a short mini-tour across the West Coast, the ensemble enlisted Barker to fill in for Raynor. Barker, who had not had time to prepare or practice with the duo, learned the drum tracks for the 20-song setlist in only 45 minutes before the first show and performed them flawlessly thereafter. Raynor returned in May but arguments only grew worse. Raynor had suffered a tragic loss throughout the year and was drinking heavily. In addition, he was still unhappy with the band's decision to sign to MCA Records over Epitaph Records. Bassist Mark Hoppus and guitarist Tom DeLonge presented an ultimatum—quit drinking and go to an in-patient rehab or be fired—and although Raynor agreed, he was fired regardless. 
Faced with a huge amount of summer tour dates and a new album in the planning stages, they recruited Barker once more. "I remember Travis rehearsing backstage for an hour or two, them playing with them during sound-check," recalled Aquabats member Adam Deibert. "A few of us were standing by the stage and I vividly remember the feeling of "this is the new Blink". We should have looked for a new drummer right then because it was so obvious what band he belonged in." The addition of Barker inspired DeLonge and Hoppus to "play better" and keep up with their new member, whom DeLonge called "perfect." Barker continued playing with Blink-182 throughout 1998 and stepped in to play with The Vandals, where he filled in for Josh Freese as the year closed.
MCA gave the band its first professional recording budget, and the trio returned to DML Studios in San Diego to write their follow-up. Barker would drive down each day from Riverside to take part in the writing process. When the band completed writing and recording demos for the songs, the three headed to Los Angeles to record drum tracks at Chick Corea's Mad Hatter Studios in January 1999, and Barker completed the tracks in only a few days. Producer Jerry Finn worked with the trio on these sessions, who polished the recordings and helped the band hone its sound. The result—"Enema of the State"—was released in June 1999 and catapulted the trio to stardom, becoming the biggest pop punk band of the era. Three singles were released from the record—"What's My Age Again?", "All the Small Things", and "Adam's Song"—that crossed over into Top 40 radio format and experienced major commercial success. "All the Small Things" became a number-one hit on the Modern Rock Tracks chart, but also became a crossover hit and peaked at number 6 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. Its video parodied boy bands and pop music videos and won a Moon Man for Best Group Video at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards. The album has sold over 15 million copies worldwide and had a considerable effect on pop punk music. The band began its first arena tour in the fall of 1999. The band also had a cameo appearance in "American Pie" (1999), although Barker was mistakenly credited as Scott Raynor.
Mainstream success.
The band's success did great things for Barker. "Four years ago, I couldn’t afford to feed myself," he said. "But now I can buy art, work on old Cadillacs, and live in comfort. I can finally buy a dog and afford to feed him." He began dating Melissa Kennedy and purchased a rehearsal studio. Barker branched out into retail at this time, opening a store in Riverside called Famous Stars and Straps. The storefront was shut down by the city, but FSAS products began to be carried by other retailers and via the Internet. Barker also began offering drum lessons and added Guitar Center drum clinics to his list of activities. Meanwhile, Blink-182 was forced to postpone remaining dates of a spring European tour in 2000 when both DeLonge and Barker came down with strep throat. The band played to sold-out audiences and performed worldwide during the summer of 2000 on the Mark, Tom and Travis Show tour. During the tour, he and Kennedy took a taxi to a Taco Bell on an "off" day in Cuyahoga Falls, Ohio. Two men aggressively began flirting with Kennedy, and Barker was involved in an altercation, toppling his larger assailant. One of the blows he landed on the guy’s face broke Barker’s right pinkie, a hairline fracture. "That guy was way bigger and older than me," Barker cracked in an interview with "Rolling Stone", who gave the trio a cover story in August 2000. "Ohio’s not that tough." Damon DeLaPaz, guitarist of Fenix TX, stepped in on drums for Barker.
Blink-182's next effort, "Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" (2001), was greeted with immediate success, debuting at number one on the "Billboard" 200 and going triple platinum within three weeks (the record eventually sold in excess of 14 million copies worldwide). In 2001, Barker married Melissa Kennedy. Following a cancelled European tour, DeLonge went back to San Diego to record an album he deemed an experiment in ideas he felt weren't suited to Blink-182. DeLonge, not wanting to pay for a studio drummer, simply asked Barker to step in and perform on the record, called "Box Car Racer". The experiment became a full-time band and toured in 2002, which led to strained relations between DeLonge and Hoppus. Hoppus was very interested in being a part of the project, but DeLonge did not want the record to turn into another Blink-182 album. Regardless, Hoppus felt betrayed on the side project and it would become an unresolved tension that followed the band for the following few years. Barker and Kennedy divorced in August 2002 after nine months of marriage. 
Through a connection with Jerry Finn, Rancid vocalist Tim Armstrong contacted Barker in the summer of 2002 to record tracks for a rap/rock collaboration called the Transplants. Armstrong, who lived in a residential part of Los Angeles, had a gentlemen's agreement with neighbors that he would cut off any "super-loud" sounds by the time they arrived home from work at 5pm. Barker set up his drums by 11am and cut the drums for nearly the entire Transplants record—over fourteen tracks—in one sitting. Barker also sat in with Dave Carlock's band The Distillers for summer tour dates as well. For his role on the "Transplants" record, "Rolling Stone" called Barker "punk rock's first superstar drummer." Barker had also remained busy, appearing in the Puff Daddy video for "Bad Boy for Life," as well as adding to his collection of vintage Cadillacs.
In January 2003, Blink-182 began recording their fifth album, ditching their typical previous recording process (writing and demoing several songs and recording them in a studio one instrument at a time), and instead moving into a house and approaching each song together. The home was rented and located near San Diego, and converted into a studio. The band "attacked" each song and worked on three-four songs per day, simply moving on to the next one when feeling "burned out" on a track. Barker left that spring to tour with Transplants, leaving the band with a variety of drum tracks to listen to while he was gone. Shortly before the album's completion, Barker's girlfriend, ex-Miss USA Shanna Moakler, gave birth to his first son, Landon Asher, in October 2003. The following month, the band's eponymous fifth studio album was released, and lead singles "Feeling This" and "I Miss You" charted high. Critical reviews were positive, but fans were split regarding the band's more "mature" direction.
The Kinison, who supported Blink-182 on their tour dates, impressed Barker and were the first group signed to LaSalle Records, the label Barker officially set up in 2004. LaSalle was named after Barker's favorite Cadillac, and the label was designed to branch out to find all types of music, be it country or hip-hop. Barker met once a week with designers at Famous Stars and Straps to oversee designs for shoes and in his spare time picked up boxing. He also became engaged to Moakler at the begnning of the new year. He injured his foot at a Melbourne, Australia show in 2004 but performed the next night using his left room for the kick-drum; he was in so much pain afterward that the tour had to be cancelled. Barker's doctor informed him that not only did he break his foot, but he tore tendons and ligaments—described by Hoppus as "the type of injury that people get in motorcycle accidents." In the meantime, Barker purchased a Wahoo's Fish Taco franchise in Norco, California, and began work on a new Transplants record. The year for Blink-182 rounded off with a European tour that was soured by division in the band. In February 2005, the band issued a press statement announcing their "indefinite hiatus." The band had broken up after arguments regarding their future and recording process. DeLonge desired to work only at his San Diego home and record his contributions there. Unresolved feelings from the Box Car Racer side project emerged too, creating rifts.
Reality television star and collaborations.
After a "Nightmare Before Christmas"-inspired wedding in October 2004, Barker starred in the MTV reality series "Meet the Barkers" with Shanna Moakler. The series followed Barker and his new family through his daily life, including Blink-182's final tour and the new Transplants album. The new Transplants record, "Haunted Cities", was completed in the aftermath of the Blink-182 "hiatus" and released that summer. Meanwhile, Hoppus and Barker continued recording music together and began working on electronic demos in Barker's basement and Hoppus' dining room, which they called +44. The project was put on hold due to Barker's Warped Tour commitments that summer. Barker began another new project in 2005 called Expensive Taste, featuring Paul Wall and Skinhead Rob—the project would be more traditionally hip-hop. Barker also turned his direction to producing, working with artists such as Bun B and T.I..
The +44 project came to a turning point when Hoppus and Barker purchased their own studio in October 2005, named Opra Music. From there, the electronic demos turned into a full band, and the group began recording in earnest in February 2006. "When Your Heart Stops Beating", the debut of +44, was greeted by less-than-stellar reviews and little commercial success. Barker filed for divorce from Moakler that August; both used their MySpace blogs to comment on the situation. Their breakup and the drama surrounding it made them tabloid favorites. After he and Moakler split up in 2006, he was frequently spotted at nightclubs—and photographed necking with Paris Hilton. Trying to blot out the guilt of giving his children a broken home, he consumed "excessive amounts" of prescription painkillers, marijuana and alcohol. The painkiller usage eventually developed into a full-fledged addiction over 2007.
+44 embarked on a promotional tour of the United Kingom directly after filming the music video for lead single "When Your Heart Stops Beating". Barker was in constant pain after performing night after night, even after altering his kit to accommodate. Doctors informed Barker he had in fact broken a bone in his arm during the video shoot, and was informed to immediately rest and not take part in any future live dates. Despite this, Barker soldiered on, performing with one arm ("Def Leppard style," confirmed Hoppus). In early 2007, Barker began to work on hip-hop remixes and production techniques for many artists, preparing some loops and beats for Juelz Santana and looking to open two new boutiques, one in Los Angeles name Fast Life and one in Venice Beach by the name of Rogue Status. He also kept busy drumming for Idiot Pilot ("Elephant") and The Federation ("Black Roses"), as well as creating well-received remixes of Rihanna's "Umbrella" and "Crank That (Soulja Boy)". After a stint on the Honda Civic Tour with Fall Out Boy and Cobra Starship, +44 began work on a second studio album that October.
Barker continued releasing hip-hop remixes in 2008; a well-received remix of Flo Rida's "Low" followed the "Crank That" rendition. The videos of Barker playing the revamped tracks grew heavily in popularity on YouTube. Barker hoped to collate his growing arsenal of remixes with a bunch of new tracks on which he was working. It began to germinate into the idea of making a solo album, producing it all himself. As 2008 wore on, it became evident that the project would supersede +44 for the immediate future, though the band would return, by all accounts, once everything was in place for the solo record. Guests who recorded with Barker included Young Dro, E-40, Willie Nelson and Damian Marley. He began performing with DJ AM (Adam Goldstein) in June 2008 in a collaboration called TRV$DJAM. Essentially, DJ AM would mix a set of classic songs (which ranged from classic rock to dance) live with two turntables, then Barker would "enhance AM's groove" with live drums. The duo performed at the MTV Video Music Awards on September 7. "Our little duo of drummer and DJ reached heights we never thought were possible," said Barker in a 2011 interview.
Plane crash.
On September 19, 2008, TRV$DJAM performed at an event with Jane's Addiction singer Perry Farrell, Gavin DeGraw in Columbia, South Carolina. The trip was a special occasion: "We all thought it was kind of a treat - we were on a private plane," Barker said. Barker had invited his ex-wife Moakler, but she declined, saying she had a weird feeling about leaving the kids. With a vacant seat, Barker invited his security guard Che Still, ﬁguring he'd be good company and would enjoy the trip. Barker was always afraid to fly; in his teenage years, he was "sure" he would die in a plane crash. When Blink-182 were putting together artwork for "Take Off Your Pants and Jacket" in 2001, they created a "Zoso-like" icon for each band member: a jacket, a pair of pants and an airplane. "Please don't give me the plane - I have a really fucked-up fear of flying," Barker begged, who ended up with the plane anyway.
Just before midnight, the plane, headed for Van Nuys, California, was racing down the runway when the occupants heard a loud bang. According to the Federal Aviation Administration, the plane was departing the airport when air traffic controllers saw sparks emanating from the plane. The pilots told the control tower that a tire had blown out and they would be aborting the take-off. Instead, the plane hurtled through the airport’s fence, across a highway and crashed into an embankment. “When everything stopped, I tried to get everyone I could," Barker remembered. Barker and Goldstein escaped the plane and ran in circles on the highway. Hearing others yell, "Stop, drop and roll," Barker dropped to the ground and Goldstein helped him put out the ﬁre on his feet. "I was lying next to AM as the plane was exploding, and I was screaming, ‘Are we alive?'" Barker and DJ AM were transported to the Joseph M. Still Burn Center in Augusta, Georgia, where they were both listed in critical condition. They were the only survivors of the crash; personal assistant Chris Baker and Che Still, along with the two pilots, had died in the crash.
Barker spent more than 11 weeks in hospitals and burn centers. Addled by medications, Barker asked how Baker and Still were doing for two months, never remembering the answer. Barker had 16 surgeries: blood transfusions that lasted 4-8 hours and numerous skin grafts. "There were times when they were talking about amputating my foot because I didn't have enough skin on my body for my grafts,” he said. Barker also developed post-traumatic stress disorder, made worse by the intense guilt he felt knowing Still wasn't supposed to be on the plane. On September 21, Dr. Fred Mullins, medical director of the Burn Center reported that Barker sustained second and third degree burns on his lower body and torso and was expected to fully recover within a year. Barker stopped his vegetarian diet and began eating meat to increase his protein intake and possibly speed up healing of his burns. Barker recovered from the incident, enabling him to return to the recording studio in November 2008. On his first television interview since the crash, he said to MTV, "I'm already playing my drums again, and I'm already back in the studio". He elaborated by stating that the return to the studio "was like riding a bike. It was really exciting to know I still have my chops. It still felt good... I still can make it around the kit. Everything felt right, so I'm thankful to be able to play."
During the ordeal, fellow +44 member Hoppus was woken up by a phone call telling him Barker’s plane had crashed. "I jumped out of bed and got on the next ﬂight to the burn center," he remembered. "You feel helpless to do anything other than be there for your friend." Boarding a plane at an airport the next morning, DeLonge saw the shocking news on the terminal’s TV screens. When he landed, he mailed a letter and two photographs to Barker: a photo of Blink aboard a submarine in the Middle East and another of himself and his two kids. "One was 'Do you remember who we were?' and the other was 'This is who I am now,' " DeLonge says. "It was a good moment to put the shit aside." Barker called DeLonge from the hospital. "He’s cracking jokes,” Barker remembered. "I called Mark and told him, 'Tom's the same dude we used to know.'" After a two-hour phone conversation between DeLonge and Hoppus, an arrangement was made for the trio to meet up at Hoppus and Barker's Los Angeles studio in October 2008. DeLonge was the first to approach the subject of reuniting. The trio had, in Hoppus's words, "two gnarly heart-to-hearts," during which the three opened up. "Tom had just kind of come out to Los Angeles for the day," recalled Hoppus, "I remember he said, 'So, what do you guys think? Where are your heads at?' And I said, 'I think we should continue with what we've been doing for the past 17 years. I think we should get back on the road and back in the studio and do what we love doing.'"
Barker sued the plane's owners, Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., and an airplane maintenance company on November 21, 2008. He sought more than $25,000 in damages "for pain and suffering, disfigurement, loss of earnings, and medical and legal expenses", claiming that the companies had "improperly operated and maintained the Learjet". The lawsuit claims the Learjet's pilots were "improperly trained and should have tried to take off rather than continue down the runway." The mother of Barker's bodyguard, Charles Monroe Still Jr., who was killed in the crash, joined the lawsuit. She sued the companies for "damages including grief and sorrow, funeral expenses and loss of earnings." The court case was settled in December 2009, with lawyer William L. Robinson, who represented some of the companies, saying the terms of the settlement are confidential.
Reformation of Blink-182 and solo work.
Eventually, Blink-182 appeared for the first time on stage together in nearly five years as presenters at the February 2009 Grammy Awards. The band's official website was updated with a statement: "To put it simply, We're back. We mean, really back. Picking up where we left off and then some. In the studio writing and recording a new album. Preparing to tour the world yet again. Friendships reformed. 17 years deep in our legacy." Barker continued to produce remixes throughout 2009, including a remix of "3 a.m." by Eminem; he also collaborated with ex-Guns N' Roses guitarist Slash. In the midst of the band's reunion tour in August 2009, DJ AM was found dead by a friend in his New York apartment. Though Goldstein had been prescribed medication for pain following the crash, the medical examiner reported that he died from "acute intoxication" listing several prescription drugs and cocaine.The following night's Hartford, Connecticut show was difficult for the band; as the band played "Down" in tribute, the three began crying. Subsequent dates were rescheduled over the next week in order to allow the news to sink in.
The crash led Barker to make some lifestyle changes; as of 2011, he now runs and swims each day, eats well and has gone vegan since leaving the hospital. He has also overcome a painkiller addiction he had for years prior to the plane crash. "I didn't even take any pain medication after I got out of the hospital. They told me I'd be on some of the medicine for the rest of my life, but I got off all of them," said Barker. "They made me a completely different person." The recording process for "Neighborhoods", the band's sixth studio album, was stalled by their studio autonomy, tours, managers, and personal projects. DeLonge recorded at his studio in San Diego while Hoppus and Barker recorded in Los Angeles. In addition, Barker's completion of his solo album stood in the way. After more than two years of setbacks and delays, Barker finally released his long-in-the-works solo debut, "Give the Drummer Some", in March 2011. The record features collaborations with artists from Lil Wayne to Slipknot's Corey Taylor. "Neighborhoods", likewise, was released in September 2011 and peaked at number two on the "Billboard" 200.
As of late, Barker has continued his collaborations, working with Chester French, LL Cool J, Cypress Hill and producing an entire EP of collaboration, "Psycho White", with rapper Yelawolf. Blink-182 split from Interscope Records in 2012 and recorded "Dogs Eating Dogs", an EP of new material. Barker, who still suffers a fear of flying, will be unable to attend Blink-182's Australian tour in 2013; Brooks Wackerman (Bad Religion, Tenacious D) will fill-in for him.
Business ventures.
Barker owns and contributes to several businesses in addition to his musical interests. He founded an accessory/apparel company called Famous Stars and Straps in 1999, which sells street/skate style clothing and gear. Barker has said the brand's trademark "F" for the logo was chosen for its resemblance to a car logo but mainly for the fact that it can stand on its own. Barker is also business partners with famous skateboarder Rob Dyrdek and together they are part of the team that own the clothing label named Rogue Status, and in 2009 another label called DTA.
He co-founded LaSalle Records, a record company to which his band, Transplants, are signed. He has dabbled in the restaurant industry, opening a Wahoo's Fish Taco restaurant in Norco, California.
Barker has developed a shoe for DC Shoe Company called the "Alias Remix" and also endorses both Orange County Drum and Percussion as well as Zildjian. He also has his own line of drumming products, sponsored by Zildjian.
Personal life.
Relationships.
Barker's first marriage, to Melissa Kennedy, lasted nine months until he filed for divorce in August 2002. Barker later married actress and First Runner Up Miss USA 1995 Shanna Moakler on October 30, 2004. The couple had a Gothic-style ceremony inspired by the Tim Burton film "The Nightmare Before Christmas" which was held on the eve of Halloween. Barker and Moakler have two children together, Landon Asher (born October 9, 2003) and Alabama Luella (born December 24, 2005). Atiana Cecilia de la Hoya (born March 29, 1999) is Moakler's daughter with former boyfriend Oscar de la Hoya. The family appeared in a reality television series, "Meet the Barkers", which aired on MTV from 2005 to 2006.
On August 8, 2006, Barker filed for divorce from Moakler after nearly two years of marriage. The couple's divorce was made public as each used their MySpace pages to air their feelings on the matter. Despite their pending divorce, reports surfaced in early 2007 that Barker and Moakler were "quietly trying to give it another go" as they were reportedly seen autographing a fan's book, with a heart around their names. In March 2007, Moakler revealed to "People" magazine that she and Barker (still married) were back together, but denied that she was pregnant. This admission came after the couple were publicly affectionate at a surprise birthday Barker threw for his wife in Miami. People.com later reported that the couple had separated again. No reason was given for the split. Barker and Moakler were seen together at the 2007 Video Music Awards kissing and holding hands. However, as of February 11, 2008, the couple's divorce had been finalized.
Barker and Moakler were together during a DJ set Barker was playing with DJ AM in Las Vegas on January 7, 2009. The couple attempted to rekindle their relationship in early 2009 but announced that they were no longer together on April 1, 2009, amid reports that police had been called to their home after a fight; no charges were filed against either party.
Equipment.
Barker is currently sponsored by Orange County Drum and Percussion and Zildjian.
Film and television.
Travis has appeared in numerous films and television shows, most notably his own reality show, "Meet the Barkers", with his ex-wife Shanna Moakler, which debuted in 2005. However, Barker can be found in a brief scene with Blink-182 in the teen movie, "American Pie". In 2003, he appeared in an episode of MTV's "Punk'd", a "Candid Camera"-esque television show, in which he took part in a set-up bareknuckle boxing match; he also appeared and spoke alongside Linkin Park-vocalist Chester Bennington on MTV's "Icon" show honoring heavy metal band Metallica in May of that year.
In 2006 Barker starred in a Boost Mobile commercial, which was detailed in an episode of "Meet the Barkers". He's also played a few guest starring roles such as a rapper on the popular crime drama, "". In 2001, he appeared with Mark Hoppus and Tom DeLonge in the skit "Leave it to Blink-182", a parody of "Leave It to Beaver", on the late night TV show MADtv.
In a slight departure from his usual genres, he made an appearance on the 41st annual CMA Awards in 2006, performing a medley of songs by country icon Buck Owens with a group of artists including Dwight Yoakam, ZZ Top guitarist Billy Gibbons, and former Byrds bass player Chris Hillman.
Videos.
In addition to his own work with Blink-182, Box Car Racer, Transplants, and +44, Barker has made numerous guest appearances. In 2001, Barker appeared, playing drums, in P. Diddy's video, "Bad Boy for Life". In 2003 he played the drums in Bubba Sparxxx's video for "Back in the Mud".
He was featured in the opening sequence of the Dem Franchise Boys music video, "Ridin Rims," in 2006. Travis appeared in Xzibit's music video "Hey Now (Mean Muggin)", T.I.'s video "What You Know", New Found Glory's "My Friends Over You", Three 6 Mafia's "Side 2 Side (Remix)" and "Doe Boy Fresh" videos. He was also featured on the Outkast music video "Morris Brown" and can be seen playing drums in The Game's AOL Session.
