Elena Jane "Ellie" Goulding (born 30 December 1986) is an English singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist. In 2010, she became the second artist to both top the BBC's annual Sound of... poll and win the Critics' Choice Award at the Brit Awards in the same year, following Adele's win of both in 2008. After signing to Polydor Records in 2009, she released her first EP in 2009, "An Introduction to Ellie Goulding". 
Goulding released her debut studio album, "Lights", in 2010. The album debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart and has sold over 850,000 copies in the UK. Her cover of Elton John's "Your Song" reached number two in the UK in December 2010, and on 29 April 2011 she performed the song at the wedding reception of Prince William and Kate Middleton at Buckingham Palace. The album's title track, "Lights", was released in the US in March 2011, and reached its peak position of number one on the "Billboard" Pop Songs chart, number one on the "Billboard" On-Demand chart, and number two on the "Billboard" Hot 100 nearly a year and a half later during its thirty-third week charting, completing one of the longest ever climbs into the top two positions on the chart. The single, which lasted over a year on the "Billboard" Hot 100, was also certified triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
Goulding's second album "Halcyon" was released in October 2012 to generally positive reviews from critics. "Anything Could Happen" preceded the album as the lead single, reaching the top five in the UK as well as the top forty in Belgium, Ireland and New Zealand. "Halcyon" debuted at number two on the UK Albums Chart, and number nine on the "Billboard" 200 Chart, her first Top 10 debut in the United States. The album also reached top five in New Zealand, top ten in Ireland and Canada, and top twenty in Australia. In 2013, Goulding won her first Grammy for Best Dance/Electronica Album as a featured artist on Skrillex "Bangarang EP". 
Life and career.
1986–2009: Early life and career beginnings.
Ellie Goulding was born and raised in Lyonshall, a small village near Kington, Herefordshire, the second of four children (a brother and two sisters). Her mother, Tracey (née Clark), used to work at a supermarket, and her father, Arthur Goulding, came from a "family of undertakers". Her parents separated when she was five, and she had a stepfather who was a lorry driver. She began playing the clarinet at the age of nine, and at 14 began learning guitar. She attended Lady Hawkins' School in Kington, where she won a main part in a school production, the Wizard of Oz, as the scarecrow. She started songwriting at the age of 15 and while in college she won a singing competition.
After commencing a drama course, politics course, and an English course at the University of Kent, where she was exposed to electronic music, she developed her sound on the track "Wish I Stayed" with the help of Starsmith and Frankmusik. After two years at Kent, she was spotted by Jamie Lillywhite of Crown Music Management at a university talent contest. After Goulding successfully showcased for Crown Music head Sarah Stennett, she was told to leave university and was set up in a flat in West London. Lillywhite became her manager and A&R, and introduced her to the producer Starsmith who would become her chief collaborator and primary producer of "Lights". She signed to Polydor Records in July 2009, but her first single, "Under the Sheets", was released through boutique label Neon Gold Records as a deliberately low-key debut, appearing digitally in the United Kingdom on 15 November 2009. The single peaked at number fifty-three on the UK Singles Chart following a successful appearance on "Later... with Jools Holland", performing "Under the Sheets" and "Guns and Horses", and a UK tour supporting Little Boots. In October 2009 "Wish I Stayed" was available as a free download as the Single of the Week on iTunes Store UK from 22–28 December 2009.
2009–11: "Lights", "Bright Lights" and commercial breakthrough.
Before the release of her debut album, Goulding won the BBC Sound of 2010 poll, which showcases the critics, broadcasters and music industry insiders' top choices for rising stars and artists for the coming year. She also won the Critics' Choice Award at the 2010 BRIT Awards, a prize that made her the second artist to win both in the same year.
Goulding co-wrote "Love Me 'Cause You Want To" for Gabriella Cilmi's second album, "Ten", and three songs, "Remake Me + You", "Notice" and "Jumping Into Rivers", for Diana Vickers's debut album, "Songs from the Tainted Cherry Tree". Her song "Not Following" was used by German singer Lena on her debut album "My Cassette Player". Goulding was featured on rapper Tinie Tempah's single "Wonderman" from his debut studio album "Disc-Overy". Goulding's "Under the Sheets" was also remixed by American rap duo Chiddy Bang, featured on their 2010 mixtape "Air Swell", and by DJ Frenzy ("F^K Y3AH! Breaks Mix"). Frankmusik, who produced Goulding's song "Wish I Stayed", told Digital Spy he hoped to collaborate with her on his second album, "Do It in the AM". "Lights" was remixed by Bassnectar, which appears on his 2011 album "Divergent Spectrum".
Goulding's debut album "Lights" was released in March 2010, reaching number one on the UK Albums Chart and number six on the Irish Albums Chart. Its singles, "Starry Eyed", "Guns and Horses" and "The Writer" peaked at numbers 4, 26, and 19 respectively. As of June 2012, the album has sold over 850,000 copies in the UK and 1.6 million copies worldwide. In August 2010, Goulding released a second EP, "Run Into the Light", containing remixes of songs from "Lights". The album was supported by Nike and was released through Polydor as a running soundtrack in an effort to get Goulding's music taken up by the national running subculture.
In November 2010, "Lights" was re-released as "Bright Lights", with six new tracks added. It was originally announced that the lead single from "Bright Lights" would be the new edit of the title track with a release scheduled for 1 November 2010. This was ultimately scrapped to allow her cover of Elton John's "Your Song" to be released in conjunction with the John Lewis Christmas 2010 advertising campaign in the UK. The single became Goulding's highest-charting single to date, reaching number two on the UK Singles Chart. The song also charted in some European countries in early 2011.
Goulding toured in support of "Lights" and supported Passion Pit in March 2010 and John Mayall during his British tour in May 2010. During the summer she performed at a number of festivals. On 29 May she performed at the Dot to Dot Festival in Bristol. She performed a set on 25 June at the Glastonbury Festival 2010 on the John Peel Stage. Her was a live recording of part of her set at the iTunes Festival 2010. The whole set was ultimately included as bonus content on the iTunes version of "Bright Lights". She made her T in the Park debut on 11 July. She played on the Nissan Juke Arena at the 2010 V Festival in late August. In September she was part of the line-up at Bestival 2010 on the Isle of Wight. In support of the album in Europe she performed on the first day of Pukkelpop in Belgium, at the Open'er Festival in Poland and at Benicàssim in Spain. A track from "Lights", "Every Time You Go", was featured in the "Vampire Diaries" episode "Founder's Day", "Your Biggest Mistake" appeared in an episode of "The Inbetweeners". and "Believe Me" appeared in an episode of "90210". She began a tour of the United States and Canada in February 2011 to coincide with the release of the American edition of "Lights".
In January 2011 it was announced that the title track from "Lights" would serve as the second single from "Bright Lights". In early 2011 she recorded an original song for the film "Life in a Day". Goulding was placed at number five on "Rolling Stone"s annual hot list in February 2011. In February 2011 she returned to the BRIT Awards where she was nominated for Best British Female and Best British Breakthrough Act, but lost out to Laura Marling and Tinie Tempah, respectively. Previously she had performed at the BRITs launch party where the nominations were announced.
She also played live at Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2011. Goulding made her American television debut on "Jimmy Kimmel Live!" on 7 April 2011 performing "Starry Eyed". She appeared as the musical guest on the 700th episode of the "Saturday Night Live", broadcast 7 May 2011 and hosted by Tina Fey. She served as the only live performer at the wedding reception of Prince William and Kate Middleton on 29 April 2011 singing her rendition of "Your Song" for the couple's first dance as well as her hits "The Writer" and "Starry Eyed" and several of William and Kate's personal favourites. She was introduced to Prince William by Tinie Tempah at Radio 1's Big Weekend in 2010. She said, "It was an amazing honour to be asked by Kate and William to perform at their party. The atmosphere was incredible and it is a night I will never forget." Goulding performed, for the second consecutive year, at Radio 1's Big Weekend on 14 May.
Goulding collaborated with American electronic artist and producer Skrillex on a song titled "Summit", included on his 2011 EP "Bangarang". She travelled with Skrillex on his South American tour and many other tours of his alike.
Goulding headlined the 2011 Wakestock Festival in Wales, performing on 8 July. In August she performed at V Festival for her second year in a row. Following the re-release of "Lights" and the American release of the album, Goulding said she would soon begin work on a second studio album with an expected release in September 2011.
On 6 August 2011, Goulding performed at Lollapalooza in Chicago. Goulding performed at the annual Nobel Peace Prize Concert on 11 December 2011 in Oslo, Norway, where she also served on a panel discussion with Amy Lee of Evanescence and Janelle Monáe. On 1 December 2011, Goulding performed at the White House during the National Christmas Tree lighting ceremony, alongside the likes of Big Time Rush and will.i.am. She also was a musical guest on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show". On 18 January 2012, Goulding performed "Lights" on "Late Show with David Letterman".
2011–present: "Halcyon".
In February 2011, Goulding told the "Daily Star" that she had plans to release a follow-up to "Lights" sometime in 2011, commenting, "I'm not going to go away for ages. It'll be out this year or the start of next." The following month, when asked about the album's musical direction in an interview with gossip website Dean Piper's World, Goulding stated, "It's started to sound very dark and very weird. This album is going to be even more emotional [...] I wanted to make it so there is hope. I want to make an effect whether it's happy or sad." In April 2012, Goulding stated that she hoped the album would be released in October 2012.
On 19 September 2011, it was announced that Goulding would open for Katy Perry's California Dreams tour, replacing Jessie J due to a foot injury. In 2012, Goulding was featured on the song "Fall Into the Sky" from Zedd's album "Clarity" and on Calvin Harris's song "I Need Your Love" which is included on "Halcyon" and also Harris's album "18 Months". She will be featured in a song on Jessie J's second studio album.
On 10 July 2012, Goulding released a cover of Active Child's song "Hanging On", featuring Tinie Tempah, as a free download on her SoundCloud page. In late July 2012, it was announced that Goulding's second album is titled "Halcyon" and it would be released on 8 October 2012. The album was preceded by the lead single "Anything Could Happen" on 21 August.
On 3 August 2012, Goulding released a trailer on YouTube containing snippets of tracks from "Halcyon". The lyric video for "Anything Could Happen" premiered on 9 August 2012, consisting of a series of fan-submitted Instagram pictures.
On 27 August 2012, while on set of her "Anything Could Happen" music video, Goulding told MTV News, "I've moved on quite a bit since the first album, because I've discovered so much; I've learned a lot more and I've grown up a lot more. I've gained more influences and different influences and people have influenced it; I suppose just circumstances. It's a bit more tribal and anthemic; a bit more piano and vocal than anything. The last album was very electronic, but it was tied in with my voice; this one, to me, is way more of a pop record."
Goulding contributed a track titled "Bittersweet" (produced by Skrillex) to the soundtrack to "", released on 13 November 2012.
On 19 November 2012. The music video for Goulding's second single from "Halcyon", titled "Figure 8" was released. The single was released digitally in the UK on 12 December 2012. The song charted before it was released, and made its way into the Top 40 in the UK, peaking at number 33.
It was announced on 12 February 2013 that when Goulding has concluded the Halcyon Days tour in May 2013 she will be supporting Bruno Mars on his Moonshine Jungle World Tour on selected dates.
Artistry.
Voice.
Goulding possesses the vocal range of a soprano and is noted for her high piercing vibrato, breathy tone and emotive delivery. In a review for "Halcyon", Neil McComick of "The Daily Telegraph" described her voice as "something special", continuing; "Her tremulous vibrato and slightly hoarse timbre have the feel of something primal and folky, her birdlike high notes conveying a childlike wonder while darker tones imply ancient depths of sorrow. She sings like she is strung out on the melody, warbling from a place of desperate emotion. It really is that rarest and perhaps most accidental of gifts: an original voice". He then continued in regards to her vocal layering stating, "producer Jim Eliot puts her voice front, back and centre, banking up choral walls of vibrato, fashioning hooks from cut up samples of chirrups and chants, and creating unusual textures from trills and warbles". Will Hermes of "Rolling Stone" compared her voice to that of Dolly Parton, stating that her upper register was dazzling whilst also complimenting her skill in vocal multi layering. Megan Farokhmanesh of "Paste" magazine praised Goulding overall for her "talent for gorgeous, high vocals with heart-tugging vocals", adding she has a "lovely voice".
Influences.
Goulding states that she is influenced by a wide range of genres from R&B, electronica, heavy metal, folk, hip hop, pop and classical. She listed Ani DiFranco, Imogen Heap, Björk, Joni Mitchell and Lauryn Hill as influences, as well as contemporaries such as Katy Perry, Lady Gaga and Rihanna, stating that she is "blown away" by them. She also expressed admiration for rappers Kanye West, Drake and Nicki Minaj.
Goulding's musical style has been compared to that of Kate Nash, Meiko, Lykke Li and Tracey Thorn.
Personal life.
Goulding is a keen runner, aiming to run six miles every day and in 2010 announced plans to run a marathon. In support of her second EP, "Run Into the Light", she invited a small number of fans through her Facebook pages to run with her in seven different cities on her UK tour, and has announced that she will be doing the same across Europe and the United States.
In October 2012, Goulding and dubstep DJ Skrillex ended a seven-month relationship, citing an inability to make their long-distance relationship work.
Awards and nominations.
! Year !! Award !! Nominated work !! Category !! Result
