Running Man () is a South Korean variety show; a part of SBS's "Good Sunday" lineup, along with "K-pop Star 2". It was first aired on July 11, 2010. This show is classified as an "urban action variety"; a never-before-seen new genre of variety shows. The MCs and guests complete missions in a landmark to win the race. It has garnered attention as being the come-back program for Yu Jae-suk, the main MC of the program, after leaving "Good Sunday"&apos;s "Family Outing" in February 2010. Airing at the 5 pm KST time slot for most of its run, "Running Man" switched to the second part of "Good Sunday" (which happened May 22 and May 29, 2011 with "Kim Yu-na's Kiss and Cry" but was quickly switched back due to low ratings) beginning May 6, 2012, airing after "Kim Byung-man's Law of the Jungle 2" at 6:10 pm and airing against KBS2 "Happy Sunday"&apos;s "1 Night 2 Days Season 2" and MBC "Sunday Night"&apos;s "I Am a Singer 2".
Format.
Current.
As of episode 48, the members and guests take part in a series of missions (see "Missions" below for details) to become the winner(s) at the end of the race. The format of the show moves away from the "race mission + other missions" format into strictly one long race with continuous missions during the race.
Previous.
Episode 1.
The MCs and guests were locked in a landmark during closed hours and were required to leave before opening hours. In the first episode, they were divided into two teams and raced to find the codes hidden within the landmark that were required to unlock the main doors.
With a total of 5 numbers, after one was found, a game was played to determine which team would start first in the next race, and the losing team received a punishment while the other team was given a head start. After all the numbers were found by either of the teams, they approached the main door and entered the code which they believed was correct. The correct team was allowed to leave the landmark while the losing team was required to complete a punishment inside the landmark.
Episodes 2-5.
From the second episode to the fifth episode, both teams competed to find "golden pigs" filled with money that were hidden within the landmark, and participated in games in attempt to win more money. At the end of each episode, the team with the most money was declared the winner and was allowed to leave the landmark while the losing team received a punishment. The money collected by the teams was donated in the winning team's honour. Viewers could vote on the official Running Man homepage on who they believed would be the winning team, and a lucky viewer who guessed correctly was allowed to have his/her name included in the donation.
Episodes 6-10.
At the end of each episode, the "Running Man Balls" collected throughout the night were placed into a lottery machine, and the colour of the first ball ejected determined the winning team for the night. The losing team was required to commute home using public transportation while undertaking an embarrassing punishment.
Episodes 11-25.
As of the eighteenth episode, only those who had earned no "Running Balls" at all throughout the night were the ones to be punished.
Episodes 26-43.
If there were many members with no "Running Balls", they were automatically punished and no lottery was conducted. Additionally, if the members succeeded in the "One Chance" mission, they were all relieved of the punishment regardless of how many "Running Balls" each of them possessed.
As of episode 38 and onwards, there were some episodes which included spy/spies. These spies could either be part of the cast, guest, or both.
Episodes 44-47.
The team with the most "Running Balls" was declared the winner and their supporters received a bonus from their boss.
Missions.
Missions form the basis of "Running Man" as members try to avoid punishment or win for prizes. Many missions are taken part in each episode, with the highlight of "Running Man" being "race missions".
Cast.
The original members of "Running Man" are Yu Jae-suk, Ji Suk-jin, Kim Jong-kook, Ha-ha, Lee Kwang-su, Song Joong-ki, and Gary. Song Ji-hyo was originally a guest for the second (episode 2-3) and third landmark (episode 4-5). She officially joined the program in the fourth landmark (episode 6) but was unable to attend until the fifth landmark (episode 7). Lizzy was also originally a guest for the eleventh (episode 13) and twelfth landmark (episode 14). She officially joined the program in the sixteenth landmark (episode 18). However, she has not been seen since episode 26. In February 2011, it was revealed that she was only a long-term guest and has left the program. Producer Jo Hyo-jin has stated that she is welcome to return at any time. In April 2011, Song Joong-ki recorded his last episode and as of May, and has left the program to focus on his acting career but returned on episode 66 as a guest after leaving for almost half a year.
List of episodes and guests.
Many guests have taken part in "Running Man". The following is a compilation of guests and the number of time they have been on the show.
With regards to guest-turned-members (Song Ji-hyo and Lizzy), only the times they were a guest are counted.
Ratings.
In the ratings below, the highest rating for the show will in be red, and the lowest rating for the show will be in blue.
2010.
"Good Sunday" divides its program into two parts, "Running Man" airs as Good Sunday Part 1.
2011.
"Good Sunday" returns to airing as one "whole" program. Ratings listed below are the individual corner ratings of "Running Man". (Note: Individual corner ratings do not include commercial time, which regular ratings include.)
"Good Sunday" returns to dividing its program into two parts, "Running Man" airs as "Good Sunday Part 1".
"Good Sunday" returns to airing as one "whole" program. Ratings listed below are the individual corner ratings of "Running Man". (Note: Individual corner ratings do not include commercial time, which regular ratings include.)
2012.
Ratings listed below are the individual corner ratings of "Running Man". (Note: Individual corner ratings do not include commercial time, which regular ratings include.)
2013.
Ratings listed below are the individual corner ratings of "Running Man". (Note: Individual corner ratings do not include commercial time, which regular ratings include.)
International.
In November 2011, the rights to air the show was sold to nine areas in Asia, namely Taiwan, Thailand, China, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, Cambodia, and Indonesia proving "Running Man"’s rise in popularity as a Hallyu program. In January 2013, SBS announced "Running Man in Asia" as one of the big projects of 2013. Producer, Jo Hyo-jin, has stated that the program will be touring two countries in Asia in the first half of 2013. The program has previously travelled to Thailand, China, and Hong Kong for filmings. Jo Hyo-jin PD has also mentioned interests in purchasing the "Running Man" format by Singapore television stations. This once again shows "Running Man"’s immense popularity in Asia. Producer, Im Hyung-taek, has confirmed the program will be in Macau, China and Hanoi, Vietnam for filming in early February.
