Liz Carmouche (born February 19, 1984) is an American mixed martial arts fighter. Carmouche currently competes for UFC in the women's bantamweight division.
Carmouche is currently the #6-ranked 135-pound female MMA fighter in the world according to the Unified Women's MMA Rankings.
Early life and military service.
Carmouche was born in Lafayette, Louisiana, and grew up in Okinawa, Japan. She is of Lebanese, Irish and Cajun descent. She currently resides in San Diego, California.
Prior to becoming a professional MMA fighter, Carmouche spent five years in the United States Marine Corps as a helicopter electrician during which she did three tours of duty in occupations of the Middle East.
Mixed martial arts career.
Early career.
Carmouche started her professional career in 2010, winning her first three fights via knockout or submission.
Strikeforce.
On August 13, 2010, she made her debut for the Strikeforce promotion at in a reserve bout for their one-night Women's Welterweight tournament. She defeated Colleen Schneider via unanimous decision after two rounds.
Carmouche returned to the promotion at Strikeforce Challengers 12 on November 19, 2010, where she defeated Jan Finney via TKO in the third round.
On February 23, 2011, it was announced that number one title contender Miesha Tate had suffered a knee injury and that Carmouche would step in on short notice to face Women's Bantamweight (135 lbs) champion Marloes Coenen on March 5, 2011 at . Carmouche was defeated via triangle choke in the fourth round, after dominating two of the previous rounds.
On July 22, 2011, Carmouche faced Sarah Kaufman at Strikeforce Challengers: Voelker vs. Bowling III in Las Vegas, Nevada. She was defeated by unanimous decision.
Carmouche was scheduled to return to Strikeforce to face Sara McMann at on November 3, 2012, but the event was cancelled.
Invicta Fighting Championships.
Carmouche faced Ashleigh Curry at Invicta Fighting Championships 1 on April 28, 2012. She won the fight via TKO in the first round.
Carmouche faced Kaitlin Young at Invicta Fighting Championships 2 on July 28, 2012. She won the fight via submission due to a rear-naked choke in the second round.
Ultimate Fighting Championship.
It was announced at the pre-fight press conference by UFC President Dana White that former Strikeforce Bantamweight Champion Ronda Rousey would be the very first UFC Women's 135 lb. Bantamweight Champion. It was confirmed by White that Carmouche would be challenging Rousey for the Women's Bantamweight title at UFC 157.
In the early part of the first round, Carmouche locked in a standing rear-naked choke/face crank on Rousey. Rousey, however, escaped and eventually finished the fight by armbar with 11 seconds left in the first round.
Personal life.
Carmouche is openly lesbian.
