Dabangg 2 is a 2012 Bollywood action film directed and produced by Arbaaz Khan under the banner of Arbaaz Khan Productions. It's a sequel to the 2010 film "Dabangg" and is written by Dilip Shukla. The story is set in the city of Kanpur. The film features Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha reprising their roles from the previous film, whilst Prakash Raj plays the antagonist.
Development of the project commenced after the release of "Dabangg", which turned out to be a blockbuster in India. Filming began on 9 March 2012 at Kamalistan Studios in Mumbai and it released on 21 December 2012. The first look poster was unveiled on 8 November 2012 whilst the theatrical trailer was premiered on 10 November 2012, on Khan's reality show "Bigg Boss 6". The film received mixed to negative reviews from critics in India and negative reviews from critics overseas. The film opened strongly upon release and went on to break the three-day record set by "Ek Tha Tiger" by netting around in India. "Dabangg 2" has become third highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in India and worldwide.Dabangg 2 is the second-highest grossing film of 2012 after Ek Tha Tiger. Box Office India declared the film a "Blockbuster" in India after its first week and a "Superhit" overseas.
Plot.
Chulbul Pandey (Salman Khan) is transferred to Kanpur where he is in charge of the local police station. Some thugs kidnap a rich schoolboy and Chulbul Pandey rescues him from a warehouse after beating up the gang of kidnappers. However Chulbul takes the ransom money for himself.
Somewhere in Kanpur, an assassin hired by Bachcha Bhaiya (Prakash Raj) murders a witness who was about to testify against him. Chulbul tracks the assassin down and kills him in a brawl at a local cafe. Bachcha decides to ignore the threat posed by Pandey because he is trying to get elected into the local government. After several public altercations, Bachcha's brother convinces him to get rid of Pandey. Bachcha's brother threatens Chulbul's stepfather and says if Chulbul does not stop interfering with Bachcha's criminal activities, he will kill his whole family.
Bachcha's brother then harasses a local girl who is about to get married. He says that he will not allow her to get married to anyone other than him. Chulbul Pandey stops Bachcha's brother from abducting the bride during her wedding and kills him by breaking his neck. Bachcha Bhaiya promises to avenge the death of his brother.
Chulbul then finds out that his wife Rajjo (Sonakshi Sinha) is pregnant. Everyone advises him to leave Baccha alone and think about his family. Chulbul gets life insurance. Bachcha cannot forgive Pandey for killing his brother and ignores the election to get revenge.
Bachcha Bhaiya tracks down Makkhi and Rajjo when they are visiting a Hindu temple. Bachcha throws Rajjo off the stairs which causes her to have a miscarriage. Makkhi is shot in the shoulder when he's trying to save Rajjo but ultimately fails. Chulbul and Rajjo lose their child and this causes Chulbul to go after Bachcha Bhaiya. Chulbul attacks Bachcha Bhaiya and his thugs and kills many of them. Chulbul then beats Bachcha Bhaiya and Vishal the police arrives. The police helps him kill Bachcha Bhaiya by giving him a gun. A year later Rajjo gives birth to a child.
Production.
Development.
After the release of "Dabangg", producer Arbaaz Khan announced that he was planning a sequel to "Dabangg". Soon after the blockbuster collections of the film, Khan reported ""Dabangg 2" may take time to hit the floors, but it is definitely on the cards." He also announced that the main leads, Salman Khan and Sonakshi Sinha were already casted to reprise their parts in the sequel. Her main look was also taken from the first and consisted of a yellow saree, a long plait with flowers in her hair. When director Abhinav Kashyap opted out of directing the sequel, Arbaaz Khan himself jumped in as the film's director. Prakash Raj was confirmed to have been chosen to play the main villain. Kareena Kapoor has been roped in to play an item number in the film, despite initial reports considering Katrina Kaif for the role.
Dabangg 2 is valued 180 crore. In Feb 2012,it was reported that distribution rights were sold to UTV Motion Pictures for a price of 140 crore, the highest for a Bollywood film till date. But later UTV Motion Pictures reported the news as completely fake & nonsense. UTV Motion Pictures has brushed aside rumours of purchasing the rights of the sequel to Salman Khan-Sonakshi Sinha starrer, Dabangg 2 for 140 crore.
The national emblem framed on the wall of Chulbul Pandey's police station was depicted incorrectly. Sensitive to the slightest abnormality pertaining to national sentiments, the Central Board of Film Certification (CBFC) has asked producer-director Arbaaz Khan to simply blur the corner of the film's frames where the national emblem appears.
Filming.
Shooting for the film began in March 2012. The producers announced plans to shoot the film in Kanpur. A set depicting the city of Kanpur was created at the Kamalistan Studios in Mumbai, where the first schedule of the film was shot. The entire studio was rented for the film, making it a first in Bollywood. The phase consisted of shooting a qawwali song under neon lights. Following the shoot, filming is expected to take place in film city in Mumbai. The last schedule has been planned to be shot at Satara. Three days after the film went on floors, it was reported that Salman Khan replaced cinematographer, K. K. Senthil Kumar, with Aseem Kumar. A song titled "Fevicol" was choreographed as a dance number and considered as an equivalent to "Munni Badnaam Hui" from "Dabangg". Reports indicating that Salman would essay an important involvement in the director's role were dismissed by Arbaaz.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack was composed by the music director-duo of Sajid-Wajid while the lyrics were penned by Jalees Sherwani, Irfan Kamal & Sameer. There is an item song named "Fevicol Se" featuring Kareena Kapoor. The music received a lukewarm reception upon release. It was criticized for copying tunes from "Dabangg".
Marketing.
Chulbul Pandey, Salman’s character in "Dabangg 2" appeared in STAR Plus soap Diya Aur Baati Hum to promote the film. It aired on 12 and 13 December 2012. Salman and Sonakshi promoted the film on the sets of "Sa Re Ga Ma Pa". "Dabangg 2" was screened at the Ketnav theatre in Khar, a western Mumbai suburb, on December 17, 2012. A "Dabangg 2" special screening was done for the star kids on December 19, 2012. Another premiere was held on 20 December 2012 in which Aamir Khan also attended.
Release.
"Dabangg 2" released in 3700 screens in India and 450 screens overseas on 21 December 2012. The film was made on a budget of including prints and advertising. This figure does not include Salman Khan's fee which can go as high as the budget of the film itself. "Dabangg 2" had the highest screen count for any film in India and worldwide, surpassing that of "Ek Tha Tiger". The trailers for "Kai Po Che!" and "Bhaag Milkha Bhaag" were released with "Dabangg 2".
Controversy.
Chief judicial magistrate (CJM), Muzaffarpur has ordered to lodge an FIR against seven artists of Dabangg 2, including Salman Khan, Arbaaz Khan, Kareena Kapoor, Sonakshi Sinha and others under Section 156 (clause 3) of the CrPC and submit a report within a week in connection with a complaint filed against a song 'Fevicol...' in Hindi movie Dabangg 2. The complainant filed the case demanding a ban on the song immediately, claiming that such songs are likely to fuel sexual harassment and misbehaviour against girls at a time when the entire nation was experiencing an unprecedented shame due to the recent gang rape and death of a 23-year-old girl in Delhi.
Critical reception.
"Dabangg 2" received mixed to negative reviews from critics in India and negative reviews from critics overseas.
India.
"Dabangg 2" received mixed to negative reviews from critics in India. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said ""Dabangg 2" has Salman Khan, Salman Khan and Salman Khan plus entertainment, entertainment and entertainment in large doses". Resham Sengar of Zee TV rated the film 3.5 out of 5 stars, noting "But the actor cum director has kept the standards of the film intact like a pro. So much so that it was hard to believe that a newbie in film making has directed the film. So, go on and book your ticket to enjoy this paisa vasool film with your friends and family and don’t forget to grab a tub of popcorn". Srijana Mitra Das of "The Times of India" gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars and praised the overall style. "Mid-Day" gave it 3 out of 5 stars and said the film was a treat for diehard Salman Khan fans. Rubina Khan of First Post India gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and said it didn't matter what score she gave the film, it would still do great business. "Filmfare" stated ""Dabangg 2" is a fanboy's dream and wouldn't disappoint the first comer either".
Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV gave the film a score 2.5 out of 5 stars reviewing "This film might also end up raking in a much larger box office booty than "Dabangg" did, but assessed strictly as a pure entertainer designed for instant mass gratification, it isn’t half as successful. Unfortunately, the "Dabangg 2" screenplay is devoid of any fresh ideas". Gaurav Malani, also from "The Times of India" gave the film a mixed review and recommended skipping it by "watching reruns of "Dabangg" on television". Raja Sen of Rediff gave it 2.5 out of 5 stars and felt "Dabangg 2" was less unwatchable than its predecessor and it had "absolutely nothing new to offer, and nothing to remember, quote or take away from the theatre". "The Indian Express" rated the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and said "Arbaaz should have given himself some more time" to make the film watchable. "Stardust" publishers Manga gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars also calling it a "one-time watch potboiler". Anupama Chopra of the "Hindustan Times" gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and said "Dabangg 2" does not match "the zing of the original" and "there wasn't one line that stayed with me after the film". Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and stated what the "film needed was personality and character, what it's left with is sameness. But that's probably enough for Salman Khan fans".
Aniruddha Guha also of "DNA India" rated the film 2 out of 5 stars and called it "wannabe-"Dabangg"". After giving it a 2 out of 5 stars, the "Daily Bhaskar" panned "Dabangg 2" by saying "you'd feel like a moron spending the last day on planet Earth filling your mind and lowering your IQ with rubbish like this". Business of Cinema gave the film 2 out of 5 stars and said it was a copy of the original and offered nothing new. Reuters gave it a negative review and raised objections to the content and said the film "objectified women in the worst way possible". Sanjukta Sharma from "Live Mint" ("The Wall Street Journal") said ""Dabangg 2" is a disappointment. It had nothing to keep me engaged". "Open Magazine" panned the film and called it a product made for the brain dead by the brain dead.
Overseas.
"Dabangg 2" received negative reviews from critics overseas. IGN gave the film 4.5 out of 10 stars and criticized the weak script and direction. Mufaddal Fakhruddin wrote "the screenplay and script is majorly lacking, and whatever story it does have is stretched out in a way that it becomes blatantly obvious. There were number of times where I went, "why did I just watch this scene?". "Dabangg 2" felt lost. They say not all those who wander are lost, but "Dabangg 2" actually is. Digital Spy gave the film 2 out of 5 stars and objected to the content. Priya Joshi wrote "Khan revels in the shameless display of narcissism, but there is little to commend the performance. The dialog is trite, there is no depth to the characters and most of the effort has been applied to the elaborate fight sequences. With the emphasis on violence and the objectifying of women, it's a step back in time, where the women are either dutiful, temple-going housewives or cleavage-baring prostitutes". Joshi recommended skipping the film and added instead of watching it, we could "use the time, perhaps more wisely, pondering whether we have enough brussels for Christmas dinner". Asian review website Wogma rated the film 1.18 out of 5 and criticized all aspects, from direction to performances by the lead actors. The reviewer broke down the rating of the film and gave "1 out of 5 for direction, 1 out of 5 for the story, 1 out of 5 for lead actors performances, 2 out of 5 for character artists, 2 out of 5 for dialogues, 1 out of 5 for screenplay, 1.5 out of 5 for the music, and 1 out of 5 for lyrics". Simon Abrams of "The Village Voice" said "before they really screw up film, "Dabangg 2"'s creators do a good job of not taking themselves too seriously". Trisha Gupta from First Post International said the film was a rehash of "Dabangg". Instead of giving a review, the "New York Daily Times" objected to the content of the film. Quoting William Nicholas Gomes, a visiting fellow at the University of York, they said "Dabangg 2" "glorified the practice of torture by police forces" and would "raise wider public support in favour of torture and ill treatment prisoners in custody".
Box office.
India.
"Dabangg 2" had a very good opening at multiplexes and was extraordinary at single screens. The film netted on its opening day and became the biggest opener for a non-holiday Friday in India, beating the previous record held by "Don 2". On its second day however, the film witnessed a drop due to "excessive screenings and cold weather" but still collected around . The film's business grew on Sunday and it collected , taking the first weekend total to , beating the previous three-day record set by "Ek Tha Tiger". After a successful weekend, the film had a strong Monday where it made , beating the previous record held by "Dabangg". "Dabangg 2" collected around on Tuesday (Christmas day). "Dabangg 2" netted around on Wednesday. The film collected on Thursday, bringing the first week total to . The film collected in its second weekend taking the film's collections to . The film was declared a blockbuster by Box Office India after its first week. Dabangg 2 has collected around nett in five days of its second week as it grossed a huge crore plus on Tuesday as it was New Years Day, taking its total to . According to Box Office India, the film became the second highest grossing film of 2012 in 13 days, adding 3 crore nett on that day. Dabangg 2 collected solid figures of nett in its second week. After successful two weeks, the film further netted in third weekend to make a total of around nett. Dabangg 2 collected a good figure of in its third week. It netted around nett after the completion of eight weeks. The final distributor share of the film in India was .
Overseas.
"Dabangg 2" collected close to US$4.5 million overseas in its opening weekend. The film reached $8 million overseas in 10 days and was declared a 'super-hit' by Box Office India. Dabangg 2 has taken its overseas total to around $8.25 million in 17 days and has became the third biggest overseas hit of 2012 behind Jab Tak Hai Jaan and Ek Tha Tiger, both of which earned the 'blockbuster' status overseas. Dabangg 2 grossed around $8.75 million in its run by fourth weekend.
Sequel.
It has been reported that "Dabangg 3" may be a prequel which explores the origins of Chulbul Pandey. Salman Khan confirmed via his Twitter account that Dabangg 3 will happen and will be the origin of Chulbul Pandey.
