Fuck in its literal meaning refers to the act of sexual intercourse. It is an English word that is almost universally considered vulgar. It is often used as a profanity, either to denote disdain or as an intensifier.
The origin of the word is obscure. It is usually considered to be first attested to around 1475, but it may be considerably older. In modern usage, "fuck" and its derivatives (such as "fucker" and "fucking") can be used in the position of a noun, a verb, an adjective or an adverb. There are many common phrases which make use of the word, as well as a number of compounds incorporating it, such as "motherfucker".
Offensiveness.
The word's use is considered obscene in social contexts, but may be common in informal and domestic situations. It is unclear whether the word has always been considered vulgar, and if not, when it first came to be used to describe (often in an extremely angry, hostile or belligerent manner) unpleasant circumstances or people in an intentionally offensive way, such as in the term "motherfucker", one of its more common usages in some parts of the English-speaking world. In the modern English-speaking world, the word "fuck" is often considered highly offensive. Most English-speaking countries censor it on television and radio. A study of the attitudes of the British public found that "fuck" was considered the third most severe profanity and its derivative "motherfucker" second. "Cunt" was considered the most severe (Hargrave, 2000). Some have argued that the prolific usage of the word "fuck" has de-vulgarized it, an example of the "dysphemism treadmill." Despite its offensive nature, the word is common in popular usage.
The term remains a taboo word to many people in English-speaking countries. 
The Canadian Press now considers the word to be commonplace and has added usage advice to the "Canadian Press Caps and Spelling" guide.
Etymology.
The "Oxford English Dictionary" states that the ultimate etymology is uncertain, but that the word is "probably cognate" with a number of native Germanic words with meanings involving striking, rubbing, and having sex.
"Flen, flyys and freris".
The usually accepted first known occurrence is in code in a poem in a mixture of Latin and English composed some time before 1500. The poem, which satirizes the Carmelite friars of Cambridge, England, takes its title, "Flen flyys", from the first words of its opening line, "Flen, flyys, and freris" (= "Fleas, flies, and friars"). The line that contains "fuck" reads "Non sunt in coeli, quia gxddbov xxkxzt pg ifmk". Removing the substitution cipher (here, replacing each letter by the next letter in alphabetical order, as the English alphabet was then) on the phrase ""gxddbov xxkxzt pg ifmk"" yields "non sunt in coeli, quia fvccant vvivys of heli", which translated means, "They are not in heaven because they fuck wives of Ely". The phrase was coded likely because it accused some Church personnel of misbehaving; it is uncertain to what extent the word "fuck" was considered acceptable at the time. (The stem of "fvccant" is an English word used as Latin: English medieval Latin has many examples of writers using English words when they did not know the Latin word: ""workmannus"" is an example.) (In the Middle English of this poem, the term "wife" was still used generically for "woman.")
Older etymology.
Via Germanic.
The word has probable cognates in other Germanic languages, such as German "ficken" (to fuck); Dutch "fokken" (to breed, to strike, to beget); dialectal Norwegian "fukka" (to copulate), and dialectal Swedish "fokka" (to strike, to copulate) and "fock" (penis). This points to a possible etymology where Common Germanic "fuk–" comes from an Indo-European root meaning "to strike", cognate with non-Germanic words such as Latin "pugnus" "fist". By reverse application of Grimm's law, this hypothetical root has the form *"pug–". In early Proto-Germanic the word was likely used at first as a slang or euphemistic replacement for an older word for "intercourse," and then became the usual word for "intercourse."
Yet another possible etymology is from the Old High German word "pfluog", meaning "to plow, as in a field." This is supported in part by a book by Carl Jung, "Psychology of the Unconscious: A Study of the Transformations and Symbolisms of the Libido", in which he discusses the "primitive play of words" and the phallic representation of the plough, including its appearance on a vase found in an archaeological dig near Florence, Italy, which depicts six erect-penised men carrying a plow.
The original Indo-European root for "to copulate" is likely to be * "h3yebh–" or *"h3eybh–", which is attested in Sanskrit ("yabhati"), Russian ("yebat' "), Polish "", and Serbian ("jebati"), among others: compare the Greek verb ("oíphō") = "I have sex with", and the Greek noun (Zéphyros) (which references a Greek belief that the west wind Zephyrus caused pregnancy).
False etymologies.
One reason that the word "fuck" is so hard to trace etymologically is that it was used far more extensively in common speech than in easily traceable written forms. There are several urban-legend false etymologies postulating an acronymic origin for the word. None of these acronyms was ever recorded before the 1960s, according to the authoritative lexicographical work "The F-Word", and thus are backronyms. In any event, the word "fuck" has been in use far too long for some of these supposed origins to be possible. Some of these urban legends are that the word "fuck" came from Irish law. If a couple were caught committing adultery, they would be punished "For Unlawful Carnal Knowledge In the Nude," with "FUCKIN" written on the stocks above them to denote the crime. A similar variant on this theory involves the recording by church clerks of the crime of "Forbidden Use of Carnal Knowledge." Another theory is that of a royal permission. During the Black Death in the Middle Ages, towns were trying to control populations and their interactions. Since uncontaminated resources were scarce, many towns required permission to have children. Hence, the legend goes, that couples that were having children were required to first obtain royal permission (usually from a local magistrate or lord) and then place a sign somewhere visible from the road in their home that said "Fornicating Under Consent of King," which was later shortened to "FUCK." This story is hard to document, but has persisted in oral and literary traditions for many years; however, it has been demonstrated to be an urban legend.
Early usage.
Its first known use as a verb meaning to have sexual intercourse is in "Flen flyys," written around 1475.
William Dunbar's 1503 poem "Brash of Wowing" includes the lines: "Yit be his feiris he wald haue fukkit: / Ye brek my hairt, my bony ane" (ll. 13–14).
Of these, "occupy" and "jape" still survive as verbs, though with less profane meanings, while "sard" was a descendant of the Anglo-Saxon verb "seordan" (or "seorðan", <ON "serða"), to copulate; and "swive" had derived from earlier "swīfan", to revolve i.e. to swivel (compare modern-day "screw").
While Shakespeare never used the term explicitly; he hinted at it in comic scenes in a few plays. "The Merry Wives of Windsor" (IV.i) contains the expression "focative case" (see vocative case). In "Henry V" (IV.iv), Pistol threatens to "firk" (strike) a soldier, a euphemism for "fuck".
Rise of modern usage.
Though it appeared in John Ash's 1775 "A New and Complete Dictionary", listed as "low" and "vulgar," and appearing with several definitions, "fuck" did not appear in any widely-consulted dictionary of the English language from 1795 to 1965. Its first appearance in the "Oxford English Dictionary" (along with the word "cunt") was in 1972. There is anecdotal evidence of its use during the American Civil War. 
Modern usage.
Most literally, to "fuck" is to copulate, but it is also used as a more general expletive or intensifier. Some instances of the word can be taken at face value, such as "Let's fuck," "I would fuck her/him," or "He/she fucks." Other uses are dysphemistic: The sexual connotation, usually connected to masturbation (in the case of "go fuck yourself" or "go fuck yourself in the ass"), is invoked to incite additional disgust, or express anger or outrage. For example, "Fuck that!", "Fuck no!", "Fuck off!", or "Fuck you!" By itself, "fuck" is usually used as an exclamation, indicating surprise, pain, fear, disgust, disappointment, anger, or a sense of extreme elation. In this usage, there is no connection to the sexual meaning of the word implied, and is used purely for its "strength" as a vulgarity. Additionally, other uses are similarly vacuous; "fuck" (or variations such as "the fuck" or "fucking") could be removed and leave a sentence of identical syntactical meaning. For example, rap music often uses the word "fucking" as an emphatic adjective ("I'm the fucking man") for the word's rhythmic properties.
Insertion of the trochaic word "fucking" can also be used as an exercise for diagnosing the of an English-language word. This is the use of "fuck" or more specifically "fucking" as an infix, or more properly, a tmesis (see expletive infixation). For example, the word "in-fucking-credible" sounds acceptable to the English ear, and is in fairly common use, while "incred-fucking-ible" would sound very clumsy (though, depending on the context, this might be perceived as a humorous improvisation of the word). "Abso-fucking-lutely" and "motherfucking" are also common uses of "fuck" as an affix. While neither dysphemistic nor connected to the sexual connotations of the word, even the vacuous usages are considered offensive and gratuitous, and censored in some media; for example, "None of your fucking business!" or "Shut the fuck up!" A common insult is "Get fucked", which in a non-offensive context would translate as "get stuffed." The word is one of the few that has legitimate colloquial usage as a verb, adverb, adjective, command, conjunction, exclamatory, noun and pronoun.
In another usage, the word "fucker" is used as a term of endearment rather than antipathy. This usage is not uncommon; to say "you're one smart fucker" is often a term of affection. However, because of its ambiguity and vulgarity, the word "fucker" in reference to another person can easily be misinterpreted. Though "fuck" can serve as a noun, the "fucker" form is used in a context that refers to an individual. Normally in these cases, if "fuck" is used instead of "fucker," the sentence refers to the sexual ability of the subject (for example, "He's a great fuck!"), although confusingly in a minority of occasions the word "fuck" can hold exactly the same meaning as "fucker" (e.g., when preceded by an adjective: "You're a pretty clever fuck.").
Related to "fucker" is the word "motherfucker." Sometimes used as an extreme insult—an accusation of incest—this term is also occasionally used to connote respectful awe. For example, "He's a mean motherfucker" does not mean "He's abusive, filthy and copulates with his mother," but "He's someone to be afraid of." In this context, some gang members might even describe themselves as "motherfuckers." The word "fuck" is used in many forms of music, with "motherfucker" being used as a rhythmic filler in hip hop, urban music and some rock genres; examples include The Crystal Method's song "Name of the Game" and Turbonegro's "Don't Say Motherfucker Motherfucker". Perhaps "motherfucker's" rhythmic compatibility is due to its quadrisyllabic pronunciation, making it a natural fit for popular music that is written in 4/4 metre. Also contributing to its use in aggressive, high-energy music is the fact that it includes a hard "k" sound in its third syllable, making it easy to exclaim, particularly when pronounced as "mutha fucka". Despite these rhythmic qualities, "motherfucker" has not become as accepted in English usage as its root "fuck".
A more succinct example of the flexibility of the word is its use as almost every word in a sentence. In his book, "Wartime: Understanding and Behavior in the Second World War", Paul Fussell, literary historian and professor emeritus of English literature at the University of Pennsylvania, recountedFussell P: "Wartime: Understanding and Behavior in the Second World War", Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 1990</ref>The phrase "Fuck you, you fucking fuck!" is a memorable quote from the movie "Blue Velvet" from 1986, and is still used today as heard in Strapping Young Lad's "You Suck" from their 2006 album "The New Black". Another example is "Fuck the fucking fuckers!" Because of its vulgar status, the word "fuck" is usually restricted in mass media and barred from titles in the United States. In 2002, when the controversial French film "Baise-moi" (2000) was released in the US, its title was changed to "Rape Me", rather than the literal "Fuck Me", though this may have been for effect. Similarly, the Swedish film "Fucking Åmål" was retitled "Show Me Love".
Online forums and public blogs may censor the word by use of automatic filters. For example, Fark.com replaces the word "fuck" with "fark". Others replace the word with asterisks ("****") to censor it (and other profanities) entirely. To avert these filters, many online posters will use the word "fvck". This particular alteration is in common usage at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where students use it in reference to the inscriptions on MIT's neoclassical buildings, in which the letter "U" is replaced by "V." A typical coinage in this idiom would be "I'm fvcked by the Institvte." (Other less common spellings to cheat a censor are "fück" and "phuck".) Another way to bypass a word filter is to use leet: fuck becomes F(_) c|< or |=(_)Ck, for example.
The word "fuck" is a component of many acronyms, some of which—like "SNAFU" and "FUBAR"—date as far back as World War II. Many more recent coinages, such as the shorthand "?" for "what the fuck?," "STFU" for "shut the fuck up," or "FML" for "fuck my life," have been widely extant on the Internet, and may count as examples of memes. Many acronyms will also have an "F" or "MF" added to increase emphasis; for example, "OMG" ("") becomes "OMFG" ("oh my fucking God"). Abbreviated versions of the word tend not to be considered as offensive. Despite the proclaimed vulgarity of the word, several comedians rely on "fuck" for comedic routines. George Carlin created several literary works based upon the word. Other comedians who use or used the word consistently in their routines include Billy Connolly, Denis Leary, Lewis Black, Andrew Dice Clay, Chris Rock, Richard Pryor, Eddie Murphy, and Sam Kinison.
Examples of more recent usage.
In 1928, D. H. Lawrence's novel "Lady Chatterley's Lover" gained notoriety for its frequent use of the words "fuck", "fucked", and "fucking".
Perhaps the earliest usage of the word in popular music was the 1938 Eddy Duchin release of the Louis Armstrong song "Ol' Man Mose."
The liberal usage of the word (and other vulgarisms) by certain artists (such as James Joyce, Henry Miller, Lenny Bruce, Peter Cook and Dudley Moore, in their Derek and Clive personas) has led to the banning of their works and criminal charges of obscenity.
"The Catcher in the Rye" by J. D. Salinger featured the use of "fuck you" in print. First published in the United States in 1951, the novel remains controversial to this day due to its use of the word, standing at number 13 for the most banned books from 1990–2000 according to the American Library Association.
The first documented use of the word "fuck" on live British television (and probably on any television system) has been attributed to theatre critic Kenneth Tynan in 1965. Controversy also ensued in 1976 when "Today" host Bill Grundy interviewed the Sex Pistols, after guitarist Steve Jones called Grundy a "dirty fucker" and a "fucking rotter" (see EMI and the Grundy incident).
Use in marketing.
In April 1997, clothing retailer French Connection began branding their clothes "fcuk" (usually written in lowercase). Though they insisted it was an acronym for French Connection United Kingdom, its similarity to the word "fuck" caused controversy. French Connection fully exploited this and produced an extremely popular range of t-shirts with messages such as "fcuk this", "hot as fcuk", "mile high fcuk", "fcuk me", "fcuk her", "too busy to fcuk", "fcuk football", "fcuk fashion", "fcuk fear", "fcuk on the beach", "the joy of fcuk", etc.
In 2009, the European Union's OHIM trade marks agency disallowed a German brewery to market a beer called "Fucking Hell". They sued, and on 26 March 2010 got permission to market the beer. They claim that it is actually named after the Austrian village Fucking and the German term for light beer, hell.
Band names.
The word "fuck" has been used in a number of band names, generally based on common compounds. Although most of these bands are in the aggressive, non-mainstream genres of punk and metal, others fall into the categories of more accessible forms of electronic rock and pop.
Holy fuck.
"Holy fuck" is a widely used example of 'liturgical profanity' used interjectionally to express anger, contempt, disgust, or amazement. Usually vulgar. Noted by academics and used in literature, deriving its power from a combination of the sacred, holy, and the profane, fuck. An exclamation, similar to "holy shit!", but more offensive, also used informally for sex within a religious context.
Machine mistranslation.
The word "fuck" occurs sometimes in Chinese/English bilingual public notices in China as a machine translation of the Simplified Chinese character 干 (干) or Traditional Chinese character 幹 (幹) which can also mean "dry" and "do," e.g., "spread to fuck the fruit" for "loose dried fruit," "fuck to adjust the area" for "dry seasonings section," and "fuck the certain price of goods" for "dry foods price counter" The fault occurred in some versions of commonly-used Chinese to English machine translators, for example Jinshan (金山 = "Gold Mountain") by Kingsoft.
F-bomb.
The term "F-bomb" surfaced in newspapers more than 20 years ago and in 2012 was listed, for the first time, in the mainstream "Merriam-Webster's Collegiate Dictionary".
Censorship.
The films "Ulysses" and "I'll Never Forget What's'isname" (both 1967) are contenders for being the first film to use the word 'fuck,' although the word 'fucking' is clearly mouthed silently in the film "Sink the Bismarck!" (1960), and the title character says it in the cartoon "Bosko's Picture Show" (1933). Since the U.S. adoption of the MPAA film rating system, use of the word has been accepted in R-rated movies, and under the older rules, use of the word in a sexual way would automatically cause the film to be given an R rating. Later changes could allow for a maximum of three non-sexual and strictly exclamatory uses of the word in PG-13 movies.
On August 19, 1969 the acid rock band Jefferson Airplane played their song "We Can Be Together" uncensored on "The Dick Cavett Show", including the 60's countercultural slogan "Up against the wall, motherfucker!" (which was also the name of an anarchist group at that time). This was the first appearance of the word on U.S. television. 
In 1970, John Lennon successfully got the word past the censors on his song "Working Class Hero" with the lines "They hate you if you're clever and they despise a fool, till you're so fucking crazy you can't follow their rules" and "You think you're so clever and classless and free, but you're still fucking peasants as far as I can see."
Since the 1970s, the use of the word "fuck" in R-rated movies has become so commonplace in mainstream American movies that it is rarely noticed by most audiences. Nonetheless, a few movies have made exceptional use of the word, to the point where such films as "Fuck", "Good Will Hunting", "Casino", "The Last Detail", "Menace II Society", "The Big Lebowski", "The Departed", "Scarface" (1983), "Pulp Fiction", "Blue Velvet", "", and "Goodfellas" as well as the HBO TV series "The Sopranos" are known for its extensive use. In the movie "Meet the Parents", and its sequels "Meet the Fockers" and "Little Fockers", the main character's last name of "Focker" is a running joke. In the popular comedy "Four Weddings and a Funeral", it is the chief word, repeatedly uttered, during the opening five minutes. In HBO's TV series "The Wire", Season 1, Episode 4, entitled "Old Cases," there is a long segment in which two homicide detectives, visiting a crime scene, communicate using only variations of the word "fuck". To many, one of the most humorous tirades demonstrating various usages of the word appears in the comedy, "Planes, Trains & Automobiles" (1987), where Steve Martin expresses his dissatisfaction in his treatment by a rental car agency. The movie "Student Bodies" inserted a scene in the middle of the film to explain to audiences that movies with an R rating are more popular than those carrying a PG rating, which the movie could easily have had. He ends his address with, " ... the producers of this motion picture have asked me to take this opportunity to say 'Fuck you'", at which time the MPAA R-rating banner appeared.
In several PG-rated movies, however, the word is used, mainly because at the time there was no PG-13 rating and the MPAA did not want to give the films R ratings; for instance, "All the President's Men" (1976), where it is used seven times; "The Kids Are Alright" (1979), where it is used twice; and "The Right Stuff" (1983), where it is used five times. "Spaceballs" (1987) is one of at least four anomalies in that it was rated PG after the 1984 introduction of the PG-13 rating, yet it includes Dark Helmet's line, "'Out of order'?! Fuck! Even in the future nothing works!" The second is "Big" (1988) which has the character of Billy asking Tom Hanks' character, "Who the fuck do you think you are?" The third is "Beetlejuice" (1988) which has the character Betelgeuse kick over a fake tree and scream, "nice fucking model!" The fourth is 1988's Caddyshack II where Randy Quaid's character shouts out he is going to break down a door with a "fucking baseball bat."
In the 1999 film "Galaxy Quest," Sigourney Weaver's character Gwen DeMarco is edited from the line "Well, fuck that!" to "Well, screw that!" The change was made to avoid a PG-13 rating, and the original line is obvious when reading her lips.
Films edited for broadcast use matching euphemisms so that lip synching will not be thrown off. One televised version of Quentin Tarantino's "Jackie Brown", for instance, had the actors dub in the words "frick", "Nubian", and "melon farmer" for "fuck", "nigger", and "motherfucker", respectively. In similarly dubbed versions of "Die Hard" and "," Bruce Willis' catchphrase "Yippee-ki-yay, motherfucker" is replaced by "Yippee-ki-yay, Mister Falcon" or "Yippee-ki-yay, Kemo Sabe." Similarly, the TV broadcast edit of "Snakes on a Plane" has Samuel L. Jackson saying "I have had it with these monkey-fighting snakes on this Monday-to-Friday plane," emending two occurrences of "motherfucking". In the film "The Big Lebowski", John Goodman's character repeatedly yells, "This is what happens when you fuck a stranger in the ass" while trashing a car. It was infamously censored on television as "This is what happens when you find a stranger in the Alps." His character also repeatedly says to Steve Buscemi's character, "Shut the fuck up, Donny," or "Donny, shut the fuck up." In the television version, "fuck" is censored with "hell."
Many stand-up comedians who perform for adult audiences make liberal use of the word "fuck". While George Carlin's use of the word was an important part of his stage persona, other comedians (such as Andrew Dice Clay) have been accused of substituting vulgarity and offensiveness for genuine creativity through overuse of the word. Billy Connolly and Lenny Bruce were pioneers of the use of the word in their shows for general audiences.
Recently, the hip-hop group Black Eyed Peas' hit song "Don't Phunk With My Heart" was only played on many radio stations in an edited version, "Don't Mess With My Heart." James Blunt's first major song, "You're Beautiful", featured the line "she could see from my face that I was fucking high" – this was censored to "flying high" for broadcasting purposes.
Freedom of expression.
In 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court decided that the mere public display of "fuck" is protected under the First and Fourteenth Amendments and cannot be made a criminal offense. In 1968, Paul Robert Cohen had been convicted of "disturbing the peace" for wearing a jacket with "FUCK THE DRAFT" on it (in reference to conscription in the Vietnam War). The conviction was upheld by the Court of Appeals and overturned by the Supreme Court. "Cohen v. California", "403 U.S. 15" (1971).
In 1983, pornographer Larry Flynt, representing himself before the U.S. Supreme Court in a libel case, shouted, "Fuck this court!" during the proceedings, and then called the justices "nothing but eight assholes (referring to Justices Warren E. Burger, William J. Brennan, Jr., Byron White, Thurgood Marshall, Harry Blackmun, Lewis F. Powell, Jr., William Rehnquist, and John Paul Stevens) and a token cunt" (referring to Justice Sandra Day O'Connor). Chief Justice Warren E. Burger had him arrested for contempt of court, but the charge was later dismissed on a technicality.
Common alternatives.
In conversation or writing, reference to or use of the word "fuck" may be replaced by any of many alternative words or phrases, including "the F-word" or "the F-bomb" (a play on "A-bomb" and "H-bomb"), or simply, "eff" (as in "What the eff!" or "You effing fool!"). Also, there are many commonly used substitutes, such as "flipping", "frigging", "fricking", "freaking", "feck", "fudge" or any of a number of similar sounding nonsense words. In print, there are alternatives such as, "F***", "F––k", etc.; or a string of non-alphanumeric characters, for example, "@$#*%!" and similar (especially favored in comic books).
A common replacement word used mainly on the Internet is "fsck", derived from the name of the Unix file system checking utility. In "Battlestar Galactica" the bowdlerized form 'Frack' (spelt 'Frak' in the reimagined 2003 version) was used as a substitute for fuck. The word is sometimes jokingly used as a curse by fans, but its use in unrelated media is growing. Similarly, the word "frell" is used as a substitute on the TV show Farscape, and Dr. Elliot Reid (played by Sarah Chalke) has frequently used the substitute "frick" on the TV show "Scrubs".
The phrase "feck" is a common substitute for "fuck" in Ireland, where it is considered to be less rude, though still not acceptable in many contexts. It has come into occasional use across the UK in the last 15 years as a result of its frequent use in the "Father Ted" comedy series. Although the word is considered to be equally as rude as "fuck", its appearance in "Father Ted" and in a Magner's Cider advert suggest the opposite.
The word "firetruck" is also used as an alternative, starting with "f" and ending with "-uck".
Using the phonetic alphabet, "foxtrot uniform charlie kilo" is sometimes used.
