Catfish is a 2010 American film, directed by Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman, involving a young man being filmed by his brother and friend as he builds a romantic relationship with a young woman on the social networking website Facebook.
Plot.
Young photographer Yaniv "Nev" Schulman lives with his brother Ariel in New York City. Abby Pierce, an eight-year-old child prodigy artist in rural Ishpeming, Michigan, sends Nev a painting of one of his photos. They become Facebook friends, which broadens to include Abby's family: including her mother, Angela (Wesselman); Angela's husband Vince (Stephen Fogarty); and Abby's attractive older half-sister Megan, who lives in Gladstone, Michigan.
For a documentary, Ariel and Daniela Torrico film Nev as he begins an online relationship with Megan. She sends him MP3s of her songs, but Nev discovers that they are all falsely taken from performances on YouTube. He later finds evidence that Megan and Abby have lied about other things. Ariel urges Nev to continue the relationship for the documentary. The siblings travel to Michigan to make an impromptu appearance at the Pierces' house and confront Megan. At Angela's house, she takes some time to answer the door and soon casually announces that she will begin chemotherapy for uterine cancer. She drives them to see Abby, who is confused when asked about her paintings. 
The next morning, Nev wakes up to a text message from Megan saying that she was checking into rehab and cannot meet him, which is confirmed by one of Megan's Facebook friends. Angela shortly admits the pictures of Megan were of someone else (and lied about twice), her daughter Megan is in rehab downstate, Megan has been estranged from the family, and that Angela made the paintings. Posing for a painting, Angela confesses that the various personae were fragments of her personality enacting fantasies of her life if she had made different choices. It also is revealed that Vince is under the illusion that Nev is a patron of Angela's and commissioned the artwork he received. 
Vince, talking with Nev, tells a story. He says that when live cod were shipped to Asia from North America, the fish's inactivity in their tanks resulted in mushy flesh, but fishermen found that putting catfish in the tanks with the cod kept them active. Vince feels that people like Angela are "catfish", who keep other people active in life.
Production.
To portray Megan and her family, Angela used pictures that Vancouver, Washington photographer Aimee Gonzales had posted on Facebook. "Catfish"s filmmakers compensated Gonzales for her involuntary appearance in the documentary, and she participated in publicity for the film. A photograph Angela described as a son, Alex, is that of rapper Joshua Paul Liimatta, also known as "The Sisu Kid".
Authenticity questioned.
In an interview, Ariel Schulman related that some viewers believe "Catfish" to be a fake documentary or a hoax. Morgan Spurlock, director and subject of the documentary "Super Size Me", told the producers of the film during one of its initial screenings, "It was the best fake documentary I have ever seen." Comedian Zach Galifianakis also has stated that he does not believe the events in the film to be true.
Kyle Buchanan at "Movieline" questions why the filmmakers would begin obsessively documenting Nev's online relationship so early on, and argues that it is highly improbable that media-savvy professionals like the Schulmans and Joost would not use the Internet to research Megan and her family before meeting them. Others have also questioned the trio's decision to begin filming, as well as the seemingly improbable coincidence of them catching everything of importance to the story on film as it happens. It has also been pointed out that the group's supposed movements in "Catfish" are not documented in their public blog postings at the time. 
Since the movie's release, Angela has been interviewed by ABC's "20/20" and the "Los Angeles Times" has spoken with neighbors familiar with her family. In the summer of 2011, "The Mining Journal" ran a two-part profile of Angela in connection with the "North of the 45th Parallel 2011" exhibition at the DeVos Art Museum on the campus of Northern Michigan University.
Release.
The film had a limited release on September 17, 2010. The Rogue Pictures unit of Relativity Media acquired "Catfish" in a bidding war with Paramount Pictures, after Brett Ratner endorsed the film. "Catfish" was released on Blu-ray and DVD on January 4, 2011.
MTV Show.
Recently, Nev Schulman has teamed up with MTV to produce a reality television show similar to the idea of the documentary but will focus on the lives of others who have been entangled in an online relationship with another person. It premiered on November 12, 2012.
Reception.
The film was well received by critics. It holds an 82% "fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes, the site's consensus being ""Catfish"" may tread the line between real-life drama and crass exploitation a little too unsteadily for some viewers' tastes, but its timely premise and tightly wound mystery make for a gripping documentary".
"Time" magazine did a full page article, written by Mary Pols in a September 2010 issue, saying "as you watch "Catfish", squirming in anticipation of the trouble that must lie ahead―why else would "this" be a movie?―you're likely to think this is the real face of social networking."
At the 2010 Sundance Film Festival, Alison Willmore of IFC described it as a "sad, unusual love story." John DeFore of "The Hollywood Reporter" called "Catfish" "jaw-dropping" and "crowd-pleasing" but said that it "will require clever marketing in order to preserve the surprises at its core." Kyle Buchanan of "Movieline" asked if "easily the most buzzed-about documentary" at Sundance had "a truth problem", and reported that an audience member questioned whether it was a documentary at all. Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" referred to these questions as a "severe cross-examination" and states that "everyone in the film is exactly as the film portrays them."
"Total Film" described the film as: "Funny, unsettling and thoroughly engrossing... the end result is a compulsive, propulsive study of relationships virtual and real".
"Very Aware" said of the film: "All of the above information doesn’t prove that the film is entirely fake. What it does prove is that much of the film has been recreated, and its possible that they did it in such a way to create a story where there might not have been one to begin with".
Ariel Schulman and Henry Joost became co-directors for the horror film "Paranormal Activity 3" after "Catfish" received attention from film festivals.
Lawsuits.
The movie itself has been the subject of two lawsuits, with Relativity Media concluding that the movie will never be profitable because of them. Both of these lawsuits have to do with songs used within the movie not being attributed to their creators.
