Sinister is a 2012 supernatural horror film directed by Scott Derrickson and written by Derrickson and C. Robert Cargill. It follows true-crime writer Ellison Oswalt (Ethan Hawke) as he discovers a box of home movies that puts his family in danger. The film employs "found footage" along with traditional cinematography. "Sinister" premiered at the SXSW festival, and was released in the United States on October 12, 2012 and in the UK on 5 October 2012.
Plot.
The film opens with Super 8 footage depicting a family of four standing beneath a tree with hoods over their heads and nooses around their necks. An unseen figure saws through a limb acting as a counterweight, causing them all
to be strangled.
Months later, washed-up true crime writer Ellison Oswalt (Ethan Hawke) moves into the murdered family's home with 
his wife, Tracy (Juliet Rylance), and their two children Ashley (Clare Foley) and Trevor (Michael Hall D'Addario). Only Ellison is aware that the house they are moving into was the crime scene. Ellison intends to use the murders as the basis for his new book, and hopes that his research will turn up the fate of the family's fifth member, a little girl named Stephanie who disappeared following the murders.
Ellison finds a box in the attic, which contains a projector and several reels of Standard 8 mm footage that are each labeled as if innocent home movies. Watching the films, Ellison discovers that they are snuff movies depicting families being murdered in various ways, including having their throats slit in bed ("Sleepy Time '98"), being burnt to death in a car ("BBQ '79"), being drowned in their pool ("Pool Party '66"), being run over by a lawn mower ("Lawn Work '86") and the hanging that opened the movie ("Family Hanging Out '11"). 
The drowning film proves especially disturbing for Ellison after he notices a demonic figure watching the drownings from the bottom of the pool before turning to look at the camera. Ellison eventually finds the figure observing the murders in each of the films, along with a strange painted symbol. 
Consulting a local deputy (James Ransone), Ellison discovers that the murders depicted in the films took place at different times, beginning in the 1960s, and in different cities across the country. He also learns that the families were all drugged before being killed; and that a child from each family went missing following every murder. The deputy refers Ellison to a local professor, Jonas (Vincent D'Onofrio), whose expertise is the occult and demonic phenomena, to decipher the symbol in the films. Jonas tells Ellison that the symbols are that of a pagan deity named Bughuul, who would kill entire families so that he could take their children into his realm and consume their souls. 
One night, Ellison hears the film projector running and goes up to the attic. There, he finds the missing children in various states of decay, watching one of the films. Bughuul suddenly appears on camera before physically appearing before Ellison. Ellison takes the camera and the films to the backyard and burns them. Then he wakes his family to tell them that they are moving back to their old house.
Ellison receives a message from Professor Jonas, who sends him scans of historical drawings associated with Bughuul; each had been partially destroyed because ancient cultures believed that Bughuul lived within the images, and that they acted as portals between his realm and the mortal world. Ellison then discovers the projector and films in his attic, along with 
a new envelope of film labeled "extended endings." During this time, the deputy tries calling several times, but Ellison never answers.
The next time the deputy calls, while Ellison is assembling the films, he answers. The deputy informs him that he has discovered a link between each of the murders: Every family had previously lived in the house where the last murder took place, and each new murder occurred shortly after the family moved into their new residence; by moving, Ellison has placed himself and his family in line to be the next victims.
Ellison then watches the footage. He finds that it depicts the missing children coming onscreen following each murder, revealing themselves to be the killers before suddenly disappearing. Before he can react, Ellison becomes light-headed; inspecting his coffee cup, he finds a note reading "Good Night Daddy" and a green liquid inside the cup before losing consciousness. 
Ellison awakens to find himself, his wife and his son bound and gagged. Ashley approaches holding the 8 mm camera, and promises him that she will make him famous again. Ashley then proceeds to murder her family with an axe, using their blood to paint images of cats, dogs, and unicorns on the walls. Her work complete, Ashley views the Super-8 film of her murders, which concludes with an image of the missing children watching her. Bughuul appears, causing the children to flee. He lifts Ashley into his arms and disappears into the film with her.
The film concludes with an image of the box of films in the Oswalt family's attic, now accompanied by a reel labeled "House Painting '12."
Production.
Writer C. Robert Cargill's inspiration for the movie came from a nightmare he experienced after seeing "The Ring", in which he discovered a film in his attic depicting the hanging of an entire family. This scenario became the setup for the plot of "Sinister." In creating a villain for the film, Cargill conceptualized a new take on the Bogeyman, calling the entity "Mr. Boogie;" Cargill's idea was that the creature would be both terrifying and seductive to children, luring them to their dooms as a sinister Willy Wonka-like figure. Cargill and co-writer Scott Derickson ultimately decided to downplay the creature's alluring nature, only intimating how it manipulates the children into murder. In further developing "Mr. Boogie," the pair had lengthy discussions about its nature, deciding not to make it a demon but rather a Pagan deity, in order to place it outside the conceptual scope of any one particular religion. Consequently, the villain was given the proper name 'Bughuul,' with only the child characters in the film referring to it as "Mr. Boogie." 
In crafting a look for Bughuul, Cargill initially kept to the idea of a sinister Willy Wonka before realizing that audiences might find it "silly" and kill the potential for the film becoming franchised. Looking for inspiration, Derickson typed the word "horror" into flickr and began searching through 500,000 images. He narrowed the images down to 15, including a photograph of a ghoul which was tagged simply "Natalie". Cargill was particularly struck by "Natalie," deciding "What if it’s just this guy?". He and Derickson contacted the photographer and purchased the rights to use the image for $500. Derickson explained that the image appealed to him because it reminded him of the makeup and costumes worn by performers in black metal while remaining unique enough so as not to be directly linked to the genre; Derickson had previously researched black metal while looking for inspiration for Bughuul's symbol, which is ritualistically painted at the scene of each of the film's murder sequences.
Shooting for "Sinister" began in autumn of 2011, after Ethan Hawke and Juliet Rylance signed on to star in the film. The super 8 segments were shot first, using actual super 8 cameras and film stock, in order to maintain the snuff films' aesthetic authenticity. Principal photography took place on Long Island.
In an interview with "Bleeding Cool", screenwriter Cargill admitted that Ethan Hawke's character got his name (Ellison Oswalt) from writer Harlan Ellison and comedian/writer Patton Oswalt. Cargill keeps books by both men on his shelves.
Release.
First revealed at the SXSW festival in the United States, "Sinister" premiered in the United Kingdom at the London FrightFest and in Spain at the Sitges Film Festival.
Reception.
Reviews for "Sinister" were generally positive, with Variety praising the movie as "the sort of tale that would paralyze kids' psyches". Film.com stated that "Sinister" was a "deeply frightening horror film that takes its obligation to alarm very seriously". Roger Ebert gave it 3 out of 4 stars, calling it "an undeniably scary movie." 
As of December 30, 2012, the film has a 62% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes with 121 reviews. The consensus of the site is, "Its plot hinges on typically implausible horror-movie behavior and recycles countless genre cliches, but "Sinister" delivers a surprising number of fresh, diabolical twists." CraveOnline called the film "solid" but remarked that the film "doesn't quite go to the next level that gets me like an "Insidious"", and IGN praised the film's story while criticizing some of "Sinister"'s "scream-out-loud moments" as lazy.
Ryan Lambie of Den of Geek wrote,
Lambie, rating the movie 3 of 5 stars, says that despite its "faults, there's something undeniably powerful about "Sinister". Hawke's performance holds the screen through its more hackneyed moments, and it's the scenes where it's just him, a projector, and a few feet of hideous 8 mm footage where the movie truly convinces. And while its scares are frequently cheap, it's also difficult to deny that "Sinister" sometimes manages to inspire moments of palpable dread." The reviewer for "Time Out London" granted only 2 out of 5 stars, saying, "This so-so, occasionally effective horror film combines found-footage creepiness and haunted-house scares – but is stronger on mood than story." 
Reviewer Garry McConnachie of Scotland's "Daily Record" rated the film 4 of 5 stars, saying, "This is how Hollywood horror should be done... "Sinister" covers all its bases with aplomb."
DVD/Blu-ray Releases.
The film is to be released on UK DVD and Blu-ray on 11 February 2013 complete with two commentaries (one with the director and another with writers Scott Derrickson and C. Robert Cargill). The release is also due to contain two new features ("True Crime Criminals" and "Living In A House Of Death") as well as a featurette on the Sinister Fear Experiment performed in celebration of the film's theatrical release.
