Geordie Shore is a British reality television series broadcast on MTV. Based in Newcastle upon Tyne, it premiered on 24 May 2011, and is the British adaptation of American show "Jersey Shore". "Geordie" is the regional nickname and dialect given to the people of the Tyneside area of North East England, and is closely associated with the city of Newcastle upon Tyne and its environs where the show is set. However the show involves members from various parts of North East England. 
History.
"Geordie Shore" was commissioned in January 2011. In June 2011, two summer specials based in Magaluf were announced as well as a reunion special. On 15 August 2011 it was announced that "Geordie Shore" had been recommissioned for a second series with an extended eight episode run. On 7 December 2011 it was confirmed the second series would begin on 31 January 2012. After the Magaluf specials Greg Lake announced he was to leave the show and not appear in the second series. Rebecca Walker (18) and Ricci Guarnaccio (25) were cast as Lake's replacements.
For series two the cast moved from their home in Jesmond to a new house in a converted warehouse on the outskirts of the city. In January 2012 the cast launched their own fragrance, capturing the essence of Newcastle. Titled L’eau De Geordie (the world's first ever KEBAB scented perfume), their spoof perfume was to mark the premiere of the second series.
On 23 February 2012, it was announced that the cast of "Geordie Shore" would head to Cancún in Mexico for Spring Break – eight episodes were filmed for series 3. Series 3 began filming in early March and aired on MTV in June, it was later confirmed by cast member Gary Beadle via Twitter.
In the article of the announcement of the third series the Senior Vice President and Director of Television for Viacom International Media Networks (VIMN) Kerry Taylor said the following in an article on the MTV UK website "There has been an overwhelming response to Geordie Shore from our audiences across the globe – both from a ratings perspective and across social media platforms".
Newcastle has also benefited from the show as tourists are coming in their thousands to visit the city. Hotels and travel agents have also told how there has been a surge of interest.
On 10 January 2013, MTV confirmed that the fifth series of "Geordie Shore" will follow the cast in several locations across Europe including Amsterdam, Barcelona, Prague and Tignes. Filming for series 5 began on 14 November 2012, as confirmed by several cast members on Twitter, and concluded in December. The series began on 19 February 2013.
Reception.
In a column for "Metro", Christopher Hooton described the show as "a gaudy kaleidoscope of six packs, shots, fights, simulated fellatio and exposed breasts," but said that criticism of the show was futile given its intent, noting that "being shocked by the lasciviousness of "Geordie Shore" is like being shocked by the lack of nutrition in a Pot Noodle." Newcastle Central MP Chi Onwurah has described the show as "bordering on pornographic," and announced she will be raising questions in Parliament about the issues raised by the programme.
The show has been a continued success for MTV UK. Series 4 has been the highest rated to date and has attracted over 1 million viewers for three of the eight episodes in the series.
Cast.
The initial cast members were revealed in April 2011. They were Gary 'Gaz' Beadle, Charlotte-Letitia Crosby, Jay Gardner, Holly Hagan, Greg Lake, Vicky Pattison, Sophie Kasaei and James Tindale. Holly left in episode 3, explaining she had felt isolated by the rest of the cast. However, she later returned to the house for episode 5. She then left again in episode 6, before everyone else, but returned for series 2.
It was later announced Greg Lake would not return for series 2 of the show, though he does appear in the introduction of the first episode, explaining that he is looking to mature and look for love and a career. In his place, Rebecca Walker and Ricci Guarnaccio joined the cast for series 2. Charlotte left in the second episode, following another clash with Gary, but would return two episodes later. Gaz and Ricci were sent home for fighting in the sixth episode but would return in the next episode.
In the first episode of series 3, both Charlotte and Rebecca were removed from the house after breaking a house rule, but they later returned in the next episode. James dislocated his knee in the third episode of series 3. In the fourth episode, Vicky and Holly were sent to collect a parcel and got separated in the process. Holly did not return until the next day at which point Vicky was still absent, causing Ricci to go out to find her. They remained absent for the rest of the episode. Episode 4 saw the departure of Sophie's boyfriend Joel, who stayed for 3 episodes. Sophie sent him back to the UK, but later regrets the decision and in episode 6 leaves the house to return home to see him. In the same episode, a fight between Ricci and Vicky initially results in both leaving the house voluntarily before being told they will not be allowed to return. They both feature in episode 7, but remain out of the house and their scenes are separate from the rest of the cast members.
On 23 May 2012 it was announced "Geordie Shore" would return for a fourth series with new castmates and ahead of the broadcast debut of series 3 on 26 June 2012, producers are holding open auditions for new stars. On 12 and 19 July 2012 it was announced Jay Gardner and Rebecca Walker would exit at the end of series 3.
On 2 October 2012 two new cast members were announced - Scott Timlin and Daniel Thomas-Tuck. The duo replaced Gardner and Walker from series 4.
On 11 December 2012 in episode 6 of series 4, Ricci Guarnaccio announced that he would be leaving the series and may not return to the show for series 5. However Ricci later announced on 7 January 2013 that he will be returning for series 5.
Series.
Note: These viewing figures are those of "MTV" and "MTV+1"
Internet distribution.
The uncensored episodes are available to buy on the UK iTunes Store the day after episodes are aired. Series 1 is also available on Netflix in the UK.
