Dame Judith Olivia "Judi" Dench, CH, DBE, FRSA (born 9 December 1934) is an English film, stage and television actress. Dench made her professional debut in 1957 with the Old Vic Company. Over the following few years she played in several of Shakespeare's plays in such roles as Ophelia in "Hamlet", Juliet in "Romeo and Juliet" and Lady Macbeth in "Macbeth". She branched into film work, and won a BAFTA Award as Most Promising Newcomer; however, most of her work during this period was in theatre. Not generally known as a singer, she drew strong reviews for her leading role in the musical "Cabaret" in 1968.
Over the next two decades, she established herself as one of the most significant British theatre performers, working for the National Theatre Company and the Royal Shakespeare Company. In television, she achieved success during this period, in the series "A Fine Romance" from 1981 until 1984 and in 1992 began a continuing role in the television romantic comedy series "As Time Goes By". Her film appearances were infrequent until she was cast as M in "GoldenEye" (1995), a role she continued to play in James Bond films through to "Skyfall" (2012). She received several notable film awards for her role as Queen Victoria in "Mrs. Brown" (1997), and has since been acclaimed for her work in such films as "Shakespeare in Love" (1998), "Chocolat" (2000), "Iris" (2001), "Mrs Henderson Presents" (2005) and "Notes on a Scandal" (2006), and the television production "The Last of the Blonde Bombshells" (2001).
Dench has received many award nominations for her acting in theatre, film and television; her awards include eleven BAFTAs, (including the Bafta Fellowship in 2001) seven Laurence Olivier Awards, (including the Society's Special Award) two Screen Actors Guild Awards, two Golden Globes, an Academy Award, and a Tony Award. In June 2011, she received a fellowship from the British Film Institute (BFI). She was married to actor Michael Williams from 1971 until his death in 2001. They are the parents of actress Finty Williams.
Personal life.
Dench was born in Heworth, York, England, the daughter of Eleanora Olive (née Jones), a native of Dublin, and Reginald Arthur Dench, a doctor who met Judi's mother while studying medicine at Trinity College, Dublin. Dench attended the Mount School, a Quaker independent secondary school in York, and became a Quaker. Her brothers, one of whom is actor Jeffery Dench, were born in Tyldesley, Lancashire. Notable relatives also include her niece, Emma Dench, a Roman historian and professor previously at Birkbeck, University of London, and currently at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts. On 5 February 1971, Dench married British actor Michael Williams and they had their only child, Tara Cressida Frances Williams, known professionally as "Finty" Williams, on 24 September 1972. Dench and her husband starred together in several stage productions, and the Bob Larbey British television sitcom, "A Fine Romance" (1981–84). Michael Williams died from lung cancer in 2001, aged 65. In early 2012, Dench discussed her macular degeneration, with one eye "dry" and the other "wet", for which she has been treated with injections into the eye. She said that she needs someone to read scripts to her.
Career.
In Britain, Dench has developed a reputation as one of the greatest actresses of the post-war period, primarily through her work in theatre, which has been her forte throughout her career. She has more than once been named number one in polls for Britain's best actress.
Early years.
Through her parents, Dench had regular contact with the theatre. Her father, a physician, was also the GP for the York theatre, and her mother was its wardrobe mistress. Actors often stayed in the Dench household. During these years, Judi was involved on a non-professional basis in the first three productions of the modern revival of the York Mystery Plays in the 1950s. In 1957, in one of the last productions in which she appeared during this period, she played the role of the Virgin Mary, performed on a fixed stage in the Museum Gardens. Though she initially trained as a set designer, she became interested in drama school as her brother Jeff attended the Central School of Speech and Drama. She applied and was accepted, where she was a classmate of Vanessa Redgrave, graduating with a first class degree in drama and four acting prizes, one being the Gold Medal as Outstanding Student.
In September 1957, she made her first professional stage appearance with the Old Vic Company, at the Royal Court Theatre, Liverpool, as Ophelia in "Hamlet", then her London debut in the same production at the Old Vic. She remained a member of the company for four seasons, 1957–1961, her roles including Katherine in "Henry V" in 1958 (which was also her New York debut), and as Juliet in "Romeo and Juliet" in October 1960, directed and designed by Franco Zeffirelli. During this period, she toured the United States and Canada, and appeared in Yugoslavia and at the Edinburgh Festival. She joined the Royal Shakespeare Company in December 1961 playing Anya in "The Cherry Orchard" at the Aldwych Theatre in London, and made her Stratford-upon-Avon debut in April 1962 as Isabella in "Measure for Measure". She subsequently spent seasons in repertory both with the Playhouse in Nottingham from January 1963 (including a West African tour as Lady Macbeth for the British Council), and with the Playhouse Company in Oxford from April 1964. That same year, she made her film debut in "The Third Secret".
Prominence.
In 1968, she was offered the role of Sally Bowles in the musical "Cabaret". As Sheridan Morley later reported: "At first she thought they were joking. She had never done a musical and she has an unusual croaky voice which sounds as if she has a permanent cold. So frightened was she of singing in public that she auditioned from the wings, leaving the pianists alone on stage". But when it opened at the Palace Theatre in February 1968, Frank Marcus, reviewing for "Plays and Players", commented that: "She sings well. The title song in particular is projected with great feeling." After a long run in "Cabaret", she rejoined the RSC making numerous appearances with the company in Stratford and London for nearly twenty years, winning several best actress awards. Among her roles with the RSC, she was the Duchess in John Webster's "The Duchess of Malfi" in 1971. In the Stratford 1976 season, and then at the Aldwych in 1977, she gave two comedy performances, first in Trevor Nunn's musical staging of "The Comedy of Errors" as Adriana, then partnered with Donald Sinden as Beatrice and Benedick in John Barton's "British Raj" revival of "Much Ado About Nothing". As Bernard Levin wrote in "The Sunday Times": "...demonstrating once more that she is a comic actress of consummate skill, perhaps the very best we have." One of her most notable achievements with the RSC was her performance as Lady Macbeth in 1976. Nunn's acclaimed production of "Macbeth" was first staged with a minimalist design at The Other Place theatre in Stratford. Its small round stage focused attention on the psychological dynamics of the characters, and both Ian McKellen in the title role, and Dench, received exceptionally favourable notices. "If this is not great acting I don't know what is", wrote Michael Billington in "The Guardian". "It will astonish me if the performance is matched by any in this actress's generation", commented J C Trewin in "The Lady". The production transferred to London, opening at the Donmar Warehouse in September 1977, and was adapted for television, later released on VHS and DVD. Dench won the SWET Best Actress Award in 1977.
Dench was nominated for a BAFTA for her role as Hazel Wiles in the 1979 BBC drama "On Giant's Shoulders". In 1989, she was cast as Pru Forrest, the long-time silent wife of Tom Forrest, in the BBC soap opera "The Archers" on its 10,000th edition. She had a romantic role in the BBC television film "Langrishe, Go Down" (1978), with Jeremy Irons and a screenplay by Harold Pinter from the Aidan Higgins novel, directed by David Jones, in which she played one of three spinster sisters living in a fading Irish mansion in the Waterford countryside. Dench made her debut as a director in 1988 with the Renaissance Theatre Company's touring season, "Renaissance Shakespeare on the Road", co-produced with the Birmingham Rep, and ending with a three month repertory programme at the Phoenix Theatre in London. Dench's contribution was a staging of "Much Ado About Nothing", set in the Napoleonic era, which starred Kenneth Branagh and Samantha Bond as Benedick and Beatrice. She has made numerous appearances in the West End including the role of Miss Trant in the 1974 musical version of "The Good Companions" at Her Majesty's Theatre. In 1981, Dench was due to play the title role of Grizabella in the original production of "Cats", but was forced to pull out due to a torn Achilles tendon, leaving Elaine Paige to play the role. She has acted with the National Theatre in London where, in September 1995, she played Desiree Armfeldt in a major revival of Stephen Sondheim's "A Little Night Music", for which she won an Olivier Award.
Popular success.
In 1995, Dench took over the role of M (James Bond's boss) in the James Bond film series, starting with "GoldenEye", replacing Robert Brown. 
In 1997, Dench appeared in her first starring role as late monarch Queen Victoria in John Madden's teleplay "Mrs. Brown" which depicts Victoria's relationship with her personal servant and favourite John Brown, played by Billy Connolly. Filmed with the intention of being shown on BBC One and on WGBH's "Masterpiece Theatre", it was eventually acquired by Miramax mogul Harvey Weinstein, who felt the drama film should receive a theatrical release after seeing it and took it from the BBC to US cinemas. Released to generally positive reviews and unexpected commercial success, going on to earn more than $13 million worldwide, the film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1997 Cannes Film Festival. For her performance, Dench garnered universal acclaim by critics and was awarded her fourth BAFTA and first Best Actress nomination at the 70th Academy Awards. In 2011, while accepting a British Film Institute Award in London, Dench commented that the project launched her Hollywood career and joked that "it was thanks to Harvey, whose name I have had tattooed on my bum ever since." 
Dench's other film of 1997 was Roger Spottiswoode's "Tomorrow Never Dies", her second film in the "James Bond" series. The spy film follows Bond, played by Brosnan, as he tries to stop a media mogul from engineering world events and starting World War III. Shot in France, Thailand, Germany, the United Kingdom, Vietnam and the South China Sea, it performed well at the box office and earned a Golden Globe nomination despite mixed reviews. In 1999, Dench won the Tony Award for her 1999 Broadway performance in the role of Esme Allen in David Hare's "Amy's View". She has taken on the role of Director for a number of stage productions. Dench won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress as Elizabeth I in the film "Shakespeare in Love". 
Dench has also lent her distinctive voice to many animated characters, narrations, and various other voice work. She plays the role of "Miss Lilly" in the children's animated series "Angelina Ballerina" (alongside her daughter, Finty Williams, as the voice of Angelina). She has narrated various classical music recordings (notably Mendelssohn's "A Midsummer Night's Dream", and Britten's "Canticles-The Heart of the Matter"), and has appeared in numerous BBC Radio broadcasts as well as commercials. Her many television appearances include lead roles in the series "A Fine Romance" and "As Time Goes By".
2001–2005.
In January 2001, Dench's husband Michael Williams died from lung cancer. The actress went to Nova Scotia, Canada, almost immediately after Williams's funeral to begin production on Lasse Hallström's drama film "The Shipping News", a therapy she later credited as her rescue: "People, friends, kept saying, 'You are not facing up to it; you need to face up to it,' and maybe they were right, but I felt I was – in the acting. Grief supplies you with an enormous amount of energy. I needed to use that up." In between, Dench finished work on Richard Eyre's film "Iris" (2001), in which she portrayed novelist Iris Murdoch. Dench shared her role with Kate Winslet, both actresses portraying Murdoch at different phases of her life. Each of them was nominated for an Academy Award the following year, earning Dench her fourth nomination within five years. In addition, she was awarded both an ALFS Award and the Best Leading Actress Award at the 55th British Academy Film Awards.
Following "Iris", Dench immediately returned to Canada to finish "The Shipping News" alongside Kevin Spacey and Julianne Moore. Based on the Pulitzer Prize winning novel by E. Annie Proulx, the drama revolves a quiet and introspective typesetter (Spacey) who, after the death of his daughter's mother, moves to Newfoundland along with his daughter and his aunt, played by Dench, in hopes of starting his life anew in the small town where she grew up. The film earned mixed reviews from critics, and was financially unsuccessful, taking in just US$24 million worldwide with a budget of US$35 million. Dench however, received BAFTA and SAG Award nominations for her performance.
In 2002, Dench was cast opposite Rupert Everett, Colin Firth and Reese Witherspoon in Oliver Parker's "The Importance of Being Earnest", a romantic comedy film about mistaken identity set in English high society during the Victorian Era. Based on Oscar Wilde's classic comedy of manners play of the same name, she portrayed Lady Bracknell in the film, a role she had repeatedly played before, including a stint at the Royal National Theatre in 1982. Dench shared the character with her daughter Finty, who portrayed the same character at a younger age. The film was released to lukewarm reactions by critics – who called it "breezy entertainment, helped by an impressive cast", but felt that it also suffered "from some peculiar directorial choices" – and earned just US$17.3 million during its limited release. Dench's other film of 2002 was "Die Another Day", the twentieth installment in the James Bond series. The Lee Tamahori–directed spy film marked her fourth appearance as MI6 head M and the franchise's last performance by Pierce Brosnan as Bond. "Die Another Day" received generally mixed reviews by critics who praised Tamahori's work on the film, but claimed the plot was damaged by excessive use of CGI. Regardless, it became the highest-grossing James Bond film up to that time.
In 2004, Dench appeared as Aereon, an ambassador of the Elemental race who helps uncover the mysterious past of Richard B. Riddick, played by Vin Diesel, in David Twohy's science fiction sequel "The Chronicles of Riddick". Selected by Diesel, who prompted writers to re-create the character to fit a female persona because he wanted to work with the actress, Dench called filming "tremendous fun," though she "had absolutely no idea what was going on in the plot." A medicore box office success, the film was largely panned by critics. In his review of the film, James Berardinelli from "ReelViews" remarked that he felt that Dench's character served nothing more than "a useful purpose than to give an opportunity to appear in a science fiction movie." 
She followed "Riddick" with a more traditional role in Charles Dance's period drama "Ladies in Lavender", also starring friend Maggie Smith. In the film, Dench plays one half of a sister duo who takes it upon herself to nurse a washed up stranger to health, eventually finding herself falling for a man many decades younger than she. The specialty release garnered positive reviews from critics, with Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" calling it "perfectly sweet and civilized a pleasure to watch Smith and Dench together; their acting is so natural it could be breathing." Also in 2004, Dench provided her voice for several smaller projects. In Walt Disney's "Home on the Range", she along with Roseanne Barr and Jennifer Tilly voiced a mismatched trio of dairy cows who must capture an infamous cattle rustler, for his bounty, in order to save their idyllic farm from foreclosure. The film became a lukewarm critical and commercial success for Disney.
A major hit for Dench came with Joe Wright's "Pride & Prejudice", a 2005 adaptation of the same-titled novel by Jane Austen, also starring Keira Knightley and Donald Sutherland. Wright convinced Dench to join the cast as Lady Catherine de Bourgh by writing her a letter that read "I love it when you play a bitch. Please come and be a bitch for me." Dench had only one week available to shoot her scenes, forcing Wright to make them his first days of filming. With both a worldwide gross of over US$121 million and several Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations, the film became a critical and commercial success.
2006–2010.
Dench in her role as M (Olivia Mansfield) was the only cast member carried through from the Brosnan films to appear in "Casino Royale" (2006), Martin Campbell's reboot of the James Bond film series, starring Daniel Craig in his debut performance as the fictional MI6 agent. The thriller received largely positive critical response, with reviewers highlighting Craig's performance and the reinvention of the character of Bond. It earned over US$594 million worldwide, ranking it among the highest-grossing James Bond films ever released. In April 2006, Dench returned to the West End stage in "Hay Fever" alongside Peter Bowles, Belinda Lang and Kim Medcalf. She finished off 2006 with the role of Mistress Quickly in the RSC's new musical "The Merry Wives", a version of "The Merry Wives of Windsor". 
Dench appeared opposite Cate Blanchett as a bitter, creepy and iron-fisted London teacher with a dedicated fondness for vulnerable women in Richard Eyre's 2006 drama film "Notes on a Scandal", an adaption from the 2003 novel of the same name by Zoë Heller. A fan of the Heller's book, Dench "was thrilled to be asked to [...] play that woman, to try to find a humanity in that dreadful person." The specialty film opened to generally positive reviews and commercial success, grossing US$50 million worldwide, exceeding its £15 million budget. In his review for "Chicago Sun-Times" film critic Roger Ebert declared the main actresses "perhaps the most impressive acting duo in any film of 2006. Dench and Blanchett are magnificent." The following year, Dench earned her sixth Academy nomination and went on to win a BIFA Award and an Evening Standard Award. 
Dench, as Miss Matty Jenkyns, co-starred with Eileen Atkins, Michael Gambon, Imelda Staunton and Francesca Annis in the BBC One five-part series "Cranford". The first season of the series began transmission in November 2007.
Dench became the voice for the narration for the updated Walt Disney World Epcot attraction Spaceship Earth in February 2008. The same month, she was named as the first official patron of the York Youth Mysteries 2008, a project to allow young people to explore the York Mystery Plays through dance, film-making and circus. Her only film of 2008 was Marc Forster's "Quantum of Solace", the twenty-second Eon-produced James Bond film, in which she reprised her role as M along with Daniel Craig. A direct sequel to the 2006 film "Casino Royale", Forster felt Dench was underused in the previous films and wanted to make her part bigger, having her interact with Bond more. The project gathered generally mixed reviews by critics who mainly felt that "Quantum of Solace" was not as impressive as the predecessor "Casino Royale", but became another hit for the franchise with a worldwide gross of US$591 million. For her performance, Dench was nominated for a Saturn Award the following year.
Dench returned to the West End in mid-2009, playing Madame de Merteuil in Yukio Mishima's play "Madame de Sade", directed by Michael Grandage as part of the Donmar season at Wyndham's Theatre. The same year, she appeared in Sally Potter's experimental film "Rage", a project that featured 14 actors playing fictional figures in and around the fashion world, giving monologues before a plain backdrop. Attracted to the fact that it was unlike anything she had done before, Dench welcomed the opportunity to work with Potter. "I like to do something that's not expected, or predictable. I had to learn to smoke a joint, and I set my trousers alight," she said about filming. Dench's next film was Rob Marshall's musical film "Nine", based on Arthur Kopit's book for the 1982 musical of the same name, which was itself suggested by Federico Fellini's semi-autobiographical film "8½". Also starring Daniel Day-Lewis, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz, and Sophia Loren, she played Lilli La Fleur, an eccentric but motherly French costume designer, who performs the song "Folies Bergères" in the film. Despite mixed to negative reviews, "Nine" was nominated for four Academy Awards, and awarded both the Satellite Award for Best Film and Best Cast.
Also in 2009, Dench reprised the role of Matilda Jenkyns in "Return to Cranford", the two-part second season of a Simon Curtis television series. Critically acclaimed, Dench was nominated for a Golden Globe Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, and a Satellite Award. In 2010, she renewed her collaboration with Peter Hall at the Rose Theatre in Kingston upon Thames in "A Midsummer Night's Dream", which opened in February 2010; she played Titania as Queen Elizabeth I in her later years – almost 50 years after she first played the role for the Royal Shakespeare Company. In July 2010, Dench performed "Send in the Clowns" at a special celebratory promenade concert from the Royal Albert Hall as part of the proms season, in honour of composer Stephen Sondheim's 80th birthday.
2011–present.
In 2011, Dench starred in "Jane Eyre", "My Week with Marilyn" and "J. Edgar". In Cary Joji Fukunaga's period drama "Jane Eyre", based on the 1847 novel of the same name by Charlotte Brontë, she played the short role of Alice Fairfax, the aloof and brooding master of Thornfield Hall, where main character Jane, played by Mia Wasikowska, gets employed as a governess. Dench reportedly signed on to the project after she had received a humorous personal note from Fukunaga, in which he "promised her that she'd be the sexiest woman on set if she did the film." Acclaimed among critics, it was a mediocre arthouse success at the box office, grossing US$30.5 million worldwide. In Simon Curtis' "My Week with Marilyn", which depicts the making of the 1957 film "The Prince and the Showgirl" starring Marilyn Monroe and Laurence Olivier, Dench played late British actress Sybil Thorndike during her work on set of the Laurence Olivier film. The film garnered largely positive reviews, particularly for Michelle Williams and Kenneth Branagh's performances, and earned Dench a Best Actress in a Supporting Role nomination at the 65th BAFTA Awards.
Dench's last film of 2011 was Clint Eastwood's "J. Edgar", a biographical drama film about the career of FBI director J. Edgar Hoover, played by Leonardo DiCaprio, from the Palmer Raids onwards, including an examination of his private life as an alleged closeted homosexual. Hand-picked by Eastwood to play Anna Marie Hoover, Hoover's mother, Dench initially thought a friend was setting her up upon receiving Eastwood's phone call request. "I didn't take it seriously to start with. And then I realised it was really him and that was a tricky conversation," she stated. Released to mixed reception, both with critics and commercially, the film went on to gross US$79 million worldwide. The same year, Dench reunited with Rob Marshall and Johnny Depp for a cameo appearance in "", playing a noblewoman who is robbed by Captain Jack Sparrow, played by Depp. She made a second cameo that year in Ray Cooney's star-studded comedy film "Run for Your Wife".
In 2011, Dench reunited with director John Madden on the set of the comedy-drama "The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel" (2012), starring an ensemble cast also consisting of Celia Imrie, Bill Nighy, Ronald Pickup, Maggie Smith, Tom Wilkinson and Penelope Wilton as a group of British pensioners moving to a retirement hotel in India, run by the young and eager Sonny, played by Dev Patel. Released to positive reviews by critics, who declared the film a "sweet story about the senior set featuring a top-notch cast of veteran actors," it became a surprise box-office hit following its international release, eventually grossing $US134 million worldwide, mostly from its domestic run. "Best Exotic Marigold Hotel" was ranked among the highest-grossing specialty releases of the year, and Dench, whose Peter Travers from "Rolling Stone" called "resilient marvel", garnered a Best Actress nod at both the British Independent Film Awards and Golden Globe Awards. 
Also in 2012, "Friend Request Pending", an indie short film which Dench had filmed in 2011, received a wide release as part of the feature films "Stars in Shorts" and "The Joy of Six". In the 12-minute comedy, directed by "My Week with Marilyn" assistant director Chris Foggin on a budget of just £5,000, she portrays a pensioner grappling with a crush on her church choirmaster and the art of cyber-flirting via social networking. Dench made her seventh and final appearance as M in the twenty-third "James Bond" film, "Skyfall" (2012), directed by Sam Mendes. In the film, Bond investigates an attack on MI6; it transpires that it is part of an attack on M by former MI6 operative, Raoul Silva (played by Javier Bardem) to humiliate, discredit and kill M as revenge against her for betraying him. Coincided with the 50th anniversary of the "James Bond" series, "Skyfall" was positively received by critics and at the box office, grossing over $1 Billion worldwide, and became the highest-grossing film of all-time in the UK and the highest-grossing film in the "James Bond" series. Critics called Dench's Saturn Awards-nominated performance "compellingly luminous".
Public life.
Dench was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1970 and Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in 1988. She was appointed a Companion of the Order of the Companions of Honour (CH) in 2005. In June 2011, she became a fellow of the British Film Institute (BFI). Dench is a patron of the Leaveners, Friends School Saffron Walden and the Archway Theatre, Horley, Surrey. She became president of Mountview Academy of Theatre Arts in London in 2006, taking over from Sir John Mills, and is also president of the Questors Theatre, Ealing. In May 2006, she became an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts (FRSA). She was also patron of Ovingdean Hall School, a special day and boarding school for the deaf and hard of hearing in Brighton, which closed in 2010, and Vice President of The Little Foundation. Dench is an Honorary Fellow of Lucy Cavendish College, Cambridge. In 1996, she was awarded a DUniv degree from Surrey University and in 2000–2001 she received an honorary DLitt degree from Durham University. In July 2000, she was awarded a DLitt degree by Queen Margaret University, Edinburgh, where she actively supported their Drama School at the Gateway Theatre on Elm Row. On 24 June 2008, she was honoured by the University of St Andrews, receiving a honorary DLitt degree at the university's graduation ceremony.
Political and social interests and involvement.
Dench has worked with the non-governmental indigenous organisation, Survival International, campaigning in the defence of the tribal people, the Bushmen of Botswana and the Arhuaco of Colombia. She made a small supporting video saying the Bushmen are victims of tyranny, greed and racism. On 22 July 2010, Dench was awarded an honorary degree of Doctor of Letters (DLitt) by Nottingham Trent University. The Dr. Hadwen Trust announced on 15 January 2011 that Dench had become a patron of the trust joining existing high profile personalities, Joanna Lumley and David Shepherd. On 19 March 2012 it was announced that Dench was to become honorary patron of the charity "Everton in the Community", the official charity of Everton F.C. in Everton, Liverpool. It was also revealed that Dench is a supporter of Everton. She is an advisor to the American Shakespeare Center. She is a patron of the Shakespeare Schools Festival, a charity that enables school children across the UK to perform Shakespeare in professional theatres. She is patron of East Park Riding for the Disabled, a riding school for disabled children at Newchapel, Surrey.
In 2011 along with musician Sting and entrepreneur Richard Branson she publicly urged policy makers to adopt more progressive drug policies by decriminalizing drug use.
Theatre work.
Source: "Judi Dench: With a Crack in her Voice" by John Miller
