Nikolina Konstantinova Dobreva (Bulgarian: Николина Константинова Добрева; born January 9, 1989), known professionally as Nina Dobrev, is a Canadian actress and model. She played the role of , the single teenage mother, on "", from the show's sixth to ninth season. She currently stars as Elena Gilbert and Katherine Pierce on The CW American television teen drama, "The Vampire Diaries".
Early life.
Nina Dobrev was born in Sofia, People's Republic of Bulgaria (now Republic of Bulgaria) as Николина Константинова Добрева, and moved to Canada at the age of two, where she was raised in Toronto, Ontario. She speaks fluent French, English, and Bulgarian. She has an older brother, Alexander; her father is a computer specialist and her mother is an artist.
Dobrev attended J. B. Tyrrell Sr. Public School, where she started ballet and jazz classes, and competed in rhythmic gymnastics. Then, she attended Wexford Collegiate School for the Arts in Scarborough, Ontario, and Ryerson University in Toronto, majoring in sociology. She left in 2008 to pursue her acting career.
Career.
Modeling jobs led to commercials, which then turned into film auditions. Shortly thereafter, she booked roles in feature films, including "Fugitive Pieces", "Away from Her", "Never Cry Werewolf", and the television series "". She starred in a number of Lifetime original movies. In 2007 she appeared in the music video of "You Got That Light" performed by "Wade Allain-Marcus" and "David Baum". She also was in an MTV movie called "The American Mall" on CTV. She is currently starring in The CW's drama "The Vampire Diaries", playing the dual role of Katherine Pierce, a vampire loved by two human brothers during the American Civil War, and Katherine's doppelgänger Elena Gilbert, a human who is caught between the same two brothers, now vampires, Damon and Stefan Salvatore.
She also had a minor role in the erotic thriller "Chloe", theatrically released by Sony Pictures Classics on March 26, 2010. The film had enjoyed commercial success and became director Atom Egoyan's biggest moneymaker ever.
In April 2011, she was cast as Candace in the film adaptation of "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", alongside Logan Lerman, Emma Watson, and Paul Rudd. Shooting began in May of that year in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and she completed her scenes on June 27, 2011. The film was released in September 2012.
In 2012, she appeared in a Funny or Die music video with Nick Braun called SPF. The song, written by Dobrev, Braun, and hip-hop producer Jewels Beats, charted as high as #188 on iTunes Comedy Charts.
Philanthropy.
In September 2011, Dobrev co-hosted We Day alongside Joe Jonas. We Day is organized by Free the Children. Dobrev also designed a T-Shirt with Me to We Style, which gives 50% of its profits to Free the Children.
Personal life.
While working on the show, Dobrev began dating her "Vampire Diaries" co-star Ian Somerhalder.
