Rise of the Guardians is a 2012 American 3D computer-animated fantasy-adventure film based on William Joyce's "The Guardians of Childhood" book series and "The Man in the Moon" short film by Joyce and Reel FX. Peter Ramsey directed the film, while Joyce and Guillermo del Toro were executive producers. Produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by Paramount Pictures, it was released on November 21, 2012 and received mixed to positive reviews.
Set about 200 years after the book series, the film tells a story about the Guardians (North or Santa Claus, the Tooth Fairy, Bunnymund or the Easter Bunny, and the Sandman), who enlist Jack Frost to stop Pitch from engulfing the world in darkness. It features the voices of Chris Pine (Jack Frost), Alec Baldwin (Santa Claus), Hugh Jackman (The Easter Bunny), Isla Fisher (The Tooth Fairy) and Jude Law (Pitch). The film was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film.
Plot.
The spirit of winter, Jack Frost (Chris Pine), describes how he came to be hundreds of years ago, lifted from the depths of a frozen pond by the Man in the Moon, and has been invisible ever since because people don't believe in him. 300 years later At the North Pole, Nicholas St. North, better known as Santa Claus (Alec Baldwin), is alerted that Pitch the Bogeyman (Jude Law) has returned and is threatening childhood with fear. After summoning fellow Guardians the Tooth Fairy/Tooth (Isla Fisher), the Easter Bunny/E. Aster Bunnymund (Hugh Jackman) and the Sandman/Sandy, North learns from the Man in the Moon that they are to induct Jack as their new member. Jack is brought to North's headquarters and they attempt to swear him in. Jack, frustrated by centuries of isolation caused by children's disbelief in him, declines to join. Regardless, North persuades him to cooperate for now by explaining their mission and the looming threat of Pitch. 
At Tooth's palace, the team discovers that Pitch has attacked, taken all the children's teeth, the childhood memories stored in them, and all but one of Tooth's baby fairies, Baby Tooth, whom Jack saves. Pitch declares his intention to destroy children's faith in the Guardians in revenge for his own disbelieved-in state, beginning with Tooth, who immediately begins weakening as children stop believing in her. To avert this, the Guardians perform her teeth-collection themselves for the interim, with a promise to find Jack's teeth to recover his previous life's memories. A young boy named Jamie (Dakota Goyo) is delighted to discover them in his room, as he believes in all of them except Jack, which renders Jack still invisible. Pitch learns of the Guardians' resistance and attacks Jack and Sandy; despite Jack's great efforts to save him, Sandy is overwhelmed by Pitch and seemingly destroyed.
The dejected Guardians next rally by helping Bunnymund prepare his eggs for Easter to keep children's belief strong. Although slightly complicated by the intrusion of Jamie's toddler sister, Sophie, the operation goes smoothly through to the distribution stage. Jack takes Sophie home, and discovers the entrance to Pitch's headquarters, where Tooth's baby fairies and the teeth are being held. Pitch urges him to step aside as a neutral party with the promise of his teeth's memories. Jack refuses, and Pitch attacks Bunnymund's domain, ruining the Easter-egg distribution and shattering children's faith in the Easter Bunny.
The Guardians' spirit broken, a despondent Jack departs in disgrace to Antarctica. There, Pitch tempts him to join forces, but Jack again refuses, as he wants to be loved, not feared. In response, Pitch reveals he has Baby-Tooth and threatens to kill her unless Jack relinquishes the source of his power, his staff. Jack submits, but Pitch reneges and the resulting fight leaves Jack trapped in a crevasse with Baby-Tooth while Pitch breaks his staff. To counter Jack's despair, Baby-Tooth convinces Jack to unlock his memories, which reveal that he was once a mortal teenager who died saving his little sister from falling through the thin ice of the lake and, because of that sacrifice, was changed into a winter spirit and chosen as a Guardian by the Man in the Moon.
Inspired at this revelation, Jack restores his staff and his power. The Guardians and Pitch learn there is only one believing child left: Jamie. Jack races to the boy first and not only confirms Jamie's faith in the Guardians, but also instills a belief in Jack Frost, enabling Jamie to finally see him, to Jack's own delighted surprise. The diminished and weakened Guardians arrive to join him as they confront Pitch, while Jamie gathers his friends to support them. Pitch's seemingly overwhelming power of nightmare proves no match against the children's faith, which restores the Guardians' full power to battle the villain. Sandman is resurrected by this belief, and joins the fight, leaving Pitch defeated and children's faith restored, as well as in Jack Frost. Pitch is taken down by his own fear and is dragged back into his lair.
At this victory, Jack finally accepts his responsibilities as a Guardian and resolves to protect the world's children with his new friends.
Production.
In 2005, William Joyce and Reel FX launched a joint venture, Aimesworth Amusements, to produce CG-animated feature films, one of which was set to be "The Guardians of Childhood", based on the Joyce's idea. The film was not realized, but they did create a short animated film, "The Man in the Moon", directed by Joyce, which introduced the Guardians idea, and served as an inspiration for the film.
Early in 2008, Joyce sold the film rights to DreamWorks Animation, after the studio assured him it would respect his vision for the characters and that he would be involved with the creative process. In November 2009, it was revealed that DreamWorks had hired Peter Ramsey to make his feature debut as director of what was then titled "The Guardians", and playwright David Lindsay-Abaire to script. Joyce acted as a co-director for the first few years, but left this position after the death of his daughter Mary Katherine, who died of brain tumor. Joyce continued to assist as an executive producer, while Ramsey took over full directing, making him the first African American to direct a big-budget CG animated film. As with some previous DreamWorks films, Guillermo del Toro came on board as an executive producer. Present almost from the beginning, he was able to help shape the story, character design, theme and structure of the film. He said he was proud that the filmmakers were making parts of the film "dark and moody and poetic," and expressed hope this might "set a different tone for family movies, for entertainment movies." The final title, "Rise of the Guardians" was announced in early 2011, along with the first cast.
Roger Deakins, the cinematographer who had already worked on the previous DreamWorks' film, "How to Train Your Dragon", advised on the lighting to achieve its real look. He selected photographic references for color keys, and during the production gave notes on contrast, saturation, depth of field and light intensity. The film contains a lot of special effects, particularly the volumetric particles for depicting Sandman and Pitch. For this, DreamWorks Animation developed OpenVDB, a more efficient tool and format for manipulating and storing volume data, like smoke and other amorphous materials. OpenVDB had been already used on "Puss in Boots" and "", and was released in August 2012 for free as an open source project with a hope to become an industry standard.
Although the film is based on the Joyce's book series, it contains differences from the books. The book series, begun in 2011, explains the origins of the characters, while the film takes place about 200 years after the books, and shows how the characters function in present time. Joyce explained, "Because I don't want people to read the book and then go see the movie and go, 'Oh, I like the book better,' and I also didn't want them to know what happens in the movie. And I also knew that during the progress of film production, a lot of things can change. So I wanted to have a sort of distance, so we were able to invoke the books and use them to help us figure out the world of the movie, but I didn't want them to be openly competitive to each other." The idea for the Guardians came from Joyce's daughter, who asked him "if he thought Santa Claus had ever met the Easter Bunny." The film includes a dedication to her, as well a song, "Still Dream," sung over the end credits.
Originally, the film was set to be released on November 2, 2012, but DreamWorks Animation pushed the film to November 21, 2012 to avoid competition with Pixar's upcoming film "Monsters University", which in turn had been pushed to November 2, 2012 to avoid competition with "". "Monsters University" was then pushed to June 21, 2013, with "Wreck-It Ralph" taking its place.
Soundtrack.
French composer Alexandre Desplat composed the original music for the film, which was released on November 13, 2012 by Varèse Sarabande. The score was recorded in London at Abbey Road Studios and Air Studios, and performed by the London Symphony Orchestra, with a choral contribution by London Voices. David Lindsay-Abaire wrote the lyrics for the end-credit song, "Still Dream," which was performed by soprano Renée Fleming. Stravinsky's Firebird Suite can also be heard during the scene where North first appears.
Release.
"Rise of the Guardians" had its premiere on October 10, 2012, at The Mill Valley Film Festival in Mill Valley, California, followed by the international premiere at The International Rome Film Festival on November 13, 2012. Under distribution by Paramount Pictures, the film was released on November 21, 2012, in American theaters. Digitally re-mastered into IMAX 3D, it was shown in limited international and domestic IMAX theaters. It was the second film released in the firm Barco's Auro 11.1 3D audio format, after "Red Tails". The film was also shown in Dolby Atmos, a surround sound technology introduced in 2012. "Rise of the Guardians" was the last DreamWorks Animation film distributed by Paramount, as DreamWorks has signed a five-year distribution deal with 20th Century Fox, starting in 2013 with "The Croods".
Home media.
"Rise of the Guardians" is scheduled to be released on DVD, Blu-ray, and Blu-ray 3D on March 12, 2013.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Rise of the Guardians" received mixed to positive reviews from critics. Based on 142 reviews, the film holds a rating of 74% on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 6.5/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "A sort of "Avengers" for the elementary school set, "Rise of the Guardians" is wonderfully animated and briskly paced, but it's only so-so in the storytelling department." Another review aggregator, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics, calculated a score of 57 based on 34 reviews, or "Mixed or average." The film earned an "A" from audiences polled by CinemaScore.
Carrie Rickey of "The Philadelphia Inquirer" gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars and found the film's characters to have "a primal familiarity, as though they were developed by a tag team of Maurice Sendak and Walt Disney." Olly Richards of Empire wrote, "It's gorgeously designed, deftly written and frequently laugh-out-loud funny. For child or adult, this is a fantasy to get lost in." "The Washington Post"s Michael O'Sullivan also gave the film a positive review and said, "Thoughts become things. That's the message of "Rise of the Guardians", a charming if slightly dark and cobwebbed animated feature about how believing in something makes it real, or real enough." Roger Ebert of "The Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film three stars and wrote in his review, "There's an audience for this film. It's not me. I gather younger children will like the breakneck action, the magical ability to fly and the young hero who has tired of only being a name." Though he did say, "Their parents and older siblings may find the 89-minute running time quite long enough." 
Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" called the film "a lively but derivative 3D storybook spree for some unlikely action heroes." Conversely, Justin Chang in "Variety" said, "Even tots may emerge feeling slightly browbeaten by this colorful, strenuous and hyperactive fantasy, which has moments of charm and beauty but often resembles an exploding toy factory rather than a work of honest enchantment." Joe Morgenstern of "The Wall Street Journal" found that the film "lacks a resonant center," and that the script "seems to have been written by committee, with members lobbying for each major character, and the action, set in vast environments all over the map, spreads itself so thin that a surfeit of motion vitiates emotion."
Box office.
As of February 24, 2013, "Rise of the Guardians" has grossed an estimated $102,017,000 in North America, and $200,300,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $302,317,000.
In North America, the film opened to $32.3 million over its extended five-day weekend, and with $23.8 million over the three-day weekend, it reached fourth place behind "", "Skyfall", and "Lincoln". The film's opening was the lowest debut for a DreamWorks Animation film since "Flushed Away". While the film did gross more than its $145 million budget, it still did not turn a profit for DreamWorks Animation due to its high production and marketing costs. Layoffs for the company are also expected to be made due to the film's underperformance.
Accolades.
The Rome Film Fes­ti­val and "Vanity Fair" magazine awarded the new Vanity Fair International Award for Cinematic Excellence in November 2012 to "Rise of the Guardians". The film also received the Hollywood Ani­ma­tion Award at the 16th Annual Hollywood Film Festival, held on October 22, 2012.
Video game.
A video game based on the film was released by D3 Publisher on November 20, 2012 in North America, and released on November 23, 2012 in Europe. It allows gamers to lead the Guardians in their battle against Pitch. The game is a 3D beat-em-up, where the player travels through each of the worlds: Burgess, North Pole, Bunnymund Valley, Tooth Palace, and Sandman's Ship, in order to fight Pitch's army of Nightmares. The player can switch between all five guardians at any time, and freely customize their powers, and they learn new special abilities as they level up. All of the game versions support up to 4 player gameplay. It is available on the Wii, Wii U, Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS.
Rise Of The Guardians 2.
The filmmakers have stated that if the film meets their expectations, they would like to make a sequel.
