Man of Steel is an upcoming American superhero film directed by Zack Snyder, produced by Christopher Nolan and scripted by David S. Goyer. Based on the DC Comics character Superman, the film will be a reboot of the "Superman" film series, portraying the character's origin story. The film stars Henry Cavill in the title role, with Amy Adams as Lois Lane, and Michael Shannon as General Zod.
Development of "Man of Steel" began in 2008 when Warner Bros. Pictures took pitches from comic book writers, screenwriters and directors, opting to reboot the franchise. In 2009, a court ruling resulted in Jerry Siegel's family recapturing the rights to Superman's origins and Siegel's copyright. The decision stated that Warner Bros. did not owe the families additional royalties from previous films, but if they did not begin production on a Superman film by 2011, then the Shuster and Siegel estates would be able to sue for lost revenue on an unproduced film. Nolan pitched Goyer's idea after story discussion on "The Dark Knight Rises". Snyder was hired as director in October 2010. Principal photography started in August 2011 in West Chicago before moving to Plano and Vancouver. The film is scheduled to be released on June 14, 2013, in conventional, 3D and IMAX theaters.
Premise.
Clark Kent is a journalist in his twenties who was adopted as a child by Jonathan and Martha Kent after he was transported to Earth from the dying planet of Krypton. Raised with the values of his adoptive parents, he feels alienated because of his unique super powers and struggles to find his own place in life. When the world is attacked, he becomes the hero named Superman to protect the Earth and its people.
Production.
Development.
In June 2008, Warner Bros. took pitches from comic book writers, screenwriters, and directors on how to successfully restart the "Superman" film series. "I told them, it’s not that bad. Just treat "Superman Returns" as the Ang Lee "Hulk"," comic book writer Mark Waid explained. ""The Incredible Hulk" has proven the audience will forgive you and let you redo the franchise." Comic book writers Grant Morrison, Geoff Johns, and Brad Meltzer also pitched their ideas for a reboot. Morrison's idea was similar to his work on "All-Star Superman", while Waid's was akin to "". Mark Millar, teaming with director Matthew Vaughn, planned an epic 8-hour "Superman" trilogy, each installment released a year apart, similar to "The Lord of the Rings". Millar compared it to the "Godfather" trilogy, in which it would chronicle the entire life of Superman, from the early days of Krypton to the finale where Superman loses his powers as the Sun starts to supernova. August 2009 saw a court ruling in which Jerry Siegel's family recaptured the rights to Superman's origins and Siegel's copyright in "Action Comics" #1. In addition, a judge ruled that Warner Bros. did not owe the families additional royalties from previous films. However, if they did not begin production on a Superman film by 2011, then the Shuster and Siegel estates would have been able to sue for lost revenue on an unproduced film.
During story discussions for "The Dark Knight Rises" in 2010, David S. Goyer told Christopher Nolan his idea on how to present Superman in a modern context. Impressed with Goyer's concept, Nolan pitched the idea to the studio, who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of "The Dark Knight". Nolan admired Bryan Singer's work on "Superman Returns" for its connection to Richard Donner's version, but stated that the new film would not have any relationship with the previous film series.
Pre-production.
Guillermo del Toro, with whom Goyer worked on "Blade II", turned down the director's position on the reboot because of his commitment on a film adaptation of "At the Mountains of Madness", while Robert Zemeckis was also approached. Ben Affleck, Darren Aronofsky, Duncan Jones, Jonathan Liebesman, Matt Reeves, and Tony Scott were considered as potential directors, before Zack Snyder was hired in October 2010. Casting began the following November.
Filming.
Principal photography began on August 1, 2011 at an industrial park near DuPage Airport under the codename "Autumn Frost". Zack Snyder expressed reluctance to shooting the film in 3-D, due to the technical limitations of the format. Filming was expected to last for two to three months. Production took place in Plano on August 22 to 29. Filming then took place in the Chicago Loop from September 7 to 17. Vancouver Film Studios and Chicago are other shooting locations. According to an interview with Michael Shannon, filming would continue until February 2012.
Post-production.
Hans Zimmer initially denied popular rumours that he would be composing the film's score. However, in June 2012, it was confirmed that Zimmer will in fact be writing the film's musical score. To completely distinguish "Man of Steel" from the previous films, the iconic "Superman" theme by John Williams will not be heard. Weta Digital, MPC and Double Negative (VFX) provided visual effects for the film.
Marketing.
Warner Bros. and DC Comics won the rights to the domain name manofsteel.com, in use by a member of the public, as use for the film's official website. On November 20, 2012 for the release of "The Dark Knight Rises" DVD and Blu-ray, Warner Bros. launched a countdown on the film's website where fans could share the countdown on websites like Facebook or Twitter to unlock an "exclusive reward". On December 3, 2012, the "exclusive reward" was revealed to be an official "Man of Steel" teaser poster. The poster, which depicts Superman being arrested, generated a positive response and much speculation about the film's story. In December, Zack Snyder confirmed that the first full-length trailer will be attached to the theatrical release of "" in cinemas on December 14, 2012. On December 10, 2012 a website appeared at dsrwproject.com that provided audio signals to be decoded by viewers. It was quickly discovered to be related to a movie due to the copyright on the website. By December 11, 2012 the decoded message led readers to another website with a countdown that led to the public release of the trailer.
