Mark Richard Hamill (born September 25, 1951) is an American actor, voice artist, producer, director, and writer, best known for his performance as Luke Skywalker in the original "Star Wars" trilogy, as well as his voice role as the Joker in ', its various spin-offs, and the video games ' and "". Hamill has also lent his voice to various other villains, such as the Hobgoblin on the 1990s Spider-Man TV series, and anti-heroes in various other animated productions.
Early life and education.
Hamill was born in Oakland, California and raised in Virginia, the son of Virginia Suzanne (née Johnson) and William Thomas Hamill, who was a captain in the U.S. Navy. He was one of seven children: two brothers, Will and Patrick, and four sisters, Terry, Jan, Jeanie, and Kim. When Mark was a child, his father's career meant numerous relocations, and he attended different schools throughout his childhood. In his elementary years, he went to Poe Middle School. At age 11, he moved to the 5900 block of Castleton Drive in San Diego where he attended Hale Junior High School and then, during his freshman year at James Madison Senior High School, his family moved to Virginia. By junior year, his father was stationed in Japan where Mark attended Nile C. Kinnick High School in Yokosuka, and was a member of the drama club. After that he attended Annandale High School in Annandale, Virginia. He majored in drama at Los Angeles City College.
Early career.
Hamill's early career included voicing the character Corey Anders on the Saturday morning cartoon "Jeannie" by Hanna-Barbera Productions. He also portrayed the oldest son David on the pilot episode of "Eight Is Enough", though the role was later performed by Grant Goodeve. He acted in TV series such as "The Texas Wheelers", "General Hospital", "The Partridge Family", and "One Day at a Time". One of his earliest films was the made-for-TV film "The City".
"Star Wars".
Robert Englund was auditioning for a part in "Apocalypse Now" when he walked across the hall where auditions were taking place for George Lucas' "". After watching the auditions for awhile, he realized that his friend, aspiring actor Mark Hamill, would be perfect for the role of Luke Skywalker. He suggested to Hamill that he audition for the part; Hamill did, and won the role.
Released in the summer of 1977, "Star Wars" was an enormous, unexpected success and made a huge impact on the film industry. Hamill also appeared in "The Star Wars Holiday Special" (1978) and later starred in the successful "Star Wars" sequels ' (1980) and ' (1983).
Hamill was twice honored with the Saturn Award for Best Actor (given by the "Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy & Horror Films"), for his performance in both sequels. The actor also reprised the role for the radio dramatizations of both "Star Wars" and "The Empire Strikes Back", but did not participate in the "Return of the Jedi" radio drama due to budgetary concerns. With the acquisition of Lucasfilm by the Walt Disney Company, it has been announced that there will be more Star Wars films starting with Episode VII which will be released in 2015. It is rumored that Hamill will reprise his role as Luke Skywalker for the next Star Wars trilogy alongside fellow Star Wars actors Harrison Ford and Carrie Fisher as Han Solo and Princess Leia respectively.
Reprints of Joseph Campbell's "The Hero with a Thousand Faces" (which influenced Lucas as he was developing the films) issued after the release of "Star Wars" in 1977 used the image of Hamill as Luke Skywalker on the cover.
Car accident.
On January 11, 1977, one day before he was set to shoot one of the final scenes needed for "Star Wars", Hamill was in a car accident in which he fractured his nose and left cheekbone, which required seven hours of surgery. As a result of the accident, a double was used for the landspeeder pickup shots.
Live action and stage work.
After the success of "Star Wars", Hamill found that audiences identified him very closely with the role of Luke Skywalker. He attempted to avoid typecasting by appearing in "Corvette Summer" (1978) and the better-known World War II film "The Big Red One" (1980). As the 1980s wore on, Hamill did little film work outside of "Star Wars". Instead, he acted on Broadway, starring in "Amadeus", "The Elephant Man" (for which he received a Drama Desk Award nomination), "The Nerd", and other stage plays, for which he received positive reviews.
Hamill played the antagonist Hawkins in the Swedish action movie "Hamilton" in 1998. Some of his other film credits include "The Night the Lights Went Out in Georgia", "Britannia Hospital", "Slipstream", "The Guyver", and the 1995 remake of "Village of the Damned". In 1990, he played an escaped mental patient who terrorizes Michael Dudikoff and his wife in "Midnight Ride". He also narrated "The Sci-Fi Files", a four-part documentary about the influence of science fiction upon present society. In 2001, Hamill starred in the feature film "Thank You, Good Night" alongside Christian Campbell, John Paul Pitoc, and Sally Kirkland. Hamill appeared in the film "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" and parodies Luke Skywalker, The Joker, The Trickster (of "The Flash" fame), the vast array of super-villain voices he has done and himself all at the same time.
In live-action television, Hamill had recurring roles in "General Hospital" and "The Texas Wheelers," and a small role in "The Bill Cosby Show." He guest appeared in two episodes as the Trickster in the live-action television series of "The Flash", a role he would later reprise in the animated series "Justice League Unlimited". He has made cameo appearances on "MADtv" (where he played the estranged father of Ms. Swan), and appeared on "Saturday Night Live" (playing himself being sold on a "Star Wars" themed home shopping sale). Hamill appeared on single episodes of "3rd Rock from the Sun" and "Just Shoot Me!" He also had a guest spot on "The Muppet Show" as both himself and his "cousin" Luke Skywalker, along with C-3PO, Chewbacca and R2-D2. In 1986, he appeared in an episode of the TV series "Amazing Stories" ("Gather Ye Acorns") in the role of Jonathan. He also had a recurring role as Tobias LeConte on "seaQuest DSV." It has been recounted by Richard Hatch that, shortly after the filming of "Star Wars", when Mark appeared on set for a guest appearance on "Streets of San Francisco", he was asked by Richard about recent work, to which Mark had reportedly replied "I just finished a movie called "Star Wars"."
Hamill also directed and starred in the 2005 direct-to-DVD "". A comic book fan who attended science fiction and comic conventions before he became famous, Hamill claimed that his character was based on an exaggerated version of himself. He and his crew shot most of the "mockumentary" film during the 2002 San Diego Comic-Con, and enlisted Stan Lee, Kevin Smith, and Hugh Hefner in small roles. The movie won an award for Best Live-Action DVD Premiere Movie at the 2005 DVD Exclusive Awards.
Hamill appeared as a villain in the fifth season of NBC's show "Chuck".
Voice acting.
Mark Hamill has gained a reputation as a prolific voice actor. He previously did voice acting work in the Ralph Bakshi film "Wizards", where he played "Sean, leader of the Knights of Stardust", which was released just three months before "Star Wars" in 1977. Though the voice-role he is most known for is Batman's arch-nemesis the Joker, his success as the Joker has led him to portray a wide variety of characters (mostly villainous) in television, film, anime, and video games. Mark Hamill was also the voice of The Hobgoblin in the 1990s "Spider-Man" cartoon series.
The Joker.
Hamill's acclaimed role as the Joker began in "" (1992–1995), and continued to many later spin-off series, video games and films. Hamill had initially played a guest voice role as corrupt businessman Ferris Boyle in the episode "", and was delighted when offered the role of the Joker, one of his favorite characters, after the previous choice Tim Curry dropped out. The most prominent feature of his portrayal that has garnered such acclaim is his dynamic use of laughter to express the Joker's mood. Hamill referred to the Joker's laugh as being like a musical instrument and would practice laughing maniacally while driving to recording sessions. The incredible success of Hamill in this role not only was a rousing success in all regards, but put him in high demand as a voice-over actor of over-the-top cartoon villains.
Hamill also voiced the Joker in three episodes of ', five episodes of "The New Batman Adventures", five episodes of "Justice League", and an episode of "Static Shock". He also voiced the Joker in the theatrical film ' (1993) and the direct-to-video film "" (2000).
The short-lived WB live action series, "Birds of Prey", based on the comic book of the same title, featured a flashback sequence in which the Joker shoots Barbara Gordon (Batgirl) and paralyzes her. This sequence featured Hamill voicing the Joker, dubbed over actor Roger Stoneburner whose facial structure more resembled the character. The actor's face was shot in the background so as to be slightly blurred. Hamill also voiced the Joker alongside his "Batman: The Animated Series" co-star Kevin Conroy as Batman and Jason Hillhouse as Dick Grayson in a feature of a storyboard scene included in the 2005 Special Edition DVD of Tim Burton's 1989 "Batman" film. This scene depicted the origin of Robin, which was not filmed because the producers felt it was out of place with the rest of the film.
Hamill has said that he has voiced the Joker for toys and amusement park rides. Although these jobs did not pay particularly well, he enjoyed even these small roles and admitted being protective of the character, expressing concern with others "sleeping in his sleeping bag". He also unapologetically self-identifies as a "real comic book nerd".
Hamill has portrayed the Joker in a few Batman-themed video games, notably "Batman Vengeance", the Sega CD version of "The Adventures of Batman & Robin", and in '. Hamill again reprised his role of The Joker in the "Asylums sequel, ', as well as the computer and PlayStation 3 MMORPG "DC Universe Online". In May 2010, Hamill declared to IGN UK that his role in "Arkham City" would be his last as the Joker. On October 19, 2011, shortly after the release of the game, he confirmed this on his Twitter account, saying "Hello/Goodbye Joker! I've enjoyed every minute behind the wheel of the Clown Prince’s crazy car — I'm going to miss him more than I can say!!". However, he has expressed an interest in reclaiming the role were an adaptation of ' ever made. He encouraged fans to campaign for said adaptation, in a tweet made on October 24, 2011. Since then, a Facebook page titled "Petition to get Mark Hamill to play the Joker in animated "Killing Joke"" has been set up by his fans.
Later television and film work.
Hamill later did the voice of Lawrance "Larry" 3000, in Cartoon Network's animated series "Time Squad". He also guest starred in "The Simpsons" episode "Mayored to the Mob". On the audio commentary of the episode, he says that he has been a fan of the show since it debuted in 1989 and that it was a personal thrill to work with Dan Castellaneta, the voice of Homer Simpson.
His acclaim for the Joker role has led to other super-villain roles in other animated series, including the Gargoyle in the animated series of "The Incredible Hulk", the Hobgoblin in "Spider-Man: The Animated Series", Maximus in "Fantastic Four", Captain Stickybeard in ', and the deranged shock jock anchorman Dr. Jak in "Phantom 2040". He even parodied his Joker role in the "Tom & Jerry Kids" episode "Droopy Man Returns," and in the "Animaniacs" episode "The Cranial Crusader", as Johnny Bad-Note. He voiced Py-Ro in ', Dr. Julius Pendecker in "The Tick", and Niju the Evil Wolf in '. He also voiced Christopher "Maverick" Blair in the animated series "Wing Commander Academy". In 1999, he provided the voice of Van Ripper in "The Night of the Headless Horseman". He voiced the character of Chanukah Zombie for the 2007 straight-to-DVD release '. He also voiced the character Adolpho in "Loonatics Unleashed".
Hamill was also the voice of Judah in the DreamWorks film "".
Hamill also provided voice-acting for comic-book baddies Solomon Grundy and the Trickster in the DC animated universe series "Justice League" and "Justice League Unlimited". Hamill has since voiced the murderous gangster Tony Zucco in "The Batman", an animated series unrelated to the various DCAU shows. He also voiced the Spectre, in an episode of "", another animated series unrelated to the DCAU.
Hamill performs the voice of the bad guy Undergrowth in the "Danny Phantom" episode "Urban Jungle." He provided the voice of series antagonist Fire Lord Ozai in "" and Skeleton King in "Super Robot Monkey Team Hyperforce Go!". He also guest starred as The Moth in the "SpongeBob SquarePants" episode "Night Light". Additionally, he played the latter character in the "Mina and the Count" shorts.
In the Hanna-Barbera Productions cartoon "", Hamill voiced Jonny K., the Red Lynx, and Burke, among others. He is also a recurring voice actor on Seth Green's "Robot Chicken". Adult Swim listed Hamill as one of the channel's best Voice Actors.
In April 2009, he had a voice cameo in the NASA animated short "Robot Astronomy Talk Show: Gravity and the Great Attractor," part of the web-series "IRrelevant Astronomy", produced by NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope.
He is currently doing voicework for several characters in the "Metalocalypse" animated series, plays the voice of Skips in the animated series "Regular Show", and did a special guest appearance on "The Boondocks" in the episode Mr. Medicinal on Adult Swim. He also voices Frank the Director in "Random! Cartoons" on Frederator Studios. He also voices Abraham Kane in the new series, "Motorcity".
In 2012, it is confirmed that Hamill is also doing the voicework for Alvin the Treacherous, a villain who is set to appear in Dreamworks Television Series, "".
Anime.
He voiced Colonel Muska in the English language version of "Castle in the Sky" and the Mayor of Pejite in "Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind", both directed by Hayao Miyazaki and distributed by Disney. Hamill provided the voice of Commander Taylor in "", the sequel to the 1980s adapted anime series "Robotech". He was also in "Afro Samurai Resurrection".
Hamill provides the voice of Jameson Burkright in the miniseries comedy "The Wrong Coast", and Yamma in the joint Cartoon Network/Production I.G anime series "IGPX Immortal Grand Prix". In early 2010, he voiced as Dante's father in the anime film version of "Dante's Inferno".
Video games.
Hamill's roles in television animation led to his recruitment as a voice actor for a number of video games, most often as the protagonist.
When the "Wing Commander" series of computer games started using full motion video cut scenes, Hamill was cast as the series protagonist, Colonel Christopher Blair, a role he played in "Wing Commander III: Heart of the Tiger" (1994), "Wing Commander IV: The Price of Freedom" (1995), and "Wing Commander: Prophecy" (1997). (In the 1999 "Wing Commander" film, set earlier in the series, the character was played by Freddie Prinze, Jr.) He did however, have a voice-over cameo, as did many of the other actors who did voice-overs for the game. Hamill was also cast as the voice of Christopher Blair in the animated television series "Wing Commander Academy".
Other notable computer-game roles (voice only) include Detective Mosely in ', Assistant Director Wilson in ', several characters in the LucasArts game "Full Throttle" (including the game's main villain, Adrian Ripburger), and Wolverine in ', the tie-in game to the movie "X-Men 2". Hamill also provided a voice for one of the selectable voicesets in Icewind Dale (Heart of Winter expansion) and also two of the primary characters of "Starsiege", one of them a young warrior leading a rebellion against an empire. Hamill voiced characters for ', and also played the role of Emperor Griffon in the PlayStation 2 role-playing game "Dark Cloud 2", as well as Colonel Kroitz in "Grandia Xtreme".
While some have mistakenly suspected that he reprised his role as Luke Skywalker for LucasArts' ' and ', the character is actually voiced by Bob Bergen (also the voice of Porky Pig and others). Hamill's likeness is also used as an alternative character model in the Wii and PlayStation 2 versions of "". The PlayStation 2 and Wii editions feature both "A New Hope" and "Return of the Jedi" models.
He narrated a documentary on the United States' 1st Infantry Division. Footage from the documentary was used in the video game '. He has appeared in two installments in the "Crash Bandicoot" series: in ' as Py-Ro the Fire Elemental, and in "" as the Znu.
Hamill did voiceover work for the PlayStation 2 game "Yakuza", where he plays Goro Majima, a lieutenant in a Yakuza family. He is also the voice of Malefor the Dark Master in "". He also lent his vocal talents to "Darksiders", as the Watcher.
Hamill also lent his voice to the English version of the PlayStation Portable title, "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep" as Master Eraqus. The game's director, Tetsuya Nomura, stated in an interview that he chose Hamill for the part specifically because of his role as Luke Skywalker.
One of Hamill's most prestigious roles in video games is his work on ', as the Joker. He also played the Joker in the sequel, ', winning the 2011 British Academy Video Game Award for Best Performer.
Audio books.
Hamill voiced the character of Todd Wainio in "World War Z", a critically acclaimed audiobook based on Max Brooks' novel of the same name.
He also provided the entire cast of voices for a 1983 audiobook version of "Pinocchio" (with unique characteristics for each). Hamill also reads life into the characters of the popular juvenile fiction book series, "The Spiderwick Chronicles Volumes I-III", by Holly Black and Tony DiTerlizzi.
Narration.
Hamill is credited as the narrator in "Ancient Voices", a 1999 series of documentaries on archaeology and ancient history produced by as a BBC/The Learning Channel co-production, and published by Time-Life as a DVD series.
Writing career.
Hamill is the co-writer of "The Black Pearl", a comic book miniseries published by Dark Horse Comics. He wrote an introduction to the Trade Paperback "Batman: Riddler Two-Face" which reprints various stories involving The Riddler and Two-Face to tie in with "Batman Forever". He has also written several stories for "Simpsons Comics", including "Catastrophe in Substitute Springfields!", which parodies DC's "Crisis on Infinite Earths" and also references several other classic comics.
Personal life.
On December 17, 1978, Hamill married dental hygienist Marilou York in a private civil ceremony. They have three children together: Nathan (born June 25, 1979), Griffin (born March 4, 1983) and Chelsea Elizabeth (born July 27, 1988). His son Nathan was born during the production of ' and had a cameo role in ' (1999) playing one of the Royal Guards of Naboo.
Political views.
At Comic-Con 2012, Hamill said to OnTheRedCarpet.com, "If you don't vote for Barack Obama, you're insane. 'Cause without him, I think the middle class will completely disappear. And you look at Romney and I'm sure he's a nice guy, but he is like "The Thing", he only imitates human behavior, he's not actually human himself. (...) So God bless him, I'm enjoying him running for office but I just came out as a lifelong Democrat". 
Hamill has appeared on "The Young Turks" on Current TV.
