Fast & Furious 6 (alternatively known as Fast Six) is an upcoming action film written by Chris Morgan and directed by Justin Lin. It is the sixth installment in the "Fast and the Furious" film series. Vin Diesel, Paul Walker, Dwayne Johnson, Michelle Rodriguez and Jordana Brewster will star. 
"Fast & Furious 6" was in development by February 2010 as the first film in the series to move away from the underground car-racing theme of the series' previous films which was considered to have placed a barrier on audience numbers. Pre-production had begun by April 2011, and principal photography began in London, England in July 2012. Filming locations also include the Canary Islands, Scotland, and Los Angeles. The film is scheduled for release on May 24, 2013.
Premise.
After the events of "Fast Five", professional criminal Dominic Toretto and his crew are wealthy, but their criminal records prevent them from returning to their home country. Following his attempts to apprehend them, Diplomatic Security Service (DSS) agent Luke Hobbs offers the crew a deal; he will give them all full pardons for their crimes if they help him take down a lethally skilled mercenary organization led by a criminal mastermind and his ruthless second-in-command, Dominic's thought-dead lover Letty Ortiz.
Production.
Development.
In Vin and my mind we already know what the sixth movie is, we’ve already been talking about it. Vin and I have had numerous conversations about what that might be. And we’re starting to get serious about it right now. We just finished ["Fast Five"] like 4 or 5 weeks ago and we just needed a break, and now we’re gonna start focusing on that.
The question putting "Fast Five" and "Fast Six" together for us was: Can we take it out of being a pure car culture movie and into being a true action franchise in the spirit of those great heist films made 10 or 15 years ago?
Fogelson said that the racing aspect had put a "ceiling" on the number of people willing to see films in the series, and that, by turning it into a series where car driving ability is just one aspect of the film, he hoped to increase the series' audience. On Johnson's character, Fogelson added " also wants to appear in and be integral to the action in "Fast Six"."
We have to pay off this story, we have to service all of these character relationships, and when we started mapping all that out it just went beyond 110 pages...The studio said, 'You can't fit all that story in one damn movie!'
On April 23, 2012, it was announced that mixed martial arts fighter Gina Carano was in negotiations to play a member of Hobbs' team. On May 1, 2012, Michelle Rodriguez was confirmed to be reprising her role as Letty Ortiz, and it was announced that Welsh actor Luke Evans had been offered a role as a villain. Evans was confirmed to join the cast on May 9, 2012, portraying the leader of a heist gang competing with Diesel's crew over the same heist job. On July 27, 2012, Joe Taslim was confirmed to star as the villain Jah. On February 15, 2012, Johnson confirmed that "Fast Six" would begin filming in May 2012, with some of the production to take place in the United Kingdom and Germany. Johnson stated that the two intended sequels would no longer be filmed simultaneously because of weather issues in filming locations, and that production on "Fast Seven" would only begin after the completion of "Fast Six". However, filming did not officially begin until July 30, 2012. In February 2013, it was confirmed that the film would be titled "Fast & Furious 6".
Principal photography.
Filming began on July 30, 2012, in London, England, and Shepperton Studios in Surrey, part of the Pinewood Studios group. Lin was unable to obtain permission to shoot an action sequence at Piccadilly Circus involving an exploding oil tanker, and so a replica of the landmark was built at Shepperton. The London shoot including filming on Lambeth Bridge. On October 11, 2012, Walker suffered an anterior cruciate ligament injury during a stunt, requiring the production to film around his scenes until he recovered. A scene involving a plane crash began filming at RAF Bovingdon, Hertfordshire on October 30, 2012 and was scheduled to conclude on November 9. Filming for a car chase scene took place on Dale Street in Liverpool City Centre, and the Queensway Tunnel in the nearby town of Birkenhead between November 12-15, 2012.
Shooting also occurred on Spain's Canary Islands including the island of Tenerife. Filming had been intended to take place in Marseille, France, but was relocated to the islands to take advantage of a larger tax rebate (38%) that was estimated to lower filming costs by $20 million.
Stunt and car chase scenes began filming on location in Glasgow, Scotland on August 29, 2012, and were scheduled to conclude on September 16, 2012. The shoot took place entirely at night and involved approximately 250 crew, but none of the central cast. Sets were built on site for the scenes including a large car showroom. Filming was scheduled to take place at the former Royal Air Force base RAF Bentwaters in late August 2012 until early September 2012. Filming also took place in Echo Park, Los Angeles beginning on December 1, 2012. The shoot returned the series to the filming location of the original "The Fast and the Furious", and required the garage setting of that film to be rebuilt by carpenters. By December 17, 2012, it was reported that filming had concluded.
Marketing.
"Fast & Furious 6" employed social media to raise awareness. The film's first trailer was released during the 2013 Super Bowl on February 3. Among the six films that launched trailers at the Super Bowl, "Fast & Furious 6" generated widespread attention on social media, moreso than the other five films (including "Iron Man 3" and "Star Trek Into Darkness") combined according to data collection agency Fizziology. The extended version of the trailer had been viewed over 17 million times by February 24. The film's stars success was partially attributed to the film's stars promoting the trailer on their personal social networks. The "The Fast and the Furious" series marketing had made efforts to cultivate an online fan base which was also considered to have helped promote the film; the filmmakers responded to fan interaction, conducting an online poll to decide the title of "Fast & Furious 6", brought back the character of Letty Ortiz based on fan feedback and encouraged fans to document the filming process of "Fast & Furious 6" with unofficial photos. Universal's marketing co-president Michael Moses said: "We’re trying to remove the studio filter as much as possible, which is a little scary because you’re ceding control... But it makes for more authentic and organic interaction with fans."
