Stoker is an upcoming British-American psychological thriller directed by Park Chan-wook and written by Ted Foulke. It stars Mia Wasikowska, Matthew Goode, and Nicole Kidman. It will be released on March 1, 2013. It is the last movie to be produced by Tony Scott who died during production.
Plot.
Enigmatic Uncle Charlie moves in with India and her emotionally unstable mother, Evelyn, after the death of India's father. Although suspicions about his motives are raised, India and Evelyn soon find themselves drawn to him.
Production.
Wentworth Miller wrote the screenplay for "Stoker", as well as a prequel, "Uncle Charlie". He used the pseudonym Ted Foulke, later explaining "I just wanted the scripts to sink or swim on their own." Miller's script was voted to the 2010 "Black List" of the 10 best unproduced screenplays making the rounds in Hollywood. Miller described it as a "horror film, a family drama and a psychological thriller." Although influenced by Bram Stoker's "Dracula", Miller clarified that "Stoker" was "not about vampires. It was never meant to be about vampires but it is a horror story. A stoker is one who stokes, which also ties in nicely with the narrative." Hitchcock's "Shadow of a Doubt" also influenced the film. Miller said: "The jumping off point is actually Hitchcock's "Shadow of a Doubt". So, that's where we begin, and then we take it in a very, very different direction."
The film marks director Park Chan-wook's English-language debut. In January 2011, it was reported that Mia Wasikowska was in negotiations to play the teenager, and in February, Nicole Kidman also entered negotiations to join the cast. In June, it was reported that Matthew Goode was in talks to play the uncle, after Colin Firth, who was attached earlier, had to drop out. Jacki Weaver, Lucas Till, Alden Ehrenreich, and Dermot Mulroney joined the cast in July and August 2011.
Filming took 40 days. beginning in Nashville, Tennessee, in September 2011. Portions were also filmed in nearby Murfreesboro on September 22, as well as in Sewanee, home of the University of the South. Principal photography wrapped on October 23. 
Composer Philip Glass was originally hired to compose the film's score but was replaced by Clint Mansell.
Reception.
The film premiered at Sundance and the reviews were mostly positive. Writing in "The Guardian", critic Jeremy Kay called the film "a gorgeously mounted family mystery dressed up as a gothic fairytale," and said the film presents viewers with clues worthy of Hitchcock: "Literary references and symbolism abound in Stoker. You can get tied up trying to figure out who is what. That is the idea. All the clues are there. You just have to look closely." "The Guardian" awarded "Stoker" four out of five stars in its review.
Writing for Variety, critic Guy Lodge praised the film, calling it "a splendidly demented gumbo of Hitchcock thriller."
Ty Cooper gave the film a flawless 5 star review, and said that "Stoker stands as a masterpiece, delivering thrills as chilling as Psycho, and cementing the idea that Park Chan-Wook really is the Hitchcock for a new generation of moviegoers."
