The Lumineers are an American folk rock band, based in Denver, Colorado. The two founding members and songwriters of the Lumineers are Wesley Schultz (lead vocals, guitar) and Jeremiah Fraites (drums, percussion). Schultz and Fraites began writing and performing together in New Jersey in 2005. Neyla Pekarek (cello, vocals) joined the band in 2010 after responding to a Craigslist ad. Two additional fulltime members Stelth Ulvang (piano), and Ben Wahamaki (bass), joined the band as full time members in 2012. Their self-titled debut album was released on Dualtone Records on April 3, 2012, eventually peaking at number 2 on the "Billboard" 200 chart in January 2013. As of December 2012, their debut album has been certified gold in the US, UK, Australia, Canada and platinum in Ireland.
History.
In the spring of 2005, Wesley Schultz and Jeremiah Fraites began to collaborate, writing together and playing gigs around New York. Originally based in Ramsey, New Jersey, they later moved to New York City. After battling the city's cutthroat music scene and high cost of living, the two decided to expand their horizons. They packed up and headed for Denver, Colorado. It was there they met Neyla Pekarek after posting a Craigslist ad for a cellist. They started to perform shows in small venues like the 100 capacity Meadowlark around Denver, writing songs, and eventually recording several songs in Jer's attic. In the Spring of 2011, they signed a management deal with Onto Entertainment managers Christen Greene and David Meinert, after the two saw a video on YouTube of the band playing their future hit single "Ho Hey" in a small apartment. Onto fronted the band money to record a full length album in Seattle at Bear Creek Studio with producer Ryan Hadlock (mixed in LA by Kevin Augunas at Fairfax Studio).
2011–12: Debut album.
In December 2011, what would become the band's first single, "Ho Hey", was used in the season finale of CW's "Hart of Dixie". This started a national buzz on social media. In January 2012, John Richards, the morning show DJ at KEXP-FM in Seattle, discovered "Ho Hey" in a pile of new cd's he had received, played it twice in a row daily for a week, and called it the best song of 2012. WXPN Philadelphia/ NPR then did a feature on the band on their "World Cafe: Next" program. The band passed up major label offers to sign a deal with independent label Dualtone Records that same month. The album was then licensed under similar terms to Dine Alone Records in Canada, Inertia in Australia, and Decca Records for the rest of the world. 
"The Lumineers" was released on April 3, 2012 on Dualtone Records. The band's popularity continued to build in 2012 with sold-out shows and favorable reviews with The Bears Of Blue River and other American bands, and their debut album went on to peak at number 11 on the "Billboard" 200 album chart.
On June 14, 2012, the album's first single "Ho Hey" debuted at number 90 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, their first song to do so. "Ho Hey" later peaked at number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, making it the band's first Top 5 single, and as of December 2012, the single had sold over 2 million copies, making it their first Double Platinum single. By June 23, "Ho Hey" hit No.1 at commercial Triple A radio, where it spent 8 weeks, and on September 17 the song hit #1 on the Alternative Radio chart where it stayed for two weeks. "Ho Hey" reached #1 on the US Hot AC airplay chart in December 2012, and #2 on the US Top 40 airplay chart, which makes it the highest charting independent label single in the history of the charts. "Ho Hey" is also having huge success internationally, reaching #1 on the Canadian Alternative radio chart and #17 on the Canadian single sales chart . It also reached number 8 in the United Kingdom, becoming their first Top 10 single there, and is currently the #12 top single in the world.
In October, 2012, Spotify named "Ho Hey" as the most shared song in Manhattan, and 3rd most shared in Brooklyn. "Ho Hey" has also been the #1 most played track in the US on Spotify, while "The Lumineers" has been the #1 most listened to album for several weeks. In the UK Spotify chart "Ho Hey" is #1, and "The Lumineers" is #2.
Of the album's success, Schultz told "American Songwriter" that "It's really arbitrary to any of us, especially to Jer and Neyla and I... because we've never really had an album out in this way... I'm really thrilled, but I also take it with a grain of salt... I think basically, I feel really lucky because I know how fickle the business, the industry is."
The Lumineers headline shows in the Northeastern US were announced for February 2013, and quickly sold out. Similarly, the band's tours of the UK, Europe, and Australia in early 2013 has sold out all shows, after many shows were moved to larger venues. This theme of sold out shows and high ticket purchases continues through The Lumineers other tours as well. In Atlanta, one of their lowest radio airplay markets, the band's first headline show post release of their album sold 4,000 tickets. Every US show they played in 2012 sold out, many within hours. In London, The Lumineers went from playing a 200 capacity venue to selling out the 1500 capacity KOKO in November, then announced and quickly sold out a February 2013 show at the 2,800 capacity Shepard's Bush Empire, subsequently adding two additional London dates to that tour at the 4,800 capacity Brixton Academy, as well as selling out every other UK, show they have played so far. They have also announced they will perform at the The O2 in Dublin, Ireland which has a capacity of 14,000.
On December 5, 2012, The Lumineers were nominated for two Grammy awards for Best New Artist and Best Americana Album. Musicperk.com rated the album 8/10 quoting "A spark of uniqueness does exist". 
Musical style.
Fraites emphasizes the simplicity of the group's style.
