Aamir Khan () (born:Aamir Hussain Khan on 14 March 1965) is an Indian film actor, director, and producer who has established himself as one of the leading actors of Hindi cinema (commonly referred to as "Bollywood").
Starting his career as a child actor in his uncle Nasir Hussain's film "Yaadon Ki Baaraat" (1973), Khan began his professional career eleven years later with "Holi" (1984) and had his first commercial success with "Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak" (1988). He received his first National Film Award as a Special Jury Award for his roles in the films "Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak" (1988) and "Raakh" (1989). After eight previous nominations during the 1980s and 1990s, Khan received his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his performance in the major grosser "Raja Hindustani" (1996) and later earned his second Best Actor award for his performance in the Academy Award-nominated "Lagaan", which also marked the debut of his own production company.
Following a four-year break from acting, Khan made his comeback playing the title role in the historical drama "" (2005), and later won a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor for his role in "Rang De Basanti" (2006). The following year, he made his directorial debut with "Taare Zameen Par", for which he received the Filmfare Award for Best Director. This was followed by the thriller "Ghajini" (2008), which became the highest grossing film of that year, and the comedy "3 Idiots" (2009), which became the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all-time. The Government of India honoured him with the Padma Shri in 2003 and the Padma Bhushan in 2010 for his contributions towards the arts.
On 30 November 2011, Khan was appointed as national brand ambassador of UNICEF to promote child nutrition. He is part of the government organised IEC campaign to raise awareness about malnutrition.
Early life.
Khan was born in Bandra's Holy Family Hospital, Mumbai, India, to a Muslim family that has been actively involved in the Indian motion picture industry for several decades. His father, Tahir Hussain, was a film producer while his uncle, Nasir Hussain, was a film producer as well as a director and an actor. Aamir Khan's mother is Zeenat Hussain. His siblings are Faisal Khan, Farhat Khan and Nikhat Khan. Imran Khan is nephew of Aamir Khan. Aamir Khan belonged to family of Indian freedom fighter Abul Kalam Azad.He is also a descendant of former President of India, Dr. Zakir Hussain and a second cousin to former Chairperson of Rajya Sabha, Dr Najma Heptullah. His father, Tahir Hussain,died on 3 Feb 2010.
Career.
Actor.
Aamir Khan began his film career at the age of 8, as a child actor in a home production, made by Nasir Hussain, titled "Yaadon Ki Baaraat" (1973) and "Madhosh" (1974). Eleven years later, he made his adult acting debut in a role that went quite unnoticed in Ketan Mehta's "Holi" (1984).
Khan's first notable leading role came in 1988 in the film "Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak" which was directed by his cousin and Nasir Hussain's son Mansoor Khan. This film was a breakthrough commercial success, effectively launching Khan's career as a leading actor. Having the typical 'chocolate hero' looks, he was publicised as a teen idol. He also starred in critically acclaimed film "Raakh", for which Khan got his first National Award for Special Jury Award. After that, he went on to appear in several other films in the late '80s and early '90s: "Dil" (1990), which became the highest grossing film of the year, "Dil Hai Ke Manta Nahin" (1991), "Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar" (1992), "Hum Hain Rahi Pyar Ke" (1993) (for which he also wrote the screenplay), and "Rangeela" (1995). Most of these films were successful critically and commercially. Other successes include "Andaz Apna Apna", co-starring Salman Khan. At the time of its release the movie was reviewed unfavorably by critics, but over the years has gained a cult status.
Khan continued to act in just one or two films a year, an unusual trait for a mainstream Hindi cinema actor. His only release in 1996 was the Dharmesh Darshan directed commercial blockbuster "Raja Hindustani" in which he was paired opposite Karisma Kapoor. The film earned him his first Filmfare Best Actor Award, after seven previous nominations, and went on to become the biggest hit of the year, as well as the third highest grossing Indian film of the 1990s. Khan's career had seemed to hit a plateau at this point of time, and most of the films to follow for the next few years were only partially successful. In 1997, he co-starred alongside Ajay Devgn, Kajol and Juhi Chawla in "Ishq", which performed well at the box office. The following year, Khan appeared in the moderately successful "Ghulam", for which he also did playback singing. John Mathew Matthan's "Sarfarosh" (1999), Khan's first release in 1999, was also moderately successful, gaining an above average box office verdict. The film was highly appreciated amongst the critics and Khan's role as a dedicated, honest and uncorrupted cop engaged in fighting border terrorism, was well received, as was his role in Deepa Mehta's art house film "Earth". His first release for the new millennium, "Mela", in which he acted alongside his real-life brother Faisal Khan, was both a box-office and critical bomb.
In 2001 he appeared in "Lagaan". The film was a major critical and commercial success, and received a nomination for Best Foreign Language Film at the 74th Academy Awards. Additionally, the film gathered critical acclaim at several international film festivals, in addition to winning numerous Indian awards, including the National Film Awards. Khan himself won his second Filmfare Best Actor Award. The film continues to be one of the most popular Hindi films in the west.
The success of "Lagaan" was followed by "Dil Chahta Hai" later that year, in which Khan co-starred with Saif Ali Khan and Akshaye Khanna, with Preity Zinta playing his love interest. The film was written and directed by the then newcomer Farhan Akhtar. According to critics, the film broke new grounds by showing Indian urban youth as they really are today. The characters depicted were modern, suave and cosmopolitan. The film did moderately well and was a success mostly in urban cities.
Khan then took a four-year break citing personal problems, and returned in 2005 with Ketan Mehta's "" playing the title role of a real-life sepoy and a martyr who helped spark the Indian Rebellion of 1857 or the 'First War of Indian Independence'.
Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra's award-winning "Rang De Basanti" was Khan's first release in 2006. His role was critically acclaimed, earning him a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor and various nominations for "Best Actor". The film went on to become one of the highest grossing films of the year, and was selected as India's official entry to the Oscars. Although the film was not shortlisted as a nominee for the Oscar, it received a nomination for Best Foreign Film at the BAFTA Awards in England. Khan's work in his next movie, "Fanaa" (2006) co-starred with Kajol was also appreciated, and the film went on to become one of the highest grossing Indian films of 2006.
His 2007 film, "Taare Zameen Par" was also produced by him and marked his directorial debut. The film, which was the second offering from "Aamir Khan Productions", starred Khan in a supporting role as a teacher who befriends and helps a dyslexic child. It opened to excellent responses from critics and audiences alike. Khan's performance was well-received, although he was particularly applauded for his directing.
In 2008, Khan appeared in the movie "Ghajini". The film was a major commercial success and became the highest grossing Bollywood movie of that year. For his performance in the film, Khan received several "Best Actor" nominations at various award ceremonies as well as his fifteenth Filmfare Best Actor nomination.
In 2009, Khan appeared in the commercially and critically acclaimed film "3 Idiots" as Ranchodas Chanchad w"3 Idiots" has become the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in India, breaking the previous record set by "Ghajini" which also starred Aamir Khan."3 Idiots" also became one of the few Indian films to become a major success in East Asian markets such as China, eventually bringing its overseas total to US $25 million—the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in overseas markets. It was expected to be the first Indian film to be officially released on YouTube, within 12 weeks of releasing in theatres on 25 March 2010, but finally got officially released on YouTube in May 2012. The film also went on to win many awards, winning six Filmfare Awards including best film and best director, ten Star Screen Awards and sixteen IIFA awards Around August 2011, Khan started talks with Siddhartha Basu's BIG Synergy, to host a talk show, similar to The Oprah Winfrey Show.
On 6 May 2012, the highly anticipated show Satyamev Jayate debuted in English and all major Indian languages and received both popular and critical praise for its discussions on various social issues like female foeticide, child sexual abuse and dowry plaguing Indian society.
Aamir is said to have had disagreements with Reema Kagti over the tone of his new film Talaash which has pushed back its release date significantly. However Aamir has termed all these rumours baseless and confirmed that the movie is on schedule and would release on 30 November 2012.
Film production and direction.
In 2001 Khan set up a production company known as Aamir Khan Productions. Its first film was "Lagaan". The movie was released in 2001, starring Khan as the lead actor. The film was selected as India's official entry to the 74th Academy Awards in the Best Foreign Language Film category. It was eventually chosen and nominated in that category but lost to "No Man's Land". The film won numerous awards at several Indian award functions such as Filmfare and IIFA, and won the National Film Award for Most Popular Film, an award shared between Khan and the film's director, Ashutosh Gowariker. Khan later commented on the loss of "Lagaan" at the Oscars: "Certainly we were disappointed. But the thing that really kept us in our spirits was that the entire country was behind us".
In 2007 he produced the drama "Taare Zameen Par" which marked his directorial debut. Khan also played a supporting role in the film, sharing the screen with the debut of child actor Darsheel Safary. The film was initially conceived of and developed by the husband and wife team, Amole Gupte and Deepa Bhatia. It was a story of a young child who suffers in school until a teacher identifies him as dyslexic. The movie was critically acclaimed, as well as a box office success. "Taare Zameen Par" won the 2008 Filmfare Best Movie Award as well as a number of other Filmfare and Star Screen Awards. Khan's work also won him the Best Director. In 2008, Khan launched his nephew Imran Khan's debut in the film "Jaane Tu... Ya Jaane Na" under his production house. The film was a big hit in India, and eventually earned Khan another nomination for Best Movie at the Filmfare.
In 2011, Khan released his home production "Dhobi Ghat". which was directed by his wife, Kiran Rao. In 2012, Khan starred in Reema Kagti's neo-noir mystery film, Talaash which was joint production by Excel Entertainment and Aamir Khan Productions. The film was eventually declared a semi-hit in India and accumulated a worldwide gross of .
Television.
Khan made his television debut with his social issue based talk show "Satyamev Jayte" which started airing on 6 May 2012. Aamir was paid Rs. 3 crore rupees per episode to host the "Satyamev Jayate", and it makes him the highest paid host in Indian television industry (as on June 2012). Aamir, speaking on a radio channel, said that in view of phenomenal public response he may come up with a second season of the show. The show went live simultaneously on Star Plus, STAR World and national broadcaster Doordarshan on the 11 am Sunday slot in eight languages, being the first to do so in India.
"Satyamev Jayte" opened to positive reviews and feedback from eminent personalities such as social activists, media houses, doctors, film and television personalities. Khan was also praised for his effort. In her review, Ritu Singh of IBN Live stated that, "Aamir Khan deserves an applause for bringing up such a sensitive issue and presenting it in a hard hitting way. The amount of research Aamir and his team has put into the show was clearly visible with the facts and figures presented. Every aspect of the issue was covered with great diligence." Parmita Uniyal from "Hindustan Times" praised the content and Khan for "step in to do what journalists are supposed to do – make a difference. The show is a classic example of that." Despite the initial hype and being labelled as the channel's most ambitious project till date, the initial viewership figures were not very encouraging; the show received an average television rating of 2.9 (with a reach of 14.4 million, it was watched by only 20% of TV viewers) in the six metros in its debut episode on 6 May. The rating was far lower than those of most other celebrity-hosted shows at the time.
Khan made to cover page of "TIME magazine" Asia edition in September 2012 issue with title "Khan's Quest" — "He is breaking the Bollywood mold by tackling India's social evils. Can an actor change a nation?"
Humanitarian and political causes.
In April 2006, Aamir participated in the demonstrations put up by the Narmada Bachao Andolan committee with their leader Medha Patkar after the Gujrat government's decision to raise the height of the Narmada dam. He quoted to support adivasis(tribes), who might be displaced from their homes. Later he faced protests and a partial ban on his film Fanaa but the Prime Minister of India, Manmohan Singh supported him by saying "Everyone has the freedom of expression. If someone says something on a particular subject, that doesn't mean you should start protesting." Aamir also lent his support to Janlokpal Bill Movement led by Anna Hazare in August 2011.
He has been supporting common causes and in the same row when asked about views on entertainment tax in 2012 budget Aamir said, "I don't want any reduction in that, all I expect is focus on education and nutrition." He quit the GOI's copyrights panels in February 2010 after facing sharp differences with other members. During the promotion of 3 Idiots he journeyed to diverse parts of India, mostly to small towns, noting that "film makers from Mumbai don’t understand small town India". This experience of reaching out to 'regional India' was extended in his debut TV show Satyamev Jayate.On 16 July 2012, Khan met Prime Minister and the Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment, discussed the plight of manual scavengers and sought eradication of manual scavenging in the country.
In the media.
In a 2009 interview, Khan states that he tends to take an independent approach to the world of filmmaking, noting that he does not "do different things; I try to do it in a different manner. I think every person should follow his/her dream and try and make it possible to create an ability to achieve it backed by its practicality." He has also indicated that he is more interested in the process of filmmaking than in the end result: "For me, the process is more important, more joyful. I would like to have my entire concentration on the process right from the first step."
Aamir Khan has a reputation for shunning award ceremonies and not accepting any popular Indian film awards. Though nominated many times, Khan does not attend any Indian film award ceremony as he feels "Indian film awards lack credibility". When asked about the selection procedure and authenticity of popular Indian Film awards, Aamir Khan says, "fact is that I have no objections to film awards per se. I just feel that if I don’t value a particular film award, then I won’t attend it either. Apart from the National Film Awards, I don’t see any other award ceremony that I should give value to. My personal experience about these award ceremonies is that I don’t trust them. I have no faith in them so I would prefer to stay away."
In 2007, Khan was invited to have a wax imitation of himself put on display at Madame Tussauds in London. However, Khan declined stating that, "It's not important to me... people will see my films if they want to. Also, I cannot deal with so many things, I have bandwidth only for that much."
Personal life.
Khan married Reena Dutta, who had a small part in "Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak", on 18 April 1986. They have two children, a son named Junaid and a daughter, Ira. Reena was involved briefly in Khan's career when she worked as a producer for "Lagaan". In December 2002, Khan filed for divorce, ending the 15-year marriage. Reena took custody of both children.
On 28 December 2005, Khan married Kiran Rao who had been an assistant director to Ashutosh Gowariker during the filming of "Lagaan". On 5 December 2011, Khan and his wife announced the birth of their son, Azad Rao Khan, through a surrogatemother.
In 2007, Khan lost a custody battle for his younger brother Faisal to their father, Tahir Hussain. His father passed away on 2 February 2010. Khan is a follower of spiritual leader J. P. Vaswani.
