Karlie Elizabeth Kloss (born August 3, 1992) is an American model. She is a Victoria's Secret Angel. Kloss is currently ranked 2nd on the "Top 50 Models Women" list by Models.com. Vogue Paris declared her one of the top 30 models of the 2000s.
Early life and discovery.
Kloss was born in Chicago, Illinois, and her family moved to St. Louis, Missouri, in 1994. Kloss has called her classical ballet training "a beautiful thing" that taught her how to move in the modeling world and was a great training ground for her runway walk. 
Kloss was "discovered at a local benefit runway show". She attended Webster Groves High School.
Modelling.
At the beginning of her career in 2006, Kloss posed for Photographer David Leslie Anthony for a 12 page editorial and cover for Scene Magazine in Chicago. Elite Chicago then forwarded these tear sheets to Elite NY, who then brought Kloss to New York.
One of her first modelling stints was for Abercrombie when she posed for the brand's photography shot by Bruce Weber. In January 2008 she left Elite and signed with NEXT Model Management. She ended up walking 31 runways in New York Fashion Week notably, closing for Marc Jacobs, opening Carolina Herrera, and occupying both spots at Doo.Ri. After New York she went on to walk 20 shows in Milan, and 13 in Paris for the fall 2008 collections, with a total of 64 shows in a single season. Kloss found herself in the middle of a legal dispute when her former agency Elite Model Management sued NEXT Model Management for allegedly stealing its young star by offering her "improper compensation" to sign. Elite felt they were responsible for launching her career and booked much work for her. The case was eventually settled out of court.
After four years of being represented by Next Model Management, Kloss is now signed with IMG Models. "Karlie has an immense and loyal following, and we welcome the opportunity to help expand her relationships through endorsements as well as our global network that reaches beyond fashion," said Ivan Bart, IMG Models' senior vice president and managing director.
She was named the best model by "People magazine" in 2008. Kloss, labeled her famed runway walk a "moody gait." Molly Sims, whom she considers a mentor, told "New York" she thinks Kloss is the type of model who will still "do well at 30" because of her classic look.
She has been in advertisements for Jean Paul Gaultier, Donna Karan, Nina Ricci, Chloé, Lacoste, Sportmax, Alexander McQueen, Yves Saint Laurent, Elie Saab, Dolce & Gabbana, Gap, Bally Shoe, Bergdorf Goodman, Pringle of Scotland, Dior, Hermes, Oscar de la Renta, Sonia Rykiel, Aquascutum, Topshop, Eryn Brinie, Uniqlo, Omnia Jade, Lord & Taylor, Barneys New York, American Eagle, and Victoria's Secret PINK. Kloss is the face of the Marc Jacobs fragrance "Lola". She has walked for numerous designers in New York, London, Milan and Paris, including Shiatzy Chen, Calvin Klein, Karl Lagerfeld, Marc Jacobs, Zac Posen, Givenchy, Gucci, Valentino, Louis Vuitton and Versace, Elie Saab and appeared in editorials for American and Korean "W", American "Elle", "Allure", "i-D", French and Japanese "Numéro", "Vanity Fair", "Dazed & Confused", and American, Australian, Italian, French, British, Korean, German, Japanese, Chinese, Turkish, Portuguese, Teen, and Latin American "Vogue" magazines. Her covers include Italian "Vogue" in October 2009, January 2010, and December 2011, "Vogue" Turkey, "Vogue" Portugal, "Vogue" China in February, August, and November in 2010, British "Vogue" in September 2012, "Vogue" Korea and American "Teen Vogue", alongside Chanel Iman and Ali Michael in February 2008 and by herself in May 2010. She has ventured into TV when she appeared in Season Four Episode 1 of "Gossip Girl" as herself. She has become a muse for fashion designer John Galliano and has appeared in Dior and John Galliano campaigns and opened both shows, Christian Dior Haute Couture and Dior resort shows from spring summer 2010. In the Spring/Summer 2011 Season, she opened 10 shows and closed 8.
Her runway walk, one of the most unique, is often described as powerful. Supermodel Tyra Banks stated (in February 2011) that Kloss was one of her favorite models because of her "unique, atypical beauty".
In 2011 Kloss renewed her contract with Christian Dior for the third season in a row. The same year, she made her debut in the Victoria's Secret Fashion Show.
In 2012 Kloss is featured on the September covers of British Vogue, Japanese Vogue, Harper's Bazaar Russia, and Numero. She appeared in the campaign ads of Juicy Couture, Stefanel, Elie Saab and Jean Paul Gaultier. She co-hosted with the revival of the MTV series House of Style with fellow model Joan Smalls. She also appeared in that year's Victoria's Secret Fashion Show.
In 2013, she was the face of Donna Karan, Lacoste and Lanvin campaigns. In January 2013, Kloss was officially signed as a Victoria's Secret Angel.
Personal life.
Her hobbies include baking cookies, biking, and ballet. In collaboration with Momofuku Milk Bar, she created a special recipe called Karlie's Kookies that she sold in DKNY Soho during Fashion's Night Out in New York City, with proceeds benefiting hungry children around the world (through FEED projects). She calls it a "Perfect 10 Cookie", because it contains dark chocolate and almond oat (dairy-free, gluten-free, and no sugar added). 
