By definition, the first two numbers in the Fibonacci sequence are 0 and 1, and each subsequent number is the sum of the previous two.
In mathematical terms, the sequence "Fn" of Fibonacci numbers is defined by the recurrence relation
with seed values
The Fibonacci sequence is named after Leonardo of Pisa, who was known as Fibonacci. Fibonacci's 1202 book "Liber Abaci" introduced the sequence to Western European mathematics, although the sequence had been described earlier in Indian mathematics. By modern convention, the sequence begins either with "F"0 = 0 or with "F"1 = 1. The "Liber Abaci" began the sequence with "F"1 = 1, without an initial 0.
Fibonacci numbers are closely related to Lucas numbers in that they are a complementary pair of Lucas sequences. They are intimately connected with the golden ratio; for example, the closest rational approximations to the ratio are 2/1, 3/2, 5/3, 8/5, ... . Applications include computer algorithms such as the Fibonacci search technique and the Fibonacci heap data structure, and graphs called Fibonacci cubes used for interconnecting parallel and distributed systems. They also appear in biological settings, such as branching in trees, phyllotaxis (the arrangement of leaves on a stem), the fruit sprouts of a pineapple, the flowering of artichoke, an uncurling fern and the arrangement of a pine cone.
Origins.
The Fibonacci sequence appears in Indian mathematics, in connection with Sanskrit prosody. In the Sanskrit oral tradition, there was much emphasis on how long (L) syllables mix with the short (S), and counting the different patterns of L and S within a given fixed length results in the Fibonacci numbers; the number of patterns that are "m" short syllables long is the Fibonacci number "F""m" + 1.
Susantha Goonatilake writes that the development of the Fibonacci sequence "is attributed in part to Pingala (200 BC), later being associated with Virahanka (c. 700 AD), Gopāla (c. 1135), and Hemachandra (c. 1150)". Parmanand Singh cites Pingala's cryptic formula "misrau cha" ("the two are mixed") and cites scholars who interpret it in context as saying that the cases for "m" beats ("F""m+1") is obtained by adding a to "F""m" cases and [L to the "F""m"−1 cases. He dates Pingala before 450 BCE.
The series is also discussed by Gopala (before 1135 AD) and by the Jain scholar Hemachandra (c. 1150).
In the West, the Fibonacci sequence first appears in the book "Liber Abaci" (1202) by Leonardo of Pisa, known as Fibonacci. Fibonacci considers the growth of an idealized (biologically unrealistic) rabbit population, assuming that: a newly born pair of rabbits, one male, one female, are put in a field; rabbits are able to mate at the age of one month so that at the end of its second month a female can produce another pair of rabbits; rabbits never die and a mating pair always produces one new pair (one male, one female) every month from the second month on. The puzzle that Fibonacci posed was: how many pairs will there be in one year?
At the end of the "n"th month, the number of pairs of rabbits is equal to the number of new pairs (which is the number of pairs in month "n" − 2) plus the number of pairs alive last month ("n" − 1). This is the "n"th Fibonacci number.
The name "Fibonacci sequence" was first used by the 19th-century number theorist Édouard Lucas.
List of Fibonacci numbers.
The sequence can also be extended to negative index "n" using the re-arranged recurrence relation
Thus the bidirectional sequence is
Occurrences in mathematics.
The Fibonacci numbers occur in the sums of "shallow" diagonals in Pascal's triangle (see Binomial coefficient).
The Fibonacci numbers can be found in different ways in the sequence of binary strings.
Relation to the golden ratio.
Closed-form expression.
where
is the golden ratio , and
To see this, note that φ and ψ are both solutions of the equations
so the powers of φ and ψ satisfy the Fibonacci recursion. In other words
and
It follows that for any values "a" and "b", the sequence defined by
satisfies the same recurrence
which has solution
producing the required formula.
Computation by rounding.
Since 
for all "n" ≥ 0, the number "F""n" is the closest integer to 
Similarly, if we already know that the number "F" > 1 is a Fibonacci number, we can determine its index within the sequence by
Limit of consecutive quotients.
Johannes Kepler observed that the ratio of consecutive Fibonacci numbers converges. He wrote that "as 5 is to 8 so is 8 to 13, practically, and as 8 is to 13, so is 13 to 21 almost", and concluded that the limit approaches the golden ratio formula_22.
This convergence does not depend on the starting values chosen, excluding 0, 0. For example, the initial values 19 and 31 generate the sequence 19, 31, 50, 81, 131, 212, 343, 555 ... etc. The ratio of consecutive terms in this sequence shows the same convergence towards the golden ratio.
In fact this holds for any sequence which satisfies the Fibonacci recurrence other than a sequence of 0's. This can be derived from Binet's formula.
Decomposition of powers of the golden ratio.
Since the golden ratio satisfies the equation
This equation can be proved by induction on formula_29.
This expression is also true for formula_30 if the Fibonacci sequence formula_31 is extended to negative integers using the Fibonacci rule formula_32
Matrix form.
A 2-dimensional system of linear difference equations that describes the Fibonacci sequence is
The Fibonacci numbers occur as the ratio of successive convergents of the continued fraction for formula_42, and the matrix formed from successive convergents of any continued fraction has a determinant of +1 or −1.
Taking the determinant of both sides of this equation yields Cassini's identity
In particular, with formula_47,
These last two identities provide a way to compute Fibonacci numbers recursively in O(log "n") arithmetic operations and in time O("M"("n") log "n"), where "M"("n") is the time for the multplication of two numbers of "n" digits. This matches the time for computing the "n"th Fibonacci number from the closed-form matrix formula, but with fewer redundant steps if one avoids to recompute an already computed Fibonacci number (recursion with memorization).
Recognizing Fibonacci numbers.
The question may arise whether a positive integer "z" is a Fibonacci number. Since formula_49 is the closest integer to formula_50, the most straightforward, brute-force test is the identity
which is true if and only if "z" is a Fibonacci number. In this formula, formula_49 can be computed rapidly using any of the previously discussed closed-form expressions.
Alternatively, a positive integer "z" is a Fibonacci number if and only if one of formula_54 or formula_55 is a perfect square.
A slightly more sophisticated test uses the fact that the convergents of the continued fraction representation of formula_27 are ratios of successive Fibonacci numbers. That is, the inequality
(with coprime positive integers "p", "q") is true if and only if "p" and "q" are successive Fibonacci numbers. From this one derives the criterion that "z" is a Fibonacci number if and only if the closed interval
contains a positive integer. For formula_59, it is easy to show that this interval contains at most one integer, and in the event that "z" is a Fibonacci number, the contained integer is equal to the next successive Fibonacci number after "z". Somewhat remarkably, this result still holds for the case formula_60, but it must be stated carefully since formula_61 appears twice in the Fibonacci sequence, and thus has two distinct successors.
Combinatorial identities.
Most identities involving Fibonacci numbers can be proven using combinatorial arguments using the fact that "F""n" can be interpreted as the number of sequences of 1s and 2s that sum to "n" − 1. This can be taken as the definition of "F""n", with the convention that "F"0 = 0, meaning no sum will add up to −1, and that "F"1 = 1, meaning the empty sum will "add up" to 0.
Here the order of the summand matters. For example, 1 + 2 and 2 + 1 are considered two different sums.
For example, the recurrence relation 
or in words, the "n"th Fibonacci number is the sum of the previous two Fibonacci numbers, may be shown by dividing the "F" ("n") sums of 1s and 2s that add to "n" − 1 into two non-overlapping groups. One group contains those sums whose first term is 1 and the other those sums whose first term is 2. In the first group the remaining terms add to "n" − 2, so it has "F" ("n" − 1) sums, and in the second group the remaining terms add to "n" − 3, so there are "F" ("n" − 2) sums. So there are a total of "F" ("n" − 1) + "F" ("n" − 2) sums altogether, showing this is equal to "F" ("n").
This is done by dividing the sums adding to n+1 in a different way, this time by the location of the first 2. Specifically, the first group consists of those sums that start with 2, the second group those that start 1+2, the third 1+1+2, and so on, until the last group which consists of the single sum where only 1's are used. The number of sums in the first group is "F"("n"), "F"("n" − 1) in the second group, and so on, with 1 sum in the last group. So the total number of sums is "F"("n") + "F"("n" − 1) + ... + "F"(1)+1 and therefore this quantity is equal to "F"("n" + 2)
and
In words, the sum of the first Fibonacci numbers with odd index up to F2"n" − 1 is the (2n)th Fibonacci number, and the sum of the first Fibonacci numbers with even index up to F2"n" is the (2n+1)th Fibonacci number minus 1.
A different trick may be used to prove
or in words, the sum of the squares of the first Fibonacci numbers up to "F""n" is the product of the "n"th and ("n" + 1)th Fibonacci numbers. In this case note that Fibonacci rectangle of size "F""n" by "F" ("n" + 1) can be decomposed into squares of size "F""n", "F""n" − 1, and so on to "F""1" = 1, from which the identity follows by comparing areas.
Other identities.
where "L""n" is the "n"'th Lucas Number.
The last is an identity for doubling "n"; other identities of this type are 
These can be found experimentally using lattice reduction, and are useful in setting up the special number field sieve to factorize a Fibonacci number. 
More generally,
Putting in this formula, one gets again the formulas of the end of above section Matrix form.
Power series.
The generating function of the Fibonacci sequence is the power series
If is the inverse of an integer, the closed form of the series becomes 
In particular, 
for all integers formula_83.
Some math puzzle-books present as curious the particular value formula_84.
Reciprocal sums.
Infinite sums over reciprocal Fibonacci numbers can sometimes be evaluated in terms of theta functions. For example, we can write the sum of every odd-indexed reciprocal Fibonacci number as
and the sum of squared reciprocal Fibonacci numbers as
If we add 1 to each Fibonacci number in the first sum, there is also the closed form
and there is a nice "nested" sum of squared Fibonacci numbers giving the reciprocal of the golden ratio,
Results such as these make it plausible that a closed formula for the plain sum of reciprocal Fibonacci numbers could be found, but none is yet known. Despite that, the reciprocal Fibonacci constant
has been proved irrational by Richard André-Jeannin.
Primes and divisibility.
Divisibility properties.
Every 3rd number of the sequence is even and more generally, every "k"th number of the sequence is a multiple of "Fk". Thus the Fibonacci sequence is an example of a divisibility sequence. In fact, the Fibonacci sequence satisfies the stronger divisibility property
Fibonacci primes.
Fibonacci primes with thousands of digits have been found, but it is not known whether there are infinitely many.
"F""kn" is divisible by "F""n", so, apart from "F"4 = 3, any Fibonacci prime must have a prime index. As there are arbitrarily long runs of composite numbers, there are therefore also arbitrarily long runs of composite Fibonacci numbers.
With the exceptions of 1, 8 and 144 ("F"1 = "F"2, "F"6 and "F"12) every Fibonacci number has a prime factor that is not a factor of any smaller Fibonacci number (Carmichael's theorem).
The only nontrivial
square Fibonacci number is 144. Attila Pethő proved in 2001 that there is only a finite number of perfect power Fibonacci numbers. In 2006, Y. Bugeaud, M. Mignotte, and S. Siksek proved that 8 and 144 are the only such non-trivial perfect powers.
No Fibonacci number greater than "F"6 = 8 is one greater or one less than a prime number.
Any three consecutive Fibonacci numbers, taken two at a time, are relatively prime: that is,
More generally,
Prime divisors of Fibonacci numbers.
If "p" is a prime number then
formula_95
It is not known whether there exists a prime "p" such that formula_96. Such primes (if there are any) would be called Wall–Sun–Sun primes.
For odd "n", all odd prime divisors of "F""n" are ≡ 1 (mod 4), implying that all odd divisors of "F""n" (as the products of odd prime divisors) are ≡ 1 (mod 4).
All known factors of Fibonacci numbers F(i) for all i < 50000 are collected at the relevant repositories.
Periodicity modulo "n".
It may be seen that if the members of the Fibonacci sequence are taken mod "n", the resulting sequence must be periodic with period at most "n"2-1. The lengths of the periods for various "n" form the so-called Pisano periods . Determining the Pisano periods in general is an open problem, although for any particular "n" it can be solved as an instance of cycle detection.
Right triangles.
Starting with 5, every second Fibonacci number is the length of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with integer sides, or in other words, the largest number in a Pythagorean triple. The length of the longer leg of this triangle is equal to the sum of the three sides of the preceding triangle in this series of triangles, and the shorter leg is equal to the difference between the preceding bypassed Fibonacci number and the shorter leg of the preceding triangle.
These formulas satisfy formula_101 for all "n", but they only represent triangle sides when "n" > 2.
Magnitude.
Since formula_107 is asymptotic to formula_108, the number of digits in formula_109 is asymptotic to formula_110. As a consequence, for every integer formula_111 there are either 4 or 5 Fibonacci numbers with "d" decimal digits.
More generally, in the base "b" representation, the number of digits in formula_107 is asymptotic to formula_113.
Applications.
The Fibonacci numbers are important in the computational run-time analysis of Euclid's algorithm to determine the greatest common divisor of two integers: the worst case input for this algorithm is a pair of consecutive Fibonacci numbers.
Yuri Matiyasevich was able to show that the Fibonacci numbers can be defined by a Diophantine equation, which led to his original solution of Hilbert's tenth problem.
The Fibonacci numbers are also an example of a complete sequence. This means that every positive integer can be written as a sum of Fibonacci numbers, where any one number is used once at most. Specifically, every positive integer can be written in a unique way as the sum of "one or more" distinct Fibonacci numbers in such a way that the sum does not include any two consecutive Fibonacci numbers. This is known as Zeckendorf's theorem, and a sum of Fibonacci numbers that satisfies these conditions is called a Zeckendorf representation. The Zeckendorf representation of a number can be used to derive its Fibonacci coding.
Fibonacci numbers are used by some pseudorandom number generators.
Fibonacci numbers are used in a polyphase version of the merge sort algorithm in which an unsorted list is divided into two lists whose lengths correspond to sequential Fibonacci numbers – by dividing the list so that the two parts have lengths in the approximate proportion φ. A tape-drive implementation of the polyphase merge sort was described in "The Art of Computer Programming".
Fibonacci numbers arise in the analysis of the Fibonacci heap data structure.
The Fibonacci cube is an undirected graph with a Fibonacci number of nodes that has been proposed as a network topology for parallel computing.
A one-dimensional optimization method, called the Fibonacci search technique, uses Fibonacci numbers.
The Fibonacci number series is used for optional lossy compression in the IFF 8SVX audio file format used on Amiga computers. The number series compands the original audio wave similar to logarithmic methods such as µ-law.
Since the conversion factor 1.609344 for miles to kilometers is close to the golden ratio (denoted φ), the decomposition of distance in miles into a sum of Fibonacci numbers becomes nearly the kilometer sum when the Fibonacci numbers are replaced by their successors. This method amounts to a radix 2 number register in golden ratio base φ being shifted. To convert from kilometers to miles, shift the register down the Fibonacci sequence instead.
In nature.
Fibonacci sequences appear in biological settings, in two consecutive Fibonacci numbers, such as branching in trees, arrangement of leaves on a stem, the fruitlets of a pineapple, the flowering of artichoke, an uncurling fern and the arrangement of a pine cone. In addition, numerous poorly substantiated claims of Fibonacci numbers or golden sections in nature are found in popular sources, e.g., relating to the breeding of rabbits, the seeds on a sunflower, the spirals of shells, and the curve of waves. The Fibonacci numbers are also found in the family tree of honeybees.
Przemysław Prusinkiewicz advanced the idea that real instances can in part be understood as the expression of certain algebraic constraints on free groups, specifically as certain Lindenmayer grammars.
A model for the pattern of florets in the head of a sunflower was proposed by H. Vogel in 1979. This has the form
where "n" is the index number of the floret and "c" is a constant scaling factor; the florets thus lie on Fermat's spiral. The divergence angle, approximately 137.51°, is the golden angle, dividing the circle in the golden ratio. Because this ratio is irrational, no floret has a neighbor at exactly the same angle from the center, so the florets pack efficiently. Because the rational approximations to the golden ratio are of the form "F"("j"):"F"("j" + 1), the nearest neighbors of floret number "n" are those at "n" ± "F"("j") for some index "j" which depends on "r", the distance from the center. It is often said that sunflowers and similar arrangements have 55 spirals in one direction and 89 in the other (or some other pair of adjacent Fibonacci numbers), but this is true only of one range of radii, typically the outermost and thus most conspicuous.
The bee ancestry code.
Thus, a male bee will always have one parent, and a female bee will have two.
If one traces the ancestry of any male bee (1 bee), he has 1 parent (1 bee), 2 grandparents, 3 great-grandparents, 5 great-great-grandparents, and so on. This sequence of numbers of parents is the Fibonacci sequence. The number of ancestors at each level, "F""n", is the number of female ancestors, which is "F""n"−1, plus the number of male ancestors, which is "F""n"−2. This is under the unrealistic assumption that the ancestors at each level are otherwise unrelated.
