John Gavin Malkovich (born December 9, 1953) is an American actor, producer, director and fashion designer with his label "Technobohemian". Over the last 30 years of his career, Malkovich has appeared in more than 70 motion pictures. For his roles in "Places in the Heart" and "In the Line of Fire", he received Academy Award nominations. He has also appeared in critically acclaimed films such as "Empire of the Sun", "The Killing Fields", "Dangerous Liaisons", "Of Mice and Men", "Con Air", "Being John Malkovich", and "RED", and has produced numerous films, including 'Juno' and "The Perks of Being a Wallflower".
Early life.
Malkovich was born in Christopher, Illinois. His paternal grandparents were Croatian, natives of Ozalj. His mother was of Scottish and German ancestry. He grew up in Benton, Illinois, in a large house on South Main Street. His father, Daniel Leon Malkovich, was a state conservation director and publisher of "Outdoor Illinois", a conservation magazine. His mother, Joe Anne (née Choisser), owned the "Benton Evening News", as well as "Outdoor Illinois". Malkovich has three younger sisters and an older brother. Malkovich attended Logan Grade School, Webster Junior High, and Benton Consolidated High School. During his high school years, he appeared in various plays and the musical, "Carousel". He was also a member of a folk rock musical trio, and was a member of a local summer theater/comedy project in Benton in 1972, where he co-starred in Jean-Claude van Itallie's "America Hurrah". Upon graduation from high school, he entered Eastern Illinois University, and then transferred to Illinois State University, where he majored in theatre.
Career.
In 1976, Malkovich, along with Joan Allen, Gary Sinise, and Glenne Headly, became a charter member of the Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago. He moved to New York City in 1980 to appear in a Steppenwolf production of the Sam Shepard play "True West" for which he won an Obie Award. In early 1982, he appeared in "A Streetcar Named Desire" with Chicago's Wisdom Bridge Theatre. Malkovich then directed a Steppenwolf co-production, the 1984 revival of Lanford Wilson's "Balm in Gilead", for which he received a second Obie Award and a Drama Desk Award. His Broadway debut that year was as Biff in "Death of a Salesman" alongside Dustin Hoffman as Willy. Malkovich won an "Emmy Award" for this role when the play was adapted for television by CBS in 1985.
One of the actor's first forays into film was as an extra alongside Allen, Terry Kinney, George Wendt and Laurie Metcalf in Robert Altman's 1978 film "A Wedding". He made his feature film debut in 1984 as Sally Field's blind boarder Mr. Will in "Places in the Heart". For his portrayal of Mr. Will, Malkovich received his first Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. He also portrayed Al Rockoff in "The Killing Fields". He continued to have steady work in films such as "Empire of the Sun", directed by Steven Spielberg, and the 1987 film adaptation of Tennessee Williams's "The Glass Menagerie" with Paul Newman and Joanne Woodward. A few years later, Malkovich became a star when he portrayed the sinister and sensual Valmont in the 1988 film "Dangerous Liaisons". He later reprised this role for the music video of "Walking on Broken Glass" by Annie Lennox.
In 1990, he recited, in Croat, verses of the Croatian national anthem "Lijepa naša domovino" (Our Beautiful Homeland) in Nenad Bach's song "Can We Go Higher?".
Malkovich starred in the 1992 film adaptation of John Steinbeck's award-winning novella "Of Mice and Men" as Lennie alongside Gary Sinise as George. In 1994, he was nominated for another Oscar, in the same category, for "In the Line of Fire". Though he played the title role in the Charlie Kaufman-penned "Being John Malkovich", he played a slight variation of himself, as indicated by the character's middle name of "Horatio". Malkovich has a cameo in the movie "Adaptation."—also written by Kaufman—appearing as himself during the filming of "Being John Malkovich". "The Dancer Upstairs", Malkovich's directorial film debut, was released in 2002. Recent film roles include "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy", "Beowulf", "Burn After Reading", "Changeling", "RED" and "Secretariat".
Malkovich has hosted three episodes of the NBC sketch show "Saturday Night Live". The first occasion was in January 1989 with musical guest Anita Baker; the second in October 1993 with musical guest Billy Joel (and special appearance by former cast member Jan Hooks); and the third was in December 2008 with musical guest T.I. with Swizz Beatz (and special appearances by Justin Timberlake, Molly Sims and Jamie-Lynn Sigler).
In keeping with his renaissance-man image, he created his own fashion company, Mrs. Mudd, in 2002. The company released its John Malkovich menswear collection, "Uncle Kimono," in 2003, which was subsequently covered in international press, and its second clothing line, "Technobohemian," in 2010. Malkovich designed the outfits himself.
In a 2008 interview on "College Hour", Malkovich revealed that he has been discussing making a motion picture adaptation of the Arnon Grunberg novel "The Story of My Baldness".
In 2008, Malkovich portrayed the story of Jack Unterweger in a performance for one actor, two sopranos, and period orchestra entitled "Seduction and Despair," which premiered at Barnum Hall in Santa Monica, CA. A fully staged version of the production, entitled "The Infernal Comedy" premiered in Vienna in July 2009. The show has since been performed in 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 throughout Europe, North America and South America.
In November 2009, Malkovich appeared in an advertisement for Nespresso with fellow actor George Clooney. He portrayed Quentin Turnbull in the film adaption of "Jonah Hex".
In 2011, Malkovich directed Julian Sands in "A Celebration of Harold Pinter" in the Pleasance Courtyard, Edinburgh for the Edinburgh Festival Fringe.
Malkovich is known for his distinctive voice which "The Guardian" describes as "a reedy, faintly orgasmic drawl".
Personal life.
Malkovich was married to actress Glenne Headly from 1982 to 1988. They divorced after Malkovich became involved with Michelle Pfeiffer. He later met his long-term partner Nicoletta Peyran on the set of "The Sheltering Sky", where she was the second assistant director, in 1989. They have two children, Amandine and Loewy.
Malkovich is fluent in French, and for nearly 10 years lived and worked in a theater in Southern France. He and his family left France in a dispute over taxes in 2003, and since then he has lived in Cambridge, Massachusetts. In a 2008 interview on the "Late Show with David Letterman", Malkovich said he had just spent five weeks that summer living in France.
Malkovich lost millions to Bernard Madoff's Ponzi scheme when it collapsed in 2008.
Malkovich stated in a 2011 interview that "I’m not a political person actually, and I don’t have an ideology." He also said that he had not voted since George McGovern lost his presidential run in 1972.
When asked in an interview with the "Toronto Star" whether it was necessary to have spiritual beliefs to portray a spiritual character, he said "No, I'd say not...I'm an atheist. I wouldn't say I'm without spiritual belief particularly, or rather, specifically. Maybe I'm agnostic, but I'm not quite sure there's some great creator somehow controlling everything and giving us free will. I don't know; it doesn't seem to make a lot of sense to me."
In a 2002 appearance at the Cambridge Union Society, when asked whom he would most like to "fight to the death", Malkovich replied that he would "rather just shoot" journalist Robert Fisk and British MP George Galloway. Both Fisk and Galloway reacted with outrage.
