Side Effects is a 2013 psychological thriller film directed by Steven Soderbergh from a screenplay written by Scott Z. Burns. The film stars Jude Law, Rooney Mara, Catherine Zeta-Jones and Channing Tatum. The film concerns the ramifications of an event following a young woman being prescribed antidepressant drugs.
"Side Effects" was released in the United States on February 8, 2013.
Plot.
Emily Taylor's (Rooney Mara), husband Martin (Channing Tatum) has just been released after serving a 4-year prison sentence for insider trading. Shortly afterward Emily, as if in a trance, drives her car into a concrete wall in an apparent suicide attempt. Jonathan Banks (Jude Law) is a psychiatrist assigned by the state to her case and while he fears for her safety, he agrees to release her from the hospital as long as she frequently attends sessions with him. Emily tries a series of anti-depressant medications but they fail to work. Jonathan then talks to Emily's previous psychiatrist Victoria (Catherine Zeta-Jones), whom Emily stopped seeing after she lost her health insurance; Victoria suggests that Jonathan put Emily on the drug Ablixa. Jonathan hesitates putting Emily on the experimental drug until she attempts suicide a second time by almost jumping onto a subway track before a policeman stops her. The medication works and Emily seems to regain her normal life with Martin, except that she begins to have severe sleepwalking episodes. Jonathan monitors her and her case appears to be solved until one night she stabs Martin to death while sleep-walking.
Emily is brought to trial after a thorough investigation. It is revealed that Ablixa is known to have sleep-walking side-effects in patients, and Jonathan fights for Emily's innocence. Jonathan is criticized publicly for fumbling Emily's case and is accused of taking too large of a work load and consulting for drug trials because his wife had recently lost her job and he was unwilling to remove her son from an expensive private school. Emily eventually agrees to an insanity plea deal; she'll be declared not guilty as long as she is held in a mental institution until cleared by a psychiatrist.
Due to the bad publicity of the case, Jonathan's partners leave him, he is removed from the clinical trials, and the District Attorney will no longer consult with him. As he cannot believe he did anything wrong, he begins to investigate the case, looking for any angle to prove he did nothing wrong -- even conspiracies -- and he begins to find bizarre circumstances in the case. For example, Emily had clearly activated her car's safety mechanisms just before her first suicide attempt, Victoria had been the only psychiatrist that reported the sleep-walking side effects of Ablixa, and the coverage from Emily's murder trial had caused a massive drop in the stock price of Ablixa and a large rise in the stock price of its primary competitor. Jonathan believes that Emily and Victoria have conspired together and he interviews Emily after administering what he claims is a truth serum. Emily behaves as if she's groggy from the drug -- which unbeknownst to her was actually a placebo -- and this confirms Jonathan's suspicions. 
When Jonathan confronts Victoria with this information, she mails photographs to Jonathan's wife implying he had an affair with Emily; Jonathan's wife and son leave him. Jonathan manages to turn Emily and Victoria against each other by using legal means to prevent contact between them, then lies to them, making each believe that her partner had sold her out to Jonathan for a better deal. Desperate for Jonathan to save her, Emily reveals the workings of the plot to him: Emily enjoyed the rich life and hated Martin for causing her to lose it. She specifically went to Victoria for counseling as she, too, had been abandoned by her husband, and the two began a relationship. They taught each other about the workings of the financial world and faking psychiatric disorders. They then went to elaborate means to fake the side effects of the drug in order to manipulate the stock prices of Ablixa's manufacturer and its competitor, allowing the duo to become rich through the change in stock prices.
Jonathan agrees to release Emily from the psychiatric ward under his care. She immediately re-unites with Victoria, who admits details of the plot to Emily -- who is wearing a wire. Victoria is arrested for conspiracy to commit murder, but Emily, due to double jeopardy, can no longer be held criminally responsible for her part in Martin's murder. As retaliation for Emily's part in the plot, Jonathan prescribes her a series of unnecessary drugs with serious side effects, including one that induces a zombie-like state, under the threat she'll be sent back to the ward if she refuses. Angered by this, she goes ballistic and rants about all that she has done to avoid being sent to prison for Martin's death. Unbeknownst to her, Martin's mother, her lawyer, and a police officer are all outside the room and heard every bit of the confession. In a panic, she runs from his office, but Jonathan has called police agents in advance, knowing how she would react. The agents take Emily into custody and send her back to the mental ward. In the final scene, Jonathan is shown having regained his normal life and Emily in the ward, staring blankly out the window, implied to be caused by her new medication, is asked by a ward how she is feeling. She replies in a monotone voice, "Better. Much Better."
Cast.
Originally, Blake Lively was first cast for the lead role. However, it was later reported Rooney Mara would replace her. Catherine Zeta-Jones also landed the role of Dr. Victoria Siebert. This is the third collaboration between Soderbergh and the actress, following "Traffic" (2000) and "Ocean's Twelve" (2004).
Production.
"Side Effects", previously titled "The Bitter Pill", is directed by Steven Soderbergh, produced by Lorenzo di Bonaventura, Gregory Jacobs, and Scott Z. Burns who also worked on the screenplay. In January 2012, the film was reported to be produced by Annapurna Pictures. A few weeks later, Annapurna Pictures pulled out from the project resulting in Endgame Entertainment financing the project.
Filming started on April 5, 2012 in New York City. The first pictures of the set surfaced on April 10, 2012.
Release.
In January 2012, it was reported that "The Bitter Pill" would be released by Open Road Films. The film is expected to be released in early 2013. In November 2012, the first trailer was released, which stated it had now gone back to the original title of "Side Effects" and that it would be released on February 8, 2013. The film was screened in competition at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival.
"Side Effects" opened nationwide on February 8, 2013. It was number 3 in the box office that weekend, earning $10 million. 
Reception.
Critical reception.
Prior to the film's release, "Side Effects" has received mostly positive reviews from critics. As of February 7, 2013, the film currently holds an 85% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, with the film given an average score of 7.4/10. Two reviews are listed on Metacritic as of January 2013; both of which are positive. Director Steven Soderbergh's work on the film was applauded by critics, who called Soderbergh's effort on the film "elegant", and called Soderbergh a "connoisseur" of the horror genre, comparing him to Robert Altman. "Side Effects" has been called "absorbing," "jazzy," and "cunningly unpredictable".
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film three and a half out of four stars. Kirk Honeycutt of "Honey Cutts Hollywood" called the film a "post-modern Hitchcock-thriller" and praised the story matter, which he dubbed "incredible". Cole Smithey gave "Side Effects" an A rating (5 stars out of 5), calling it "the first real film of 2013" and also compared the film to the work of Alfred Hitchcock. Smithey called the film "milestone" thriller and said that multiple viewings of the film may be necessary. Edward Douglas of ComingSoon.net gave the film a 7.5/10, praising the performances of Jude Law and Rooney Mara as well as the writing of the film, stating that the film explores "some interesting ideas." Douglas compared the film to classic thrillers, however stated that the film began feeling far-fetched as the story progressed.
