Jeremy Lee Renner (born January 7, 1971) is an American actor, singer-songwriter, film producer, former makeup artist, and musician. He has had starring roles in "The Hurt Locker" (2008) (garnering him an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor), ' (2011), "Marvel's The Avengers" (2012), "The Bourne Legacy" (2012), and ' (2013). Throughout the 2000s, Renner appeared largely in independent films such as "Dahmer" (2002) and "Neo Ned" (2005). He also appeared in supporting roles in bigger films, "S.W.A.T." (2003) and "28 Weeks Later" (2007). He then turned out a much-praised performance in "The Town" (2010), for which he received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor.
Early life.
Renner was born in Modesto, California, the first child of Valerie (née Tague) and Lee Renner, who managed a bowling alley. His parents married as teenagers and divorced when he was ten. He has five younger siblings. His ancestry includes German and Irish. He graduated from both Fred C. Beyer High School and Modesto Junior College.
Career.
Early work.
Renner's film debut came in 1995 when he played an underachieving student in the cult favorite "National Lampoon's Senior Trip". Although the film was critically panned, he went on to guest star on two television shows, "Deadly Games" and "Strange Luck" and had a minor role in the television movie, "A Friend's Betrayal" as the friend of Brian Austin Green's character. Over the next few years, Renner had guest roles in "Zoe, Duncan, Jack and Jane" (1999), "The Net" (1999), "The Time of Your Life" (1999) and "Angel" (2000). Renner also had a small role on an episode of "" in 2001. In between acting roles, Renner worked as a makeup artist to make ends meet.
Early success: 2002–2008.
In 2002, Renner had a starring role in the film "Dahmer" playing serial-killer Jeffrey Dahmer. He found the role a challenge to cope with after he had finished shooting after seeing how easily Dahmer took advantage of his victims. His performance was well received, and he gained a nomination for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Lead Male. He also appeared in Pink's 2003 music video for her song "Trouble" as a Bad Boy Sheriff. Renner went on to appear in "S.W.A.T." as the former police partner of Colin Farrell's character in 2003 and "The Heart Is Deceitful Above All Things" in 2004.
In 2005, Renner starred with Julia Stiles and Forest Whitaker in "A Little Trip to Heaven", with roles in "North Country" and "12 and Holding". He next starred as a neo-Nazi skinhead who is admitted into a psychiatric hospital in "Neo Ned" opposite Gabrielle Union. The film won all of the awards it was nominated for at festivals, including the Palm Beach International Film Festival Award for Best Actor. Renner also had a small (though uncredited) role in skateboard film "Lords of Dogtown" as the manager of Emile Hirsch's character. In 2006 he starred with Ginnifer Goodwin in "Love Comes to the Executioner".
Renner had supporting roles in 2007 in the critically acclaimed "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford" as Wood Hite, the cousin of outlaw Jesse James portrayed by Brad Pitt, and as Sergeant Doyle in "28 Weeks Later". He appeared alongside Minnie Driver in "Take" and guest starred as a patient in an episode of "House" as a reckless rock musician. Renner had a role in the pilot of "The Oaks" but the series was not picked up.
Breakthrough: 2009–present.
After starring with Dallas Roberts in the comedy-drama "Lightbulb" and starring in the short-lived television series "The Unusuals", Renner went on to achieve critical success for his portrayal as bomb disposal expert, Sergeant William James in the 2009 Iraq war thriller "The Hurt Locker" (directed by Kathryn Bigelow). The role earned him several awards in the Best Actor category and his first Academy Award nomination for Best Actor as well a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination.
In 2010, Renner's performance in Ben Affleck's "The Town" alongside Jon Hamm, Blake Lively, Slaine and Michael Yebba garnered him rave reviews and his second Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor. He also gained his first Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actor and his second Screen Actors Guild nomination. "The Hollywood Reporter" named Renner as one of the young male actors who are "pushing – or being pushed" into taking over Hollywood as the new "A-List".
In 2011, Renner had an uncredited cameo appearance as Hawkeye in "Thor" for familiarity with his character for "The Avengers", which was released in May 2012. In December 2011. he starred alongside Tom Cruise in "", the fourth installment of the , as a new addition to Ethan Hunt's team. 
In 2012, Renner starred as Hawkeye in the Marvel film, "The Avengers". The same year, he also starred in the fourth film in the "Bourne" franchise, "The Bourne Legacy", which was written and directed by Tony Gilroy. Renner played a new lead character, Aaron Cross, in place of Jason Bourne, who was played by Matt Damon in the first three films. Renner has expressed interest in doing a "Bourne" film with Damon in the future, stating that " would be kick-ass. I love Matt".
Renner starred in the R-rated action horror film "" (released in January 2013), in which he and Gemma Arterton played Hansel and Gretel, respectively. The 3-D film was set 15 years after Hansel and Gretel killed the witch who kidnapped them.
Music.
As well as acting, Renner is a singer-songwriter, guitarist, keyboardist and drummer. Early in his acting career, he performed in the Sons of Ben. For the soundtrack of "North Country" he performed "I Drink Alone". In the 2006 films "Love Comes to the Executioner" and "The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford," Renner performed the songs "American Pie" and "Good Ole Rebel". He also appeared in music videos like "Trouble" by P!nk and "Scenes on Sunset" by Brother Sal.
Personal life.
He is good friends with actors Ben Affleck, Channing Tatum, Sam Rockwell, Colin Farrell, Charlize Theron, and Scarlett Johansson. His best friend is fellow actor Kristoffer Winters, with whom he runs a successful house-renovating business. In the past, he has also studied disciplines including world religion, criminology, Arnis (Filipino martial arts), and Muay Thai martial arts.
