Sushant Singh Rajput (born on January 21, 1986 in Patna, India) is an Indian television and film actor best known for playing the role of Preet in "Kis Desh Mein Hai Meraa Dil" and Manav in "Pavitra Rishta" and also known for his dancing skills post "Zara Nachke Dikha" and "Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa". 
Early life and background.
Sushant was born in Patna where his father worked for the government as an engineer.He lost his mother during his 12th standard.He did his schooling from Kulachi Hansraj Model School, in Delhi. Sushant being the youngest of 5 children with 4 elder sisters to pamper him, grew up in a family of engineers and doctors. He was expected to follow the family tradition by choosing a similar career. His mind set on his goal, he appeared in the All India Engineering Entrance Examination (AIEEE) 2003, passed it with flying colours and got enrolled in the Delhi College of Engineering in the Mechanical Engineering stream. He cleared 11 national engineering exams, including the Indian School of Mines at Dhanbad, but wanted to stay in Delhi for Barry John's theatre and Shiamak Davar's dance classes. A promising student, he even qualified for a scholarship and secured a rank of 7000 at the All India Engineering Entrance Examination (AIEEE) 2003. However later, he dropped out after a couple of years, to follow his dreams of joining the glamour industry, promising to return if things did not work out.
Career.
Sushant started his career as a dancer under choreographer Shiamak Davar. He joined that troupe and went on to perform in the 2006 Commonwealth Games and Filmfare Awards. Upon his return he also joined Barry John's theatre classes. Moving to Mumbai, Singh danced with Ashley Lobo's troupe, learned martial arts from Allan Amin and assisted Mohit Suri during the making of "Raaz 2". He continued his involvement in theatre during this period and was a member of Nadira Babbar's "Ekjute" theatre group.
Television.
Following a play for a non-governmental organisation, Singh debuted on television with the role of Preet Juneja, brother of the male protagonist in Star Plus' "Kis Desh Mein Hai Meraa Dil" by Balaji Telefilms, and the popularity of that role led him on to the role of Manav Deshmukh in "Pavitra Rishta". Sushant received much adulation and appreciation for his portrayal. In May 2010, he joined Star Plus' Zara Nach Ke Dikha, a dance reality show based on the theme of boys versus girls. He was plagued by injuries and illnesses throughout the duration of the show, but still managed to turn out wonderful performances and gain even more adoring fans. His interest in direction remained ever-present, as he decided to direct and act in three short films for national and international film festivals. He followed it up by participating in dance-based reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 4 where he was paired with choreographer Shampa Sonthalia and his efforts in the display of many dance forms won him the award of "Most Consistent Performer". In November 2011, after two and a half years of acting in "Pavitra Rishta", Singh left to pursue projects in films. 
Films.
Currently he is working with writer and director Abhishek Kapoor on a movie adaptation of Chetan Bhagat's novel, "The 3 Mistakes of My Life" named "Kai Po Che".
Rajput has also been confirmed for Maneesh Sharma's next opposite Parineeti Chopra which will be produced by Aditya Chopra and Yash Raj Films. He also landed himself a role in Rajkumar Hirani's next venture titled Peekay which has Aamir Khan and Anushka Sharma in lead roles.
Sushant has also reportedly been signed in Imtiaz Ali’s next production replacing Shahid Kapoor to be directed by choreographer Bosco ( Bosco-Ceaser ) . The film is a remake of a Korean hit film titled My Girl Friend Is An Agent.` The script has apparently
been worked out keeping in mind that Sushant is a martial arts expert.
Personal Life.
Sushant is dating to co-star Ankita Lokhande from Pavitra Rishta.
Singh is also a social activist and supports child literacy projects and the provision of food for poor children.
