This article includes several lists of countries by gross domestic product at purchasing power parity per capita, the value of all final goods and services produced within a country in a given year divided by the average (or mid-year) population for the same year.
Characteristics.
Gross domestic product (GDP) dollar estimates are derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) calculations, per capita. Such calculations are prepared by various organizations, including the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. As estimates and assumptions have to be made, the results produced by different organizations for the same country tend to differ, sometimes substantially. PPP figures are estimates rather than hard facts, and should be used with caution.
Comparisons of national wealth are also frequently made on the basis of nominal GDP, which does not reflect differences in the cost of living in different countries ("See" List of countries by GDP (nominal) per capita). Using a PPP basis is arguably more useful when comparing generalized differences in living standards on the whole between nations because PPP takes into account the relative cost of living and the inflation rates of the countries, rather than using just exchange rates which may distort the real differences in income. Other figures include savings (not just income), such as national wealth. GDP per capita is often considered an indicator of a country's standard of living;</ref> although this can be problematic because GDP per capita is not a measure of personal income. See Standard of living and GDP.
Several economies which are not considered to be countries (the world, EU, and some dependent territories) are included in the list because they appear in the sources. These economies are not ranked in the charts here, but are listed in sequence by GDP for comparison. Non-sovereign entities, former countries or other special groupings are marked in italics.
Lists of countries by GDP (PPP) per capita.
All figures are in current International Dollars (Int$).
