Jeffrey Charles William Michael "Jeff" Conaway (October 5, 1950 – May 27, 2011) was an American actor best known for his roles in the movie "Grease" and two US television series, "Taxi" and "Babylon 5". Conaway was also featured in the first and second season of the reality television series, "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew". In May 2011, after spending just over two weeks in the hospital, Conaway died at the age of 60 due to complications related to pneumonia and the degenerative brain condition known as encephalopathy.
Early life.
Jeff Conaway was born in the New York City borough of Manhattan. He was raised in the Astoria, Flushing, and Forest Hills neighborhoods in the New York City borough of Queens. His father, Charles, was an actor, producer and publisher. His mother, Helen, an actress who went by the stage name Mary Ann Brooks, taught music at New York City's Brook Conservatory. They divorced when he was 3, and Conaway and his two older sisters lived with his mother. He also spent time living with his grandparents in South Carolina, which gave him enough of a Southern accent that when he accompanied his mother to a casting call for director Arthur Penn's Broadway play "All the Way Home", the 10-year-old Conaway landed a featured role as one of four boys. The 1961 Pulitzer Prize-winning play was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Play and ran 333 performances and one preview from November 29, 1960 to September 16, 1961. Conaway remained for the entire run, then toured with the national company of the play "Critic's Choice".
Conaway worked as a child model, and attended high school at the Quintano School for Young Professionals. After playing with the rock band 3 1/2 for a time, beginning at age 15, he attended the North Carolina School of the Arts and later transferred to New York University.
Career.
While at NYU, he appeared in television commercials and had the lead in a school production of "The Threepenny Opera". He made his movie debut in the 1971 romantic drama "Jennifer on my Mind".
"Grease" and "Taxi".
The following year, Conaway appeared in the original cast of the Broadway musical "Grease", as an understudy to several roles including that of the lead male character, Danny Zuko, and eventually succeeded role-originator Barry Bostwick. He played the role for 2 1/2 years while his friend John Travolta, with whom he shared a manager, later joined the show, playing Doody in the chorus. The two would reunite in the 1978 motion picture musical "Grease", in which Travolta played Zuko and Conaway his buddy Kenickie.
Conaway went on to star in the short-lived 1983 fantasy-spoof series, "Wizards and Warriors". He made guest appearances on such shows as "Barnaby Jones", "George and Leo" and in four episodes of "Murder, She Wrote". He appeared in films such as "Jawbreaker", "Elvira, Mistress of the Dark" and "Do You Wanna Know a Secret?". From 1989 to 1990, he was cast on "The Bold and the Beautiful", in the role of "Mick Savage". In 1993, he appeared onstage in "Real Life Photographs". From 1994 to 1999, he played Sergeant Zack Allan, on "Babylon 5".
Music career.
In 1979, Conaway recorded a self-titled debut album for Columbia Records. "City Boy" was released as a single. Bruce Springsteen's manager, Mike Appel, produced the album.
The CD "Saints & Sinners", by Vikki and Kenickie, was released independently via the internet in 2008, featuring Conaway singing and rapping with Vikki Lizzi (Spinoza). They promoted the CD on "The Howard Stern Show" on April 2, 2008 and performed live shows in the Los Angeles area.
Personal life.
Marriages.
Conaway was married three times. His first short-lived marriage, at 21, to a dancer he had been seeing for two years, was annulled. His second marriage, from 1980 until their divorce in 1985, was to Rona Newton-John, elder sister of his "Grease" co-star Olivia Newton-John. His stepson, Emerson Newton-John, is a racing driver. His third marriage was to Keri Young from 1990 until 2000. He was survived by his girlfriend of seven years, Victoria Spinoza.
Health problems.
After experiencing a crisis in the mid-1980s, Conaway came to grips with the fact that he had a substance abuse problem. He underwent treatment in the late 1980s and often spoke candidly about his addictions.
By the mid-2000s however, he had relapsed. Conaway appeared in VH1's "Celebrity Fit Club", but was forced to leave and entered rehab. In early 2008, Conaway appeared with other celebrities in the VH1 reality series, "Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew". The show revealed that Conaway was addicted to cocaine, alcohol, and painkillers, and that he was in a codependent relationship with his girlfriend Vikki Lizzi, also a user of prescription opiates. Conaway had suffered a back injury earlier in his career on the set of "Grease" while filming the "Greased Lightning" scene, which had been exacerbated recently by lifting boxes in his home.
Conaway's appearance on the show's first and second seasons drew much attention because of his severely crippled state, his constant threats to leave the facility, and his frequent inability to speak clearly. Upon arrival at the Pasadena Recovery Centre (which was filmed as part of "Celebrity Rehab"'s first episode) Conaway, using a wheelchair, arrived drunk, mumbling to Dr. Drew that the night before he had binged on cocaine and Jack Daniel's whiskey.
During the second episode of "Celebrity Rehab"'s first season, Conaway, fed up with his dorsalgia, withdrawal symptoms, and the humiliation of having to be assisted while using the toilet, told Dr. Pinsky that he was thinking of killing himself. After Pinsky asked him to elaborate upon how he would carry out a suicidal act, Conaway glared at the mirror in his room and said, "I see myself breaking that mirror and slicing my fucking throat with it." During group sessions, Conaway revealed he was "tortured" during his childhood, as older boys in his neighborhood would put him into dangerous situations, tying him up and threatening him. When he was seven years old, he was a victim of pedophiles and child pornographers. Conaway stated that he had been an addict since he was a teenager.
With John Travolta's support, Conaway took courses and auditing from the Church of Scientology to cope with his drug problem and depression, although he did not intend to become a Scientologist.
In June 2009, Conaway and Vikki joined "Celebrity Rehab" castmate Mary Carey at the premier of her spoof flick "Celebrity Pornhab with Dr. Screw".
In August 2009, Conaway was interviewed by "Entertainment Tonight". In the interview, the actor claimed he was much better after a fifth back operation, and that he had yet to use painkillers again. He also discussed unscrupulous doctors and enablers.
In March 2010, shortly after the death of actor Corey Haim, Conaway told "E! News" that he had warned Haim about dying because of prescription drug abuse.
Death.
On May 11, 2011, Conaway was found unconscious from what was initially described as an overdose of substances believed to be pain medication and was taken to Encino-Tarzana Regional Medical Center in Encino, California, where he was listed in critical condition. After initial reports, Dr. Drew Pinsky, who had treated Conaway for substance abuse, said the actor was suffering not from a drug overdose but rather from pneumonia with sepsis, for which he was placed into an induced coma. Though his pneumonia was not directly a result of drug usage, drug usage hampered Conaway's ability to recognize how severely ill he was and to seek treatment for pneumonia until it was too late.
On May 26, 2011, Conaway's family took him off life support after doctors decided there was nothing they could do to revive him. Conaway died the following morning at the age of 60. Conaway's doctor attributed his death to his addiction, stating, "What happens is, like with most opiate addicts, eventually they take a little too much ... and they aspirate, so what's in their mouth gets into their lungs ... That's what happened with Jeff."
An autopsy performed on Conaway revealed that the actor died of various causes including pneumonia and encephalopathy attributable to drug overdoses.
Awards.
Golden Globe Award
