"Community" is an American comedy television series which premiered on September 17, 2009 on NBC. The show focuses on disbarred lawyer Jeff Winger, and his attempt to get a bachelor's degree at community college. He is joined by members of his study group, which he originally formed for his Spanish 101 class.
, 74 episodes of "Community" have aired.
Episodes.
Season 2 (2010–11).
On March 5, 2010, NBC announced that "Community" had been renewed for a second season. The season premiered on September 23, 2010. On November 3, 2010, NBC ordered 2 additional episodes for the second season, bringing it to a total of 24 episodes.
Season 3 (2011–12).
On March 17, 2011, NBC announced that "Community" had been renewed for a third season.
Webisodes.
"The 5 A's of Greendale" is a webisode series that aired before "Community"s pilot aired. The first four videos are set up as informational videos about enrolling at the fictitious Greendale Community College. The last two serve as in-character outtakes of Dean Isakson (portrayed by series creator Dan Harmon).
"The Community College Chronicles" is a series of webisodes that act as Abed Nadir's student films. The webisodes parody events that happen on the main show "Community". In the episode "Debate 109", the webisodes were seen by the characters making them believe Abed can see the future. The webisodes also appear on the Greendale Community College's website part of the A/V department's page.
"Spanish Videos" is a series of webisodes featuring Star-Burns (Dino Stamatopoulos), Abed (Danny Pudi), and Señor Chang (Ken Jeong). Chang assigns the class a video assignment, and Abed and Star-Burns make a space epic.
"Study Break" is a series of three mini episodes of "Community" exclusive to Comcast's Xfinity TV and to the season one DVD of "Community". The mini episodes focus on 90 second study breaks during a Spanish study session.
"Road to the Emmys" is a series of webisodes about the study group on their way to an Emmy party.
"Dean Pelton's Office Hours" is a series of webisodes focusing on Dean Pelton (Jim Rash) solving student problems.
"Abed's Master Key" is a series of animated webisodes in which Abed becomes Dean Pelton's assistant and is given a master key to Greendale.
