John Mark "Johnny" Galecki (born April 30, 1975) is an American actor. He is best known for his roles as David Healy in the ABC sitcom "Roseanne", as Rusty Griswold in "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation" and currently as Leonard Hofstadter in the CBS sitcom "The Big Bang Theory".
Early life.
Galecki was born in Bree, Belgium, to American parents of Polish, Irish, and Italian descent. His mother, Mary Lou (née Noon), was a mortgage consultant, and his father, Richard Galecki, was a member of the U.S. Air Force stationed in Belgium and also worked as a rehabilitation teacher. He has a younger brother, Nick, whom he describes as a mechanical genius in the automotive industry, and a younger sister, Allison. Galecki grew up in Oak Park, Illinois.
During an interview with New Zealand radio station ZM, Galecki jokingly recalled his childhood relationship with his mother. As a child, he was well known for making up long, epic stories and tales. In such situations his mother used to make him play the "quiet game" where he had to see how long he could go without talking. He also recalled that despite being a loving mother, she was also very tough. One phrase she would lovingly use was, "I love you, now get out."
Career.
Galecki made his acting debut in the 1987 CBS miniseries "Murder Ordained" with JoBeth Williams and future "Roseanne" co-star John Goodman. In 1989 Galecki portrayed Rusty Griswold in "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation". One of his best known roles was as David Healy (first introduced as Kevin Healy) in the U.S. sitcom "Roseanne". Galecki was cast in the 1997 summer slasher "I Know What You Did Last Summer" and the 1998 dark comedy "The Opposite of Sex". In the year 2000, Galecki reunited with "Opposite of Sex" director Don Roos, who cast him in "Bounce".
Galecki continued his film streak with roles in "Suicide Kings" and brief bit parts in high-profile films such as "Bean" and a minor supporting part in "Vanilla Sky". Galecki played a young delinquent in "A Family Torn Apart", a TV movie based on a true story about a serial killer.
Galecki appeared in the first-season episode, "Stole Beer from a Golfer", of "My Name Is Earl" as a golfer.
He played a character named Trouty on TBS's sitcom "My Boys". He also played the half-brother of the main characters, sisters Hope Shanowski and Faith Fairfield, in the TV sitcom "Hope & Faith". In late 2006/early 2007, Galecki starred in the Broadway play "The Little Dog Laughed" as Alex, a male prostitute. In this role, he was required to do a full-frontal nude scene, the first of his acting career. "At its core, the play is about what we all sacrifice to be successful, whatever our careers or goals," he explains. Galecki originated the role earlier in 2006 at Second Stage Theatre. The widely popular comedy by Douglas Carter Beane had a successful run at Second Stage and moved to the Cort Theatre. The play closed on February 18, 2007, with Galecki taking home a 2007 Theater World Award for his performance.
Galecki currently plays the part of Leonard Hofstadter in the CBS sitcom "The Big Bang Theory", which debuted September 24, 2007. He works alongside two of his former "Roseanne" cast members, Sara Gilbert, who during his role as David Healy played the role of his longtime girlfriend and later his wife, Darlene Conner, as well as Laurie Metcalf, formerly cast as the role of Roseanne Barr's fictionalized character's sister Jackie. Both have since appeared as recurring characters. Galecki is a cellist and has played cello on the show.
Galecki appeared briefly in the 2008 superhero comedy "Hancock", alongside Will Smith and Jason Bateman. He also appears in the music video for the Dave Matthews Band song "Satellite".
In July 2011 Galecki played a parodyéd version of him himself on three episodes of "Entourage".
He was also in the movie Bookies. Bookies is a 2003 comedy thriller film written by Michael Bacall and directed by Mark Illsley. The story revolves around the lives of four college students.
He also appeared in In Time with Justin Timberlake and Amanda Seyfried.
Personal life.
Galecki owns 360 acres of land in Santa Margarita, California. There are vineyards on his property and also a log cabin. He is also a vegetarian.
While working on "The Big Bang Theory", Galecki dated co-star Kaley Cuoco for two years. They kept their relationship private until they broke up.
