Jeanie Buss (born 1961/1962) is the governor of the Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association (NBA). She also serves as the team's executive vice president of business operations. 
Buss was born to Jerry Buss, who owned the Lakers and other sports businesses. At age 19, she started in the family business as general manager of the Los Angeles Strings professional tennis team. She later became the owner of the Los Angeles Blades professional roller hockey team. She was also president of the Great Western Forum before becoming vice president of the Lakers. After her father died in 2013, Buss assumed his role as governor of the Lakers as well as its team representative at NBA Board of Governors meetings.
Early life.
Buss was born the third of four children to Joann and Jerry Buss. She grew up with older brothers Johnny and Jim and younger sister Janie. Their parents divorced in 1972, leaving Buss feeling emotionally abandoned. At age 14, Buss attended World TeamTennis meetings with her dad, who owned the Los Angeles Strings. When she was 17, she moved in with her dad at Pickfair. She became so familiar with the estate that she led guided tours. Buss attended college at the University of Southern California (USC), where she majored in business and graduated with honors.
Professional career.
World TeamTennis folded in 1978, and was revived in 1981 as TeamTennis. Jerry once again owned the Strings, and he appointed the 19-year-old Buss as the general manager while she was studying at USC. "Basically, my dad bought me the team," said Buss. After the Strings folded in 1993, Buss brought professional roller hockey to Los Angeles as owner of the Los Angeles Blades in Roller Hockey International. The league named her Executive of the Year. Buss also served four years as president of the Great Western Forum, then the home arena of the Lakers. Throughout her stint with the Forum, her role with the Lakers increased, and she served as the Alternate Governor on the NBA Board of Governors since 1995. In 1999, she was named executive vice president of business operations for the Lakers. Her brother Jim was promoted to vice president of player personnel in 2005. Their father's plan was to have Buss handle the business decisions of the team, while Jim handled the basketball side of the Lakers.
"Sporting News" in 2005 named Buss as one of the Top 20 Most Influential Women in Sports. In 2011, "Forbes" called Buss "one of few powerful women in sports management", and ESPN said she is "one of the most powerful women in the NBA".
After her father died in 2013, his controlling ownership of the Lakers passed to his six children via a trust managed by Buss, Jim, and brother Johnny, the Lakers' vice president of strategic development. Jerry's succession plan had Buss assume his previous title as the Lakers' governor as well as its team representative at NBA Board of Governors meetings.
Personal.
Buss married volleyball player Steve Timmons in 1990 before divorcing after three years. According to Buss, "I never put my marriage first ... It was always business which attracted me." She posed nude in the May 1995 issue of "Playboy". She is engaged to former Lakers coach Phil Jackson, whom she began dating in December 1999. 
