Lucy Alexis Liu (born Lucy Liu; December 2, 1968) is an American actress, artist, narrator, and film producer. She became known for playing the role of the vicious and ill-mannered Ling Woo in the television series "Ally McBeal" (1998–2002) for which she was nominated for both a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series and a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series. She has also appeared in several Hollywood films including "Payback", "Charlie's Angels", "Chicago", "Kill Bill", and "Kung Fu Panda".
In 2012, Liu joined the cast of the TNT original series "Southland" in the recurring role of Jessica Tang, for which she won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Drama Guest Actress. In 2008, she was the series lead of her own television show, the ABC comedy-drama, "Cashmere Mafia", which was short-lived and ended after one abbreviated season. The show is one of only a few American television shows with an Asian American series lead. She is currently one of the two series lead actors of the CBS television crime drama, "Elementary", based on the story of Sherlock Holmes, playing the role of Joan Watson.
Early life.
Lucy Liu was born in Jackson Heights, Queens, New York. In high school, she adopted her middle name "Alexis". She is the youngest of three children born to Cecilia, who worked as a biochemist, and Tom Liu, who was trained as a civil engineer but sold digital clock pens. Her parents worked many jobs when Lucy and her siblings were growing up.
Both of Liu's parents were immigrants of Taiwanese or Chinese descent. She has an older brother, John, and an older sister, Jenny.
Liu has stated that she grew up in a "diverse" neighborhood. She learned to speak Mandarin at home and began studying English when she was five years old. Liu attended Joseph Pulitzer Middle School (I.S.145), and graduated from Stuyvesant High School in 1986. She enrolled at New York University and transferred to the University of Michigan, where she was a member of the Chi Omega sorority. Liu earned a bachelor's degree in Asian languages and cultures. In Michigan, Liu worked as a waitress.
Career.
1989–1999.
In 1989, Liu auditioned for the University of Michigan's production of "Alice in Wonderland" during her senior year of college. Although she had originally tried out for only a supporting part, Liu was cast in the lead role. While queuing up to audition for the musical "Miss Saigon" in 1990, she told "The New York Times", "There aren't many Asian roles, and it's very difficult to get your foot in the door." In May 1992, Liu made her New York stage debut in "Fairy Bones", directed by Tina Chen.
Liu had small roles in films and TV, marking her debut. She was cast in both "The X-Files" in "Hell Money" and "" in "The March to Freedom", before landing a role on "Ally McBeal". Liu originally auditioned for the role of 'Nelle Porter' (played by Portia de Rossi), and the character Ling Woo was later created specifically for her. Liu's part on the series was originally temporary, but high audience ratings secured Liu as a permanent cast member. Additionally, she earned an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series and a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Best Actress in a Comedy Series. In "Payback" (1999), Liu portrayed Pearl, a high-class BDSM prostitute with links to the Chinese mafia.
2000–2006.
Liu was cast as Alex Munday in the "Charlie's Angels" films, alongside Drew Barrymore and Cameron Diaz. The film opened in November 2000 and earned more than $125 million in the United States. "Charlie's Angels" earned a worldwide total of more than $264 million. The sequel, ', opened in June 2003 and also did well at the box office, earning more than $100 million in the U.S. and a worldwide total of more than $259 million. In contrast, Liu starred with Antonio Banderas in ', a critical and box office failure.
In 2000, she hosted "Saturday Night Live" with Jay-Z. Liu starred as lawyer Grace Chin on "Ugly Betty" in the episodes "Derailed" and "Icing on the Cake". In a 2001 episode of "Sex and the City" entitled "Coulda, Woulda, Shoulda" she guest starred as herself, playing a new client of character Samantha Jones who does public relations. She starred in the "Sex and the City"–inspired TV show, "Cashmere Mafia" on ABC. Liu also made a cameo appearance on the animated shows "Futurama" (as herself and/or robot duplicates thereof in the episodes "I Dated a Robot" and "Love and Rocket") and "The Simpsons" (on the season 16 episode "Goo Goo Gai Pan").
In 2002, Liu played Rita Foster in Vincenzo Natali's "Brainstorm" (aka "Cypher"). Soon thereafter, she appeared as O-Ren Ishii in Quentin Tarantino's 2003 film, "Kill Bill". She won an MTV Award for "Best Movie Villain" for the part. Subsequently, Liu appeared on several episodes of "Joey" with Matt LeBlanc, who played her love interest in the "Charlie's Angels" films. She also had minor roles as Kitty Baxter in the film "Chicago" and as a psychologist opposite Keira Knightley in the thriller "Domino". In "Lucky Number Slevin", she played the leading love interest to Josh Hartnett. "3 Needles" was released on December 1, 2006. Liu portrayed Jin Ping, an HIV-positive Chinese woman.
2007–present.
In 2007, Liu appeared in ', ', a supernatural thriller co-starring Michael Chiklis in which Liu plays an undead reporter (for which she was ranked number 41 on "Top 50 Sexiest Vampires"), and "Watching the Detectives", an independent romantic comedy co-starring Cillian Murphy. She made her producer debut and also starred in a remake of "Charlie Chan", which had been planned as early as 2000.
In 2007 "Empire" named Liu number 96 of their "100 Sexiest Movie Stars." The producers of "Dirty Sexy Money" created a role for Liu as a series regular. Liu played Nola Lyons, a powerful attorney who faced Nick George (Peter Krause). Liu voiced Silvermist in "Disney Fairies" and Viper in "Kung Fu Panda".
In March 2010, Liu made her Broadway debut in the Tony Award-winning play "God of Carnage" as Annette on the second replacement cast alongside Jeff Daniels, Janet McTeer, and Dylan Baker. In March 2012, she was cast as Joan Watson for "Elementary". "Elementary" is an American Sherlock Holmes adaption, and the role Liu was offered is traditionally played by men. She also has played police officer Jessica Tang on "Southland", a television show focusing on the lives of police officers and detectives in Los Angeles as a recurring guest actor during the fourth season. She received the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Drama Guest Actress for this role.
In August 2011, Liu became a narrator for the musical group The Bullitts. Liu stars as Joan Watson, a version of Dr. John Watson, in the CBS crime drama "Elementary", a contemporary update of Sherlock Holmes, in which she stars opposite Jonny Lee Miller as Holmes. Liu's double duty as an NYPD consultant on "Elementary" and an LAPD officer on "Southland" won her praise from "TV Guide" in their "Cheers & Jeers 2012" issue, which cheered her "arresting performances".
Personal life.
Liu, who is an artist in several media, has had three gallery shows showcasing her collage, paintings, and photography. She began doing collage mixed media when she was 16 years old, and became a photographer and painter. In September 2006, Liu held an art show and donated her share of the profits to UNICEF. She also had another show in 2008 in Munich. Liu has stated that she donated her share of the profits from the NYC Milk Gallery gallery show to UNICEF. In London, portion of the proceeds from her book Seventy Two went to UNICEF.
In 2001 Liu was the spokesman for the Lee National Denim Day fundraiser, which raises millions of dollars for breast cancer research and education. In 2004 Liu was appointed an ambassador for U.S. Fund for UNICEF. She traveled to Pakistan and Lesotho, among several other countries. She also hosted an MTV documentary, "Traffic", for the MTV EXIT campaign in 2007. In 2008, Liu produced and narrated the short film, "The Road to Traffik", about the Cambodian heroine Somaly Mam. The film was directed by Kerry Girvin and co-produced by photographer Norman Jean Roy. This led to a partnership with producers on the documentary film "REDLIGHT". Early in 2006, Liu received an "Asian Excellence Award" for "Visibility". Liu is a supporter of marriage equality for gays and lesbians, and she became a spokesperson for the Human Rights Campaign in 2011. She has teamed up with Heinz to combat the widespread global health threat of iron deficiency anemia and vitamin and mineral malnutrition among infants and children in the developing world.
