The Samsung Galaxy S III is a multi-touch, slate-format smartphone running the Android operating system. It is designed, developed, and marketed by Samsung Electronics. It has additional software features, expanded hardware, and a redesigned physique from its predecessor, the Samsung Galaxy S II. The S III employs an intelligent personal assistant (S Voice), eye-tracking ability, increased storage, and a wireless charging option. Depending on country, the smartphone comes with different processors and RAM capacity, and 4G LTE support. The device was launched with Android 4.0.4 "Ice Cream Sandwich", and can be updated to Android 4.1 "Jelly Bean".
Following an eighteen-month development phase, Samsung unveiled the S III on 3 May 2012 in London. The device was released in 28 European and Middle Eastern countries on 29 May 2012, before being progressively released in other major markets in June 2012. Prior to release, 9 million pre-orders were placed by more than 100 carriers globally. The S III was released by approximately 300 carriers in nearly 150 countries at the end of July 2012. More than 20 million units of the S III were sold within the first 100 days of release. Samsung has since sold more than 40 million devices.
Due to overwhelming demand and a manufacturing problem with the blue version of the phone, there was an extensive shortage of the S III, especially in the United States. Nevertheless, the S III was well-received commercially and critically, with some technology commentators touting it as the "iPhone killer". In September 2012, TechRadar ranked it as the No. 1 handset in its constantly updated list of the 20 best mobile phones, while "Stuff" magazine likewise ranked it at No. 1 in its list of 10 best smartphones in May 2012. The handset also won the "European Mobile Phone of 2012–13" award from the European Imaging and Sound Association, as well as "T3" magazine's "Phone of the Year" award for 2012.
It played a major role in boosting Samsung's record operating profit during the second quarter of 2012. , the Galaxy S III is part of a high-profile lawsuit between Samsung and Apple. In November 2012, research firm Strategy Analytics announced that the Galaxy S III had overtaken the Apple iPhone 4S to become the world's best-selling smartphone model in Q3 2012.
History.
Design phase.
Design work on the S III started in late 2010 under the supervision of Chang Dong-hoon, Samsung's Vice President and Head of the Design Group of Samsung Electronics. From the start, the design group concentrated on a trend which Samsung dubs "organic", which suggests that a prospective design should reflect natural elements such as the flow of water and wind. Some of the results of this design were the curved outline of the phone and its home screen's "Water Lux" effect, where taps and slides produce water ripples.
Throughout the eighteen-month design process, Samsung implemented stringent security measures and procedures to maintain secrecy of the eventual design until its launch. Designers worked on three prototypes concurrently while regarding each of them as the final product. Doing so required a constant duplication of effort as they had to repeat the same process for all three prototypes. The prototypes, taking photos of which were forbidden, were locked in a separate lab accessible only by core designers; the company's employees transported them instead of third-party couriers. "Because we were only permitted to see the products and others weren't," explained Principal Engineer Lee Byung-Joon, "we couldn't send pictures or drawings. We had to explain the Galaxy S III with all sorts of words." Despite such security measures, specifications of one of the three units were leaked by Vietnamese website Tinhte, although it was not the selected design.
Speculation in the general public and media outlets regarding the handset's specifications began gathering momentum several months before its formal unveiling in May 2012. In February 2012, prior to the Mobile World Congress in Barcelona, Spain, there were rumors that the handset would incorporate a 1.5 GHz quad-core processor, a display of 1080p (1,920×1,080 pixels) resolution, a 12-megapixel rear camera and a HD Super AMOLED Plus touchscreen. More accurate rumoured specifications included 2 GB of RAM, 64 GB of internal storage, 4G LTE, a screen, a 8-megapixel rear camera, and a thick chassis. Samsung confirmed the existence of the Galaxy S II's successor on 5 March 2012, but it was not until late April 2012 that Samsung's Senior Vice-President Robert Yi confirmed the phone's name to be "Samsung Galaxy S III".
Unveiling and litigation.
After inviting reporters in mid-April, Samsung launched the Galaxy S III during the Samsung Mobile Unpacked 2012 event at Earls Court Exhibition Centre, London, on 3 May 2012, instead of unveiling their products earlier in the year during either the World Mobile Congress or Consumer Electronics Show. One explanation for this decision is that Samsung wanted to minimize the time between its launch and availability. The keynote address of the hour-long event was delivered by Loesje De Vriese, marketing director of Samsung Belgium.
On 5 June 2012, Apple filed for preliminary injunctions in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California against Samsung Electronics, claiming the Galaxy S III had violated at least two of the company's patents. Apple requested that the court include the phone in its existing legal battle against Samsung (see "Apple Inc. v. Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd."), and ban sales of the S III prior to its scheduled 21 June 2012 U.S. launch. Apple claimed the alleged infringements would "cause immediate and irreparable harm" to its commercial interest. Samsung responded by declaring it would "vigorously oppose the request and demonstrate to the court that the Galaxy S3 is innovative and distinctive", and reassured the public that the 21 June release would proceed as planned. On 11 June, Judge Lucy Koh said that Apple's claim would overload her work schedule, as she would also be overseeing the trial of Samsung's other devices; consequently, Apple dropped its request to block the 21 June release of the S III.
In mid-July 2012, Samsung removed the universal search feature on Sprint and AT&T Galaxy S III phones with over-the-air (OTA) software updates to disable the local search function as a "precautionary measure" prior to its patent court trial with Apple, which began on 30 July 2012. Although Apple won the trial, the S III experienced a sales spike due to the public's belief that the phone would be banned. On 31 August 2012, Apple asked the same federal court to add the Galaxy S III into its existing complaint, believing the device has violated its patents; Samsung countered with the statement: "Apple continues to resort to litigation over market competition in an effort to limit consumer choice."
On 11 October 2012, Samsung unveiled the Galaxy S III Mini, a smartphone with lower specifications compared to the S III.
Features.
Software and services.
The Galaxy S III uses Google's Android mobile operating system, which was introduced commercially in 2008. Its TouchWiz "Nature UX" graphical user interface (GUI)—which is influenced by the "organic" customer trend—is more interactive than Samsung's previous GUIs, with the notable addition of the "Water Lux" effect, which produces ripples upon contact. To complement the TouchWiz interface, and as a response to Apple's Siri, the phone introduces S Voice, Samsung's intelligent personal assistant. S Voice can recognize eight languages including English, Korean and French. Based on Vlingo, S Voice enables the user to verbally control 20 functions such as playing a song, setting the alarm, or activating driving mode; it relies on Wolfram Alpha for online searches.
The S III comes with Android version 4.0.4, officially named "Ice Cream Sandwich", which became commercially available in March 2012 with the Nexus S and Galaxy Nexus. Ice Cream Sandwich has a refined user interface, expanded camera capabilities, security features and connectivity. In mid-June 2012, Google unveiled Android 4.1 "Jelly Bean", which employs Google Now, a voice-assistant similar to S Voice, and incorporates other software changes. Samsung accommodated Jelly Bean in the S III by making last-minute hardware changes to the phone in some markets. Jelly Bean updates began rolling out to S IIIs in selected European countries, and to the T-Mobile in the United States in November. On October 17, Samsung announced, that US S IIIs will be updated to Android 4.1 Jelly Bean "in the coming months". The S III is also compatible with CyanogenMod 10, a custom firmware that implements the characteristics of Jelly Bean. 
The S III comes with a multitude of pre-installed applications including standard Android ones such as YouTube, Google+, Voice Search, Google Play, Gmail, Map, and Calendar, in addition to Samsung-specific apps such as ChatON, Game Hub, Video Hub, Social Hub and Navigation. To address the fact that iPhone users are reluctant to switch to Android because the OS is not compatible with iTunes, from June 2012 Samsung offers customers of its Galaxy series the Easy Phone Sync app to enable the transfer of music, photos, videos, podcasts and text messages from an iPhone to a Galaxy device. The user is able to access Google Play, a digital-distribution multimedia-content service exclusive to Android, to download applications, movies, music, TV programmes, games, books and magazines.
Apart from S Voice, Samsung has directed the bulk of the S III's marketing campaign towards the device's "smart" features, which facilitate improved human-device interactivity. These features include: "Direct Call", or the handset's ability to recognise when a user wants to talk to somebody instead of messaging them, if they bring the phone to their head; "Social Tag", a function that identifies and tags people in a photo and shares photos with them; and "Pop Up Play", which allows a video and other applications to occupy the screen at the same time. In addition, the S III can beam its screen to a TV or be used as a remote controller (AllShare Cast and Play) and share photos with people who are tagged in them (Buddy Photo Share). Other software features include Smart Alerts, Smart Stay, and S Beam.
The S III can access and play traditional media formats such as music, movies, TV programmes, audiobooks, and podcasts, and can sort its media library alphabetically by song title, artist, album, playlist, folder, and genre. One notable feature of the S III's music player is Music Square, which analyses a song's intensity and ranks the song by mood so that the user can play songs according to their current emotional state. With the release of the S III, Samsung debuted its proprietary music management and download application called "Music Hub", designed to compete with Apple's iTunes, iCloud, and iTunes Match services. Music Hub's music catalogue contains over 19 million songs.
The S III was the first smartphone to support Voice Over LTE with the introduction of HD Voice service in South Korea. The phone enables video calling with its 1.9 MP front-facing camera, and with support for the apt-X codec, improves Bluetooth-headset connectivity. Texting on the S III does not embody any new significant features from the S II. Speech-to-text is aided by the Vlingo and Google's voice-recognition assistant. Not unlike other Android devices, there are a multitude of third-party typing applications available that could complement the S III's stock keyboard.
On 18 June 2012, Samsung announced that the S III would have a version with enterprise software under the company's Samsung Approved For Enterprise (SAFE) programme, an initiative that facilitates the use of private Android devices by professional employees, also known as "Bring Your Own Device". The enterprise S III version would support AES-256 bit encryption, VPN and Mobile Device Management functionality, and Microsoft Exchange ActiveSync. It was scheduled to be released in the U.S. in July 2012. The enterprise version was expected to penetrate the business market dominated by Research in Motion's BlackBerry, following the release of similar enterprise versions of the Galaxy Note, Galaxy S II and the Galaxy Tab line of tablet computers.
A separate "Developer Edition" of the S III was made available from Samsung's Developer Portal. It came with an unlockable bootloader to allow the user to modify the phone's software.
Hardware and design.
The Galaxy S III has a polycarbonate plastic chassis measuring long, wide, and thick, with the device weighing . Samsung abandoned the rectangular design of the Galaxy S and Galaxy S II, and instead incorporated round corners and curved edges, reminiscent of the Galaxy Nexus. The phone is available in two basic color options: "Marble White" and "Pebble Blue"; however, "Pebble Blue" has reportedly been altered to a metallic blue-grey shade. A "Garnet Red" model was made available exclusively to U.S. carrier AT&T on 15 July 2012. "Sapphire Black", "Titanium Gray" and "Amber Brown" will also be available.
The S III comes in two distinct variations that differ primarily in the internal hardware. The international S III version has Samsung's Exynos 4 Quad system on a chip (SoC) containing a 1.4 GHz quad-core ARM Cortex-A9 central processing unit (CPU) and an ARM Mali-400 MP graphics processing unit (GPU). According to Samsung, the Exynos 4 Quad doubles the performance of the Exynos 4 Dual used on the S II, while using 20 percent less power. Samsung had also released several 4G LTE versions—4G facilitates higher-speed mobile connection compared to 3G—in selected countries to exploit the corresponding communications infrastructures that exist in those markets. Most of these versions use Qualcomm's Snapdragon S4 SoC featuring a dual-core 1.5 GHz Krait CPU and an Adreno 225 GPU. The South Korean and Australia versions are a hybrid of the international and 4G-capable versions.
The S III has a maximum of 2 GB of RAM, depending on model. The phone comes with either 16 or 32 GB of internal storage, with a 64 GB version to be available internationally; additionally, microSDXC storage offers a further 64 GB for a potential total of 128 GB. Moreover, 50 GB of space is offered for two years on Dropbox—a cloud storage service—for purchasers of the device, doubling rival HTC's 25 GB storage for the same duration. 
The S III's HD Super AMOLED display measures on the diagonal, making it Samsung's third largest phone display, only exceeded by the Galaxy Note's and the Galaxy Note II's . With a 1,280×720-pixel (720p) resolution, its pixel per inch (PPI, a measure of pixel density) is a relatively high 306, which is accommodated by the removal one of the three subpixels—red, green and blue—in each pixel to create a PenTile matrix-display; consequently, it does not share the "Plus" suffix found on the S II's Super AMOLED Plus display. The glass used for the display is the damage-resistant Corning Gorilla Glass 2.
The S III has an 8-megapixel camera similar to that of the Galaxy S II. It can take 3,264×2,448 resolution photos and record videos in 1,920×1,080-pixel (1080p) resolution. Samsung improved the camera's software over that of its predecessor to include zero shutter lag, and Burst Mode and Best Shot, which work together to quickly take numerous photos before the best-judged frame is selected. The phone can also take pictures while recording videos. The rear-facing camera is complemented by a 1.9-megapixel front-facing camera that can record 720p videos.
In addition to the touchscreen, the S III has several physical user inputs including a home button located below the screen, a volume key on the left side and a power/lock key on the right. At the top there is a TRRS headphone jack and one of the two microphones on the S III; the other is located below the home button. The S III is advertised as having an MHL port that can be used both as a micro-USB On-The-Go port, and for connecting the phone to HDMI devices. However, a retailer later discovered that Samsung had made a modification to the electronics of the port such that only the adapter made specifically for this model by Samsung could be used.
The S III's li-ion 2,100 mAh battery is said to have a 790-hour standby time or 11 hours of talk time on 3G, compared to 900 hours in standby and 21 hours of talk time on 2G. Built into the battery is near field communication connectivity, which allows users to share map directions and YouTube videos quickly using Wi-Fi Direct (through Android Beam), and perform non-touch payments at shops that employ specially equipped NFC cash registers. To help minimize battery consumption, Samsung has introduced "Smart Stay", an ability to track a user's eyes and turn off whenever the person is not looking at it. The battery can be wirelessly charged using a special charging pad (sold separately) that utilizes magnetic resonance to produce a magnetic field through which electricity could be transferred.
On September 19, 2012, security researchers demonstrated during Pwn2Own, a computer hacking contest held in Amsterdam, Netherlands, that the S III can be hacked via NFC, allowing attackers to download all data from the phone.
CNET TV torture-tested an S III by cooling it to , placing it in a heat-proof box and heating it to , and submerging it in water—the S III survived all three tests. The phone also did not exhibit any scratches when a key was repeatedly scraped against the display. However, Android Authority later carried out a drop test with the purpose of comparing the Samsung Galaxy S III and the iPhone 5. The screen on the S III shattered on the second drop test, while the iPhone received only minor scuffs and scratches on the metal composite frame after three drop tests.
Model variants.
On 16 May 2012, NTT DoCoMo announced that they would sell an LTE model of the S III, using a Qualcomm Snapdragon MSM8960 SoC with an integrated on-die LTE-modem. On 30 May 2012, several Canadian carriers announced that they also would sell an LTE model of the S III with the model number SGH-i747 and the same specifications as the one for NTT DoCoMo. Within a week, on 4 June 2012, T-Mobile USA and AT&T announced that they would sell the same versions of the S III as the Canadian carriers announced on 30 May. Verizon, Sprint and U.S. Cellular sell a similar version with CDMA support. Thus the design and name of the Galaxy S III for North America is retained from the international version, marking a deviation from the previous customization of design and name for different carriers of the previous Galaxy S models.
The South Korean LTE models—considered the ultimate Galaxy S III model—share the 4G LTE support and 2 GB of RAM of the North American and Japanese versions, but come with the international version's Samsung Exynos 4 Quad SoC, in addition to the T-DMB module and antenna; this compelled Samsung to increase the model's thickness to . A similar quad-core 4G LTE version of the S III is to be released in Australia.
In September 2012 Samsung confirmed the launch of the 4G version of Galaxy S III (along with 4G versions of Galaxy Note II and Galaxy Note 10.1) in the Nordic countries in the fourth quarter of 2012.
The GT-I9300 and GT-I9305 models became certified as Miracast Sources.
Release and reception.
Commercial reception.
According to an anonymous Samsung official speaking to the "Korea Economic Daily", the S III received more than 9 million pre-orders from 100 carriers during the two weeks following its London unveiling, making it the fastest-selling gadget in history. In comparison, the iPhone 4S received 4 million pre-orders prior to its launch, while Samsung's previous flagship phone, the S II, had 10 million handsets shipped within five months. Within a month of the London unveiling, auction and shopping website eBay noted a 119-percent increase in second-hand Android phone sales. According to an eBay spokesperson, this was "the first time anything other than an Apple product has sparked such a selling frenzy."
ImageSize= width:290 height:420
PlotArea= left:35 right:0 bottom:5 top:10
DateFormat= DD/MM/YYYY # European date format
Period= from:01/01/2012 till:01/02/2013
TimeAxis= orientation:vertical
ScaleMajor= unit:month increment:1 start:01/01/2012
ScaleMinor= unit:month increment:1 start:01/01/2012
PlotData=
</timeline>
The S III was released in 28 countries in Europe and the Middle East on 29 May 2012. To showcase its flagship device, Samsung afterwards embarked on a global month-long tour of the S III to nine cities, including Sydney, New Delhi, and cities in China, Japan, South Korea and the US. 
The S III has helped Samsung consolidate its market share in several countries including India, where Samsung expected to capture 60 percent of the country's smartphone market, improving on its previous 46 percent. Within a month of release, Samsung had a 60-percent market share in France, while the company controlled over 50 percent of the German and Italian smartphone markets. Over a similar period the S III helped increase Samsung's market share in the United Kingdom to over 40 percent, while eroding the iPhone 4S's 25 percent to 20 percent in the country. The S III was scheduled to be released in North America on 20 June 2012, but due to high demand, some U.S. and Canadian carriers delayed the release by several days, while some other carriers limited the market at launch.
The S III's U.S. launch event took place in New York City, hosted by "Twilight" actress Ashley Greene and attended by dubstep artist Skrillex, who performed at Skylight Studios.
Samsung estimated that by the end of July 2012, the S III would have been released by 296 carriers in 145 countries, and that more than 10 million handsets would have been sold. Shin Jong-kyun, president of Samsung's mobile communications sector, announced on 22 July that sales had exceeded 10 million. According to an assessment by Swiss financial services company UBS, Samsung had shipped 5–6 million units of the phone in the second quarter of 2012 and will ship 10–12 million handsets per quarter throughout the rest of the year. An even more aggressive prediction by Paris-based banking group BNP Paribas says 15 million units will be shipped in the third quarter of 2012, while Japanese financial consultant company Nomura places the figure for this quarter as high as 18 million. Sales of the S III may top 40 million by the end of the year. To meet demand, Samsung has hired 75,000 workers, and its South Korean factory is running at its peak capacity of 5 million smartphone units per month.
A manufacturing flaw resulted in a large portion of the new smartphones having irregularities with the "hyper-glazing" process. The mistake caused an undesirable finish on the blue back covers and resulted in the disposal of up to 600,000 plastic casings and a shortage of the blue model. The issue was later resolved; however, Reuters estimated that the shortage had cost Samsung two million S III sales during its first month of release.
On 6 September 2012, Samsung revealed that sales of the S III had reached 20 million in 100 days, making it three and six times faster-selling than the Galaxy S II and the Galaxy S, respectively. Europe accounted for more than 25 percent of this figure with 6 million units, followed by Asia (4.5 million) and the U.S. (4 million); sales in South Korea, the S III's home market, numbered 2.5 million. Around the same time of Samsung's announcement, sales of the S III surpassed that of the iPhone 4S in the U.S.
In the third quarter of 2012, more than 18 million S III units were shipped, making it the most popular smartphone at the time, ahead of the iPhone 4S's 16.2 million units. Analysts deduced that the slump in iPhone sales was due to customers' holding out for the unveiling of the iPhone 5.
Critical reception.
The reception of the Galaxy S III has been particularly positive. Critics noted the phone's blend of features, such as its S Voice application, display, processing speed, and dimensions as having an edge over its competition, the Apple iPhone 4S and HTC One X. Vlad Savov of "The Verge" declared it a "technological triumph", while Natasha Lomas of CNET UK lauded the phone's "impossibly slim and light casing and a quad-core engine", calling it the "Ferrari of Android phones", a sentiment affirmed ("a prince among Android phones") by Dave Oliver of "Wired UK" and ("king of Android") Esat Dedezade of "Stuff" magazine. Gareth Beavis of TechRadar noted that the S III is "all about faster, smarter and being more minimal than ever before while keeping the spec list at the bleeding edge of technology." Matt Warman of "The Daily Telegraph" said, "On spending just a short time with the S3, I'm confident in saying that it's a worthy successor to the globally popular S2".
Upon release, a number of critics and publications have made references to the S III, Samsung's 2012 flagship phone, as an "iPhone killer", responding perhaps to Apple's favourable customer perception. The label owes itself to the S III's use of the Android OS—the chief rival of Apple's iOS—as well as its design and features that rival the iPhone 4S such as Smart Stay, a large display, a quad-core processor, Android customizability, and a multitude of connectivity options.
The S III was the first Android phone to have a higher launch price than the iPhone 4S when the Apple product was released in 2011. With the S III, Tim Weber, business editor of the BBC, observed, "With the new Galaxy S3 they have clearly managed to move to the front of the smartphone field, ahead of mighty Apple itself."
Conversely, reviewers have opined on the design and feel of phone, calling its polycarbonate shell "cheap" and having a "slippery feel". The S Voice was described as "not optimised" and "more rigid than Siri" with its poor voice-recognition accuracy, with instances when it would not respond at all. Another usage problem was a microphone malfunction that resulted in difficulty communicating during a call. Reviewers have noted the somewhat abrupt auto-adjustment of display brightness, which tends to under-illuminate the screen; however, it has twice the battery life compared to the HTC handset, achieved partly through the dim display. Others say the numerous pre-installed apps make the S III feel "bloated".
In late-September 2012 TechRadar ranked it as the No. 1 handset in its constantly updated list of the 20 best mobile phones; "Stuff" magazine also ranked it at No. 1 in its list of 10 best smartphones in May 2012. The Galaxy S III won an award from the European Imaging and Sound Association under the category of "European Mobile Phone" of 2012–2013. In 2012, the Samsung Galaxy S III won "T3"'s "Phone of the Year" award, beating the iPhone 4S, the Nokia Lumia 900, the Sony Xperia S and others and was voted Phone of the Year by readers of tech website S21.
Sudden death.
In December 2012, a rising number of users reported that their Samsung Galaxy S III units had died without warning approximately six months after activation, leaving the phones permanently unresponsive. Samsung has been replacing the mainboards of affected units under warranty. In January 2013, Samsung promised to release a firmware update to correct the issue.
