Horse meat (or horsemeat) is the culinary name for meat cut from a horse. It is a major meat in only a few countries, notably in Central Asia, but it forms a significant part of the culinary traditions of many others, from Europe to South America to Asia. The top eight countries consume about 4.7 million horses a year. For the majority of mankind's early existence, wild horses were hunted as a source of protein. It is slightly sweet, tender and low in fat.
However, because of the role horses have played as companions and as workers, and concerns about the ethics of the horse slaughter process, it is a taboo food in some cultures. These historical associations, as well as ritual and religion, led to the development of the aversion to the consumption of horse meat. The horse is now given pet status by many in some parts of the Western world, particularly in the U.S.A., United Kingdom and Ireland, which further solidifies the taboo on eating its meat.
History.
In the late Paleolithic (Magdalenian Era), wild horses formed an important source of food. In many parts of Europe, the consumption of horse meat continued throughout the Middle Ages until modern times, despite a Papal ban of horse meat in 732. Horse meat was also eaten as part of Germanic pagan religious ceremonies in northern Europe, particularly ceremonies associated with the worship of Odin.
Domesticated horses and cattle did not exist in the Americas until the Age of Discovery, and the Conquistadors owed much of their success to their war horses. The Europeans' horses became feral, and were hunted by the indigenous Pehuenche people of what is now Chile and Argentina. At first they hunted horses as they did other game, but later they began to raise them for meat and transport. The meat was, and still is, preserved by being sun-dried in the high Andes into a product known as "charqui".
France dates its taste for horse meat to the Revolution. With the fall of the aristocracy, its auxiliaries had to find new means of subsistence. Just as hairdressers and tailors set themselves up to serve commoners, the horses maintained by aristocracy as a sign of prestige ended up alleviating the hunger of lower classes. It was during the Napoleonic campaigns when the surgeon-in-chief of Napoleon's Grand Army, Baron Dominique-Jean Larrey, advised the starving troops to eat the meat of horses. At the siege of Alexandria, the meat of young Arab horses relieved an epidemic of scurvy. At the battle of Eylau in 1807, Larrey served horse as soup and "bœuf à la mode". At Aspern-Essling (1809), cut from the supply lines, the cavalry used the breastplates of fallen cuirassiers as cooking pans and gunpowder as seasoning, and thus founded a tradition that carried on until at least the Waterloo campaign.
Horse meat gained widespread acceptance in French cuisine during the later years of the Second French Empire. The high cost of living in Paris prevented many working-class citizens from buying meat such as pork or beef, so in 1866 the French government legalized the eating of horse meat and the first butcher's shop specializing in horse meat opened in eastern Paris, providing quality meat at lower prices. During the Siege of Paris (1870–1871), horse meat was eaten by anyone who could afford it, partly because of a shortage of fresh meat in the blockaded city, and also because horses were eating grain which was needed by the human populace. Many Parisians gained a taste for horse meat during the siege, and after the war ended, horse meat remained popular. Likewise, in other places and times of siege or starvation, horses are viewed as a food source of last resort.
Despite the general Anglophone taboo, horse and donkey meat was eaten in Britain, especially in Yorkshire, until the 1930s, and in times of post-war food shortage surged in popularity in the United States and was considered for use in hospitals. A 2007 "Time" magazine article about horse meat brought in from Canada to the United States characterized the meat as sweet, rich, superlean, oddly soft meat, and closer to beef than venison.
Taboo.
Attitude of various cultures.
Horse is commonly eaten in many countries in Europe and Asia. It is not a generally available food in some English-speaking countries such as the United Kingdom, Ireland, the US, and English Canada. It is also taboo in Argentina
 and Brazil and amongst the Romani people. Horse meat is not generally eaten in Spain (except in the north), although the country exports horses both "on the hoof and on the hook" (i.e., live animals and slaughtered meat) for the French and Italian market. Horse meat is consumed in some North American and Latin American countries, and is illegal in some countries. For example, the Food Standards Code of Australia and New Zealand definition of 'meat' does not include horse. In Tonga, horse meat is eaten nationally, and Tongan emigrees living in the United States, New Zealand and Australia have retained the taste for it, claiming Christian missionaries originally introduced it to them.
In the past, horse has been eaten by Persians, Turks, some hanafi Egyptians, and Tatars; but it has never been eaten in the Maghreb.
Horse meat is forbidden by Jewish dietary laws because horses do not have cloven hooves and they are not ruminants. It has been suggested that this holds a practical purpose as horses were used as a means of transportation and did work, although this is doubtful due to the lack of the horse collar at the time of the formation of these laws.
In the eighth century, Popes Gregory III and Zachary instructed Saint Boniface, missionary to the Germans, to forbid the eating of horse meat to those he converted, due to its association with Germanic pagan ceremonies. The people of Iceland allegedly expressed reluctance to embrace Christianity for some time, largely over the issue of giving up horse meat. In the end, the eating of horse meat was a concession granted in perpetuity when the pagan Norse Icelanders eventually adopted Christianity "en masse" in the year 1000 (although, in fact, the Church reversed its position soon afterwards). Horse meat is now currently consumed in Iceland and many horses are raised for this purpose. The culturally close people of Sweden still have an ambivalent attitude to horse meat, said to stem from this time.
Henry Mayhew describes the difference in the acceptability and use of the horse carcass in London and Paris in "London Labour and the London Poor" (1851). Horse meat was rejected by the British, but continued to be eaten in other European countries such as France and Germany, where knackers often sold horse carcasses despite the Papal ban. Even the hunting of wild horses for meat continued in the area of Westphalia. Londoners also suspected that horse meat was finding its way into sausages, and that offal sold as that of oxen was in fact equine. About 1,000 horses were slaughtered a week.
In Russia, while there is no taboo on eating horse meat per se, horse meat is generally considered by ethnic Russians to be a low-quality meat with poor taste, and it is rarely found in stores. However, it is popular among nomadic peoples of Eastern Russia such as Tatars, Yakuts and Kazakhs.
Reasons for the taboo.
In 732 A.D., Pope Gregory III began a concerted effort to stop the ritual consumption of horse meat in pagan practice. In some countries, the effects of this prohibition by the Roman Catholic Church have lingered and horse meat prejudices have progressed from taboos, to avoidance, to abhorrence. In other parts of the world, horse meat has the stigma of being something poor people eat and is seen as a cheap substitute for other meats, such as pork and beef.
According to the anthropologist Marvin Harris, some cultures class horse meat as taboo because the horse converts grass into meat less efficiently than ruminants. When breeding livestock for meat, a cow or a sheep will produce more meat than a horse if fed with the same amount of grass.
There is also an element of sentimentality, as horses have long enjoyed a close relationship with many humans, on a similar level to household pets – this can be seen projected in such Anglophone cultural icons such as "Black Beauty" and "Mr Ed". Compare with the anthropomorphic animals in "Babe", "Charlotte's Web", and Freddy the Pig. The fourth season of the 1970s American sitcom All In The Family featured an episode named "Edith's Conversion", regarding Archie Bunker's wife Edith being exposed to Catholicism by a neighbor, with a secondary plotline involving Gloria Stivic's preparation of horse meat for dinner, initially without telling her parents. 
Totemistic taboo is also a possible reason for refusal to eat horse meat as an everyday food, but did not necessarily preclude ritual slaughter and consumption. Roman sources state that the goddess Epona was widely worshipped in Gaul and southern Britain. Epona, a triple aspect goddess, was the protectress of the horse and horse keepers, and horses were sacrificed to her; she was paralleled by the Irish Macha and Welsh Rhiannon. In "The White Goddess", Robert Graves argued that the taboo among Britons and their descendants was due to worship of Epona, and even earlier rites. The Uffington White Horse is probable evidence of ancient horse worship. The ancient Indian Kshatriyas engaged in horse sacrifice (Ashwamedh Yaghya) as recorded in the Vedas and Ramayana; but within context of the ritual sacrificial is not being 'killed' but instead being smothered to death. In 1913, the Finnic Mari people of the Volga region were observed to practice a horse sacrifice.
In ancient Scandinavia, the horse was very important, as a living, working creature, as a sign of the owner's status, and symbolically within the old Norse religion. Horses were slaughtered as a sacrifice to the gods and the meat was eaten by the people taking part in the religious feasts. When the Nordic countries were Christianized, eating horse meat was regarded as a sign of paganism and prohibited. A slight skepticism against eating horse meat is still common as a reminder of this in these countries even today.
Production.
In most countries where horses are slaughtered for food, they are processed in a similar fashion to cattle, i.e., in large-scale factory slaughter houses (abattoirs) where they are stunned with a captive bolt gun and bled to death. In countries with a less industrialized food production system, horses and other animals are slaughtered individually outdoors as needed, in the village where they will be consumed, or near to it.
In 2005, the eight principal horse-meat-producing countries produced over 700,000 tonnes of this product.
In 2005, the 5 biggest horse meat-"consuming" countries were China (421,000 tonnes), Mexico, Russia, Italy, and Kazakhstan (54,000 tonnes). In 2010, Mexico produced 140,000 tonnes, China - 126,000 tonnes, Kazakhstan - 114,000 tonnes.
As horses are relatively poor converters of grass and grain to meat compared to cattle, they are not usually bred or raised specifically for their meat. Instead, horses are slaughtered when their monetary value as riding or work animals is low, but their owners can still make money selling them for horse meat, as for example in the routine export of the southern English ponies from the New Forest, Exmoor, and Dartmoor. British law requires the use of "equine passports" even for semi-wild horses to enable traceability (also known as "provenance"), so most slaughtering is done in the UK before the meat is exported, meaning that the animals travel "on the hook, not on the hoof" (as carcasses rather than live). Ex-racehorses, riding horses, and other horses sold at auction may also enter the food chain; sometimes these animals have been stolen or purchased under false pretenses. Even famous horses may end up in the slaughterhouse; the 1986 Kentucky Derby winner and 1987 Eclipse Award for Horse of the Year winner, Ferdinand, is believed to have been slaughtered in Japan, probably for pet food.
There is a misconception that horses are commonly slaughtered for pet food, however. In many countries, like the United States, horse meat was outlawed in pet food in the 1970s. American horse meat is considered a delicacy in Europe and Japan, and its cost is in line with veal, so it would be prohibitively expensive in many countries for pet food.
The British newspaper "The Daily Mail" reports that every year, 100,000 live horses are transported into and around the European Union for human consumption, mainly to Italy but also to France and Belgium.
Meat from horses that veterinarians have put down with a lethal injection is not suitable for human consumption, as the toxin remains in the meat; the carcasses of such animals are sometimes cremated (most other means of disposal are problematic, due to the toxin). Remains of euthanized animals can be rendered, which maintains the value of the skin, bones, fats, etc., for such purposes as fish food. This is commonly done for lab specimens (e.g., pigs) euthanized by injection. The amount of drug (e.g. a barbiturate) is insignificant after rendering.
Carcasses of horses treated with some drugs are considered edible in some jurisdictions. For example, according to Canadian regulation, hyaluron, used in treatment of articular disorders in horses, in HY-50 preparation should not be administered to animals to be slaughtered for horse meat. In Europe, however, the same preparation is not considered to have any such effect, and edibility of the horse meat is not affected.
Opposition to production.
The killing of horses for human consumption is widely opposed in countries such as the U.S., UK and Australia. where horses are generally considered to be companion and sporting animals only. Almost all equine medications and treatments are labeled "not for horses intended for human consumption". In the European Union, horses intended for slaughter cannot be treated with many medications commonly used for U.S. horses. For horses going to slaughter, there is no period of withdrawal between the time it leaves home and the time it is butchered. French actress and animal rights activist Brigitte Bardot has spent years crusading against the eating of horse meat. However, the opposition is far from unanimous; a 2007 readers' poll in the London magazine "Time Out" showed that 82% of respondents supported chef Gordon Ramsay's decision to serve horse meat in his restaurants.
Preparation.
Horse meat has a slightly sweet taste reminiscent of a combination of beef and venison. Meat from younger horses tends to be lighter in color while older horses produce richer color and flavor, as with most mammals. Horse meat can be used to replace beef, pork, mutton, venison and any other meat in virtually any recipe, although the cooking time is shorter than that of beef or pork. Horse meat is usually very lean and tender. Jurisdictions which allow for the slaughter of horses for food rarely have age restrictions, so many are quite old. However, unlike many other types of meat, horse meat becomes more tender as the animal advances in age.
Those preparing sandwiches or cold meals with horse meat usually use it smoked and salted. Horse meat forms an ingredient in several traditional recipes of salami and lasagne.
Horse meat in various countries.
Asia-Pacific.
Australia.
Australians do not generally eat horse meat, although they have a horse slaughter industry that exports to Japan, Europe, and Russia. Horse meat exports peaked at 9,327 tons 1986, declining to 3,000 tons in 2003. The two abattoirs in Australia licensed to export horse meat are Belgian-owned. They are at Peterborough in South Australia (Metro Velda Pty Ltd) and Caboolture abattoir in Queensland (Meramist Pty Ltd). A British agriculture industry website reported that Australian horse meat production levels had risen to 24,000 tons by 2009.
On 30 June 2010, the Western Australian Agriculture Minister Terry Redman granted final approval to Western Australia butcher Vince Garreffa to sell horse meat for human consumption. Nedlands restaurateur Pierre Ichallalene announced plans to do a taster on Bastille Day and to put horse meat dishes on the menu if there's a good reaction. Mr. Redman said that the Government would "consider extending approvals should the public appetite for horse demand it".
Mr. Garreffa is the owner of Mondo Di Carne, a major wholesale meat supplier which supplies many cafes restaurants & hotels in Western Australia. He commented that there is no domestic market for horse meat, but there is a successful export market, which he believes Western Australia should have a share of.
For a short time an online petition had been created to stop the sale of horse meat for human consumption in Western Australia. This decision caused outrage amongst some groups, limited reaction from many and ethusiasm from others. Several local newspaper forums indicated that the general public were not greatly biased either way, in fact many voiced their openness for alternate meats. 
Horse meat consumption has continued as a niche market in Australia, with further potential for growth as gourmet interests develop.
China.
Although it is generally acceptable to Chinese people, outside of specific areas such as Guilin in Guangxi or in Yunnan province, horse meat is not particularly popular due to its low availability and rumors that horse meat tastes bad or it is bad for health, even poisonous . In "Compendium of Materia Medica", a pharmaceutical text published in 1596, Li Shizhen wrote "To relieve toxin caused by eating horse meat, one can drink carrot juice and eat almond." Today, in southern China, there are locally famous dishes such as Horse Meat Rice Noodles (马肉米粉; Pinyin: mǎ ròu mǐ fěn) in Guilin. In the northwest, Kazakh people eat horse meat (see below).
Kazakhstan.
In Kazakhstan horse meat is a large part of the diet, due mainly to the nomadic roots of the population. Some of the dishes include sausages called "kazy" and "shuzhuk" made from the meat using the guts as the sausage skin, "zhaya" made from hip meat which is smoked and boiled, "zhal" made from neck fat which is smoked and boiled, "karta" made from a section of the rectum which is smoked and boiled, and "sur-yet" which is kept as dried meat.
Indonesia.
In Indonesia, one type of satay (chunks of grilled meat served with spicy sauce) known as Horse Satay (Javanese:"sate jaran", Indonesian:"sate kuda") is made from horse meat. This delicacy from Yogyakarta is served with sliced fresh shallot (small red onion), pepper, and sweet soy sauce.
Japan.
In Japanese cuisine, raw horse meat is called or ("sakura" means cherry blossom, "niku" means meat) because of its pink color. It can be served raw as sashimi in thin slices dipped in soy sauce, often with ginger and onions added. In this case, it is called . "Basashi" is popular in some regions of Japan and is often served at "izakaya" bars. Fat, typically from the neck, is also found as "basashi", though it is white, not pink. Horse meat is also sometimes found on menus for "yakiniku" (a type of barbecue), where it is called or ; thin slices of raw horse meat are sometimes served wrapped in a shiso leaf. Kumamoto, Nagano and Ōita are famous for "basashi", and it is common in the Tohoku region as well. Some types of canned "corned meat" in Japan include horse as one of the ingredients. There is also a dessert made from horse meat called "basashi" ice cream. The company that makes it is known for its unusual ice cream flavors, many of which have limited popularity.
Mongolia.
Mongolia, a nation famous for its nomadic pastures and equestrian skills, also includes horse meat on the menu. Mongolians also make a horse milk wine, called airag. Salted horse meat sausages called "kazy" are produced as a regional delicacy by the Kazakhs in Bayan-Ölgii aimag. In modern times, Mongols prefer beef and mutton, though during the extremely cold Mongolian winter, many people prefer horse meat due to its low cholesterol. It is kept non-frozen and traditionally people think horse meat helps warm them up.
Other Asian nations import processed horse meat from Mongolia.
South Korea.
In South Korea, raw horse meat, usually around the neck part, is consumed. It is usually seasoned with soy sauce and sesame oil. Horse meat is a popular delicacy on Jeju island.
Tonga.
In Tonga, horsemeat or "lo'i ho'osi" is much more than a just a delicacy; the consumption of horsemeat is generally only reserved for special occasions. These special occasions may include the death of an important family member or community member or as a form of celebration during the birthday of an important family member or perhaps the visitation of someone important like the King of Tonga.
In Tonga, a horse is one of the most valuable animals a family can own because of its use as a beast of burden. Therefore the slaughter of one's horse for the purpose of consumption becomes a moment of immense homage to the person or event the horse was slain for. Despite a diaspora into Western countries like Australia, USA and New Zealand where consumption of horsemeat is generally tabooed, Tongans still practice the consumption of horse meat perhaps even more so because it is more readily available and more affordable.
Europe.
In 2013, horse meat and traces of horse DNA were found in some food products where horse was not labelled as an ingredient, sparking the 2013 meat adulteration scandal across Europe.
Austria.
Horse "Leberkäse" is available and quite popular at various hot dog stands. Dumplings can also be prepared with horse meat, spinach or Tyrolean "Graukäse" (a sour milk cheese). They are occasionally eaten on their own, in a soup, or as a side-dish.
Belgium.
In Belgium horse meat ("paardenvlees" in Dutch and "viande chevaline" in French) is popular in a number of preparations. Lean, smoked and sliced horse meat fillet ("paardenrookvlees" or "paardengerookt"; "filet chevalin" in French) is served as a cold cut with sandwiches or as part of a cold salad. Horse steaks can be found in most butchers and are used in a variety of preparations. The city of Vilvoorde has a few restaurants specialising in dishes prepared with horse meat. Horse-sausage is a well-known local specialty in Lokeren with European recognition. Smoked or dried horse/pork meat sausage, similar to salami (called "boulogne") is sold in a square shape to be distinguished from pork and/or beef sausages.
France.
In France, specialized butcher shops ("boucheries chevalines") sell horse meat, as ordinary butcher shops have been for a long time forbidden to deal in it. However, since the 1990s, it can be found in supermarket butcher shops and others.
Horse meat was famously eaten in large amounts during the 1870 Siege of Paris, when it was even included in haute cuisine menus.
Germany.
In Germany, horse meat is used for "Sauerbraten", a strongly marinated type of sweet-sour braised meat dish, at least according to the traditional Rhenish recipe. Other traditional horse meat dishes include the Swabian "Pferderostbraten" and Bavarian "Rosswurst" (horse sausage). However, as many people are hesitant to eat horse meat, Sauerbraten and other horse meat dishes are often made with beef instead. Horse meat is not commonly found in German supermarkets, but sold mainly by specialized "Pferdemetzgereien" (horse butcheries), of which there are about 100 in the country, i.e. one for circa 800,000 inhabitants. Horse meat is also occasionally used for steaks, roasts and goulash in all parts of Germany, since it is believed to be healthier than beef and pork while being cheaper than venison. In particular, cat and dog breeders and owners value horse meat as a lean and healthy pet food.
Hungary.
In Hungary, horse meat is only used in salami and sausages, usually mixed with pork. These products are sold in most supermarkets and many butcher shops and are not particularly popular.
Iceland.
In Iceland, it is both eaten minced and as steak, also used in stews and fondue, prized for its strong flavor. It has a particular role in the culture and history of the island. It has been said that the people of Iceland were reluctant to embrace Christianity for some time largely over the issue of giving up horse meat after Pope Gregory III banned horse meat consumption in 732 AD. Horse meat consumption was banned when the pagan Norse Icelanders eventually adopted Christianity in the year 1000. The island eventually lifted the ban because of the starvation it caused.
Italy.
Horse meat is especially popular in Lombardia, Veneto, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol, Parma, Apulia and the Islands of Sardinia and Sicily
Horse meat is used in a variety of recipes: as a stew called "pastissada" (typical of Verona), served as steaks, as carpaccio, or made into bresaola . Thin strips of horse meat called "sfilacci" are popular . Horse fat is used in recipes such as "". Horse meat sausages and salamis are traditional in various places . In Sardinia "sa petza 'e cuaddu" or "sa petha (d)e caddu" (campidanese and logudorese for horse meat) is one of the most renowned meats and sometimes is sold in typical kiosks with bread - also in the town of Sassari there's a long tradition of eating horse steaks ("carri di cabaddu" in the local dialect). Chefs and consumers tend to prize its uniqueness by serving it as rare as possible. Donkey is also cooked, for example as a stew called "stracotto d'asino" and as meat for sausages e.g. "mortadella d'asino" . The cuisine of Parma features a horsemeat tartare called "pesto di cavallo", as well as various cooked dishes.
In Veneto the consumption of horse meat is dating back at least till the period 1000-500 B.C., when the Adriatic Veneti settled in the region inhabited by the Euganei. They were a people migrating from Asia Minor through the Balkans; also known and appreciated for being excellent horse breeders. They bred horses for any purpose: towing and transportation, farm work, military uses and human nutrition too. Through the centuries they were esteemed suppliers of horses for the cavalry and carriage of the Roman legions and the white Venetic horses became famous among Greeks and Romans as one of the best breeds for circus racing. Horse meat consumption is a deep rooted tradition in Venetian cuisine and almost a pride in various regional locations. This tradition has developed several specialties and recipes. Horse meat is widely on sale in butcheries, hypermarkets, supermakets and minimarkets throughout the region, at higher prices than other kinds of meat, as it 's regarded as the most valued in absolute: a sort of formula one, more priced and esteemed than beef or pork. Some ultra-specialised butcheries offer only selected cuts of equine meat (horse, donkey and mule).
In the Province of Padua horse meat is a key element of the local cuisine; particularly in the area that extends south-east from the city, historically called Saccisica. Specialties based on horse meat constitute the main courses and best attractions of some typical restaurants in the zone. They are also offered among other regional delicacies at the food stands of many local festivals, related to civil and religious anniversaries. Most notable is the "Festa del Cavallo": a festival that is held annually in the small town of Legnaro, totally dedicated to horses, included their consumption for food.
In Southern Italy, horse meat is common eaten everywhere - especially in the region of Apulia, where it is considered a delicacy. It is often a vital part of the "ragù barese" in Bari.
According to British food writer Matthew Fort, "The taste for donkey and horse goes back to the days when these animals were part of everyday agricultural life. In the frugal, unsentimental manner of agricultural communities, all the animals were looked on as a source of protein. Waste was not an option."
Luxembourg.
Horse meat is commonly found on menus in Luxembourg.
Malta.
In Malta, stallion meat () is usually fried or baked in a white wine sauce. A few horse meat shops still exist and it is still served in some restaurants.
Netherlands.
 the Netherlands, smoked horse meat ("paardenrookvlees") is sold as sliced meat and eaten on bread. There are also beef-based variants. Horse meat is also used in sausages ("paardenworst" and frikandel), fried fast food snacks and ready-to-eat soups.
Norway.
In Norway, horse meat is commonly used in cured meats, such as vossakorv and svartpølse, and less commonly as steak, hestebiff.
In pre-Christian Norway, horse was seen as an expensive animal. To eat a horse was to show that you had great wealth, and to sacrifice a horse to the gods was seen as the greatest gift you could give. When Norwegians adopted Christianity, horse-eating became taboo as it was a religious act for pagans, and thus it was considered a sign of heresy.
Poland.
Horse meat is used in production of "kabanos", but it has recently been declining in popularity. Live, old horses are often being exported to Italy to be slaughtered. This practice also garners controversy. Horses in Poland are treated mostly as companions and the majority of society is against the live export to Italy.
Serbia.
Horse meat is generally available in Serbia, though mostly shunned in traditional cuisine. It is, however, often recommended by General Practitioners to persons who suffer from anemia. It is available to buy at three green markets in Belgrade, a market in Niš, and in several cities in ethnically mixed Vojvodina, where Hungarian and previously German traditions brought the usage.
Slovenia.
Horse meat is generally available in Slovenia, and is highly popular in the traditional cuisine, especially in the central region of Carniola and in the Kras region. Colt steak ("žrebičkov zrezek")it is also highly popular in Slovenia's capital Ljubljana there are many restaurants that sell burgers and meat that contain large amounts of horse meat.
Sweden.
Smoked/cured horse meat is widely available as a cold cut under the name "hamburgerkött" (hamburger meat). It tends to be very thinly sliced and fairly salty, slightly reminiscent of deli-style ham. "Gustafskorv", a smoked sausage made from horse meat, is also quite popular, especially in the province of Dalarna, where it's made. It is similar to salami or metworst and is used as an alternative to them on sandwiches. It is also possible to order horse beef from some well-stocked grocery stores.
Switzerland.
The ordinance on foodstuffs of animal origin in Switzerland explicitly list equines as an animal species allowed for the production of food. Horse steak is quite common, especially in the French-speaking west, but also more and more in the German-speaking part. A speciality known as "mostbröckli" is made with beef or horse meat. Horse meat is also used for a great range of sausages in the German-speaking north of Switzerland. Like in northern Italy, in the Italian-speaking South, local "salametti" (sausages) are sometimes made with horse meat. Horse meat may also be used in Fondue Bourguignonne.
United Kingdom.
In the United Kingdom, the slaughter, preparation and consumption of horses for food is not against the law, although in practice it has been out of fashion since the 1930s and it is not generally available. It was eaten when other meats were scarce, such as during times of war (as was whale meat, never popular and now also taboo). The sale of meat labelled as horse meat in supermarkets and butchers is minimal, and most of the properly described horse meat consumed in the UK is imported from Europe, predominantly the South of France, where it is more widely available.
Horse meat may be eaten without the knowledge of the consumer, due to accidental or fraudulent introduction of horse meat into human food. A 2003 Food Standards Agency (FSA) investigation revealed that salami and similar products such as chorizo and pastrami sometimes contain horse meat without it being listed, although listing is legally required.
Ukraine.
In Ukraine, especially in Crimea and other southern steppe regions, horse meat is consumed in the form of sausages called Mahan and Sudzhuk. These particular sausages are traditional food of the Crimean Tatar population.
North America.
Canada.
There is a thriving horse meat business in Quebec; the meat is available in most supermarket chains. Horse meat is also for sale at the other end of the country, in Granville Island Market in downtown Vancouver where, according to a "Time" magazine reviewer who smuggled it into the United States, it turned out to be a "sweet, rich, superlean, oddly soft meat, closer to beef than venison". Horse meat is also available in high end Toronto butchers and supermarkets. Aside from the heritage of French cuisine at one end of the country and the adventurous foodies of Vancouver at the other, however, the majority of Canada shares the horse meat taboo with the rest of the Anglosphere. This mentality is especially evident in Alberta, where strong horse racing and breeding industries and cultures have existed since the province's founding, although large numbers of horses are slaughtered for meat in Fort MacLeod, and certain butchers in Calgary do sell it.
United States.
Horse meat is rarely eaten in the United States. Horse meat holds a taboo in American culture which is very similar to the one found in the United Kingdom (previously described), except that it is rarely even imported.
Restriction of human consumption of horse meat in the U.S. has generally involved legislation at the state and local levels. In 1915, for example, the New York City Board of Health amended the sanitary code, making it legal to sell horse meat. During World War II, due to the low supply and high price of beef, New Jersey legalized its sale, but at war's end, the state again prohibited the sale of horse meat.
In 1951, "Time" magazine reported from Portland, OR: "Horsemeat, hitherto eaten as a stunt or only as a last resort, was becoming an important item on Portland tables. Now there were three times as many horse butchers, selling three times as much meat." Noting that "people who used to pretend it was for the dog now came right out and said it was going on the table," and providing tips for cooking pot roast of horse and equine fillets. A similar situation unfolded in 1973, when inflation raised the cost of traditional meats. "Time" reported that "Carlson's, a butcher shop in Westbrook, CT that recently converted to horse meat exclusively, now sells about 6,000 pounds of the stuff a day." The shop produced a 28-page guide called "Carlson's Horsemeat Cook Book" with recipes for chili con carne, German meatballs, beery horsemeat, and more.
Harvard University's Faculty Club had horse meat on the menu for over one hundred years, until 1985.
California Proposition 6 (1998) was passed by state voters, outlawing the possession, transfer, reception or holding any horse, pony, burro or mule by a person who is aware that it will be used for human consumption, and making the slaughter of horses sale of horsemeat for human consumption a misdemeanor offense.
Until 2007, a few horse meat slaughterhouses still existed in the United States, selling meat to zoos to feed their carnivores, and exporting it for human consumption, but the last one, Cavel International in Dekalb, Illinois, was closed by court order in 2007. The closure reportedly caused a surplus of horses in Illinois.
On November 18, 2011, the ban on the slaughter of horses for meat was lifted as part of the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2012.
Mexico.
As of 2005, Mexico was the second largest producer of horse meat in the world. It is used there both for human consumption and animal food.
South America.
Chile.
In Chile, it is used in "charqui". Also in Chile, horse meat became the main source of nutrition for the nomadic indigenous tribes, which promptly switched from a guanaco-based economy to a horse-based one after the horses brought by the Spaniards bred naturally and became feral. This applied specially to the Pampa and Mapuche nations, who became fierce horseman warriors. Similar to the Tatars, they ate raw horse meat and milked their animals.
Colombia.
In Colombia, it is used and nowadays is not taboo.
Argentina.
Argentina is a producer and exporter of horse meat, but it is not used in local consumption and is considered taboo.
