"Stay" is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna from her seventh studio album "Unapologetic" (2012). Featuring guest vocals by Mikky Ekko, the song was released as the second single from the album on January 7, 2013. "Stay" was co-written by Mikky Ekko and Justin Parker. It is a pop and R&B ballad, featuring piano and guitar chords. The lyrical content regards the temptation and failure of resisting a true love. The song garnered a mostly positive response from music critics. They were divided in their opinion regarding the balladry, with most describing it as a standout track on the album, while a few labeled it as boring. However, critics were unified in their opinion of praising her vocal performance and emotion. 
Upon the release of "Unapologetic", "Stay" charted on multiple charts worldwide. Following its release as a single, it has reached the top ten in sixteen countries including Australia, France, Germany, New Zealand, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. It has also charted at number three on the US "Billboard" Hot 100, becoming Rihanna's twenty-fourth top ten on the chart, thus surpassing Whitney Houston's tally. Furthermore, it has marked top twenty positions in Norway and Spain, and charted at number 22 on the US Pop Songs chart.
The song's music video, directed by Sophie Muller, depicts Rihanna naked in a bathtub filled with cloudy water, while Mikky Ekko performs in a separate bathroom. Critics compared the vulnerability and raw emotion in the video to the song itself. Rihanna premiered "Stay" on "Saturday Night Live" in the United States, while she performed the song in the United Kingdom on the ninth series of "The X Factor". The track was also included on the set list of the majority of her 777 Tour promotional tour dates, in support of the album. Rihanna and Mikky Ekko also performed "Stay" at the 2013 Grammy Awards.
Background and release.
Rihanna began "working on the new sound" for her seventh studio album in March 2012, even though she had not yet begun recording. On September 12, 2012, Def Jam France announced via Twitter that Rihanna would release a new single the upcoming week while her seventh studio album is scheduled to be released in November 2012. However, the tweet was shortly deleted and replaced with another clarifying that "more information will be made available tomorrow, Thursday, September 13". Via her official Twitter account, Rihanna posted series of "teasing" tweets announcing her seventh studio album.
"Stay" was co-written by Mikky Ekko and Justin Parker and also produced by the pair with assistance from Elof Loelv Ekko also appears as a featured artist courtesy of RCA Records. Rihanna's and Ekko's vocals were recording at two recording locations by three different people: Mike Gaydusek at Nightbird Studios and Marcus Tovar and Kuk Harrel at Westlake Recording Studios, both in Los Angeles, California. Vocal engineering was carried out by Gaydusek and was assisted in the process by Blake Mares and Robert Cohen. Vocal production was completed by Kuk Harrell. It was mixed by Phil Tan at Ninja Club Studios in Atlanta, Georgia. Additional/assistant production was helmed by Daniella Rivera.
"Stay" impacted the United Kingdom on January 7, 2013 as the second single from "Unapologetic". In the United States, "Stay" was released to contemporary hit radio and rhythmic radio on January 29, 2013, as the third single in the country following "Diamonds" and "Pour It Up". It will be released as a CD single in Germany on February 15, 2013.
Composition and lyrics.
"Stay" is a contemporary pop and R&B ballad that consists of piano and guitar instrumentation. It is written in the key of C major at a moderate tempo of 112 beats per minute. Rihanna's vocal range in the song ranges from the low note of F4 to the high note of E5. Greg Kot for the "Chicago Tribune" described the song as being "stripped-bare". The lyrics revolve around "failing to resist true love", according to Dan Martin for "NME", as Rihanna sings "Funny, you're the broken one/ But I'm the only one who needed saving." According to Jocelyn Vena for MTV, Rihanna "punctuates the emotions of the track" on the lyric "It's not much of a life you're living/ It's not just something you take [it's] given." Rihanna also makes a plea to her lover, singing "Round and round and round and round we go/ Now tell me, tell me now, tell me now you know/ Not really sure how to feel about it/ Something in the way you move/ Makes me feel like I can't live without you/ and it takes me all the way/ I want you to stay." Lewis Corner for Digital Spy wrote that Rihanna's vocals glow over the simple yet effective piano riffs.
Critical reception.
"Stay" received mostly positive reviews from music critics. Jon Dolan for "Rolling Stone" was complimentary of Rihanna's execution of the song, writing that she performs it "within an inch of its life" and "pleads at the piano." Dolan continued to state that it is "stark" and "shadowy" which is "confrontationally honest." Dan Martin for "NME" described "Stay" as "Unapologetic"s highlight, writing that it is a "gorgeous piano ballad." Martin continued to write that the song "puts a vulnerable spin on the Brown situation, repeating another theme of the album", a reference to her relationship with Chris Brown. Smokey Fontaine for the "Huffington Post" also praised "Stay", placing emphasis on Rihanna's vocal performance. He wrote that "Three years ago, no one would have paid attention to a beautiful piano-ballad like 'Stay.' Not because of the events we all witnessed, but because of how honest and emotionally-connected her vocals are." 
Lewis Corner for Digital Spy awarded "Stay" four out of five stars, commenting that Rihanna "doesn't need all the controversial romp to top the charts." Corner also compared "Stay" to the work of "some of 2012's most successful female balladeers" Emeli Sandé and Lana Del Rey and concluded by stating that Rihanna "never the pack" but "[airs her seemingly complex emotions through music's current trend." The song garnered a mixed review from Genevieve Koski for "The A.V. Club", writing that the album is "heavy on the sort of milquetoast ballads that have never been Rihanna's specialty" with regard to "Stay" and "What Now". However, Jon Caramanica for "The New York Times" negatively critiqued the song, writing that it is "dull piano driven song." The reason he gave for it being "dull" was that he felt "Stay", along with "Get It Over With" and "Lost in Paradise", were the "least texturally confrontational" and therefore "by far the least successful."
Chart performance.
"Stay" entered the singles chart in New Zealand at number 28 on December 24, 2012. The following week it climbed to number 25 and in its third week to a new peak of 16. On January 14, 2013, it climbed into the top ten to number nine, where it remained for five consecutive weeks, before marking a new peak of number seven in its ninth total week on the chart. The song has been certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for sales of 7,500 copies. In Australia, "Stay" debuted at number 43 for the issue dated January 20, 2013. The following week it climbed to number 28, and into the top twenty to number 12 the week after. In its fourth week, the song made a new peak of number 11. The following week it dropped to 13, receiving a Gold certification for sales of 35,000 copies by the Australian Recording Industry Association. "Stay" rebounded into the top ten to mark a new peak of number six in its sixth total week on the chart, following the release of the music video. The following week, it managed a new peak of number five, managing a higher position than the album's lead single, "Diamonds". 
"Stay" first charted in the United States on the Pop Songs chart at number 34, on the issue dated February 16, 2013. Following Rihanna and Ekko's performance at the 55th Grammy Awards on February 10, 2013, the song entered the US Digital Songs chart at number 25 for the issue dated February 23, seeing a 289% increase in sales to 67,000 copies sold. It subsequently debuted on the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 57, rocketing to number three the week after, following the chart's new policy that allowed YouTube streaming to count towards the single's chart performance. The surge was also due to the large 358% increase of digital downloads to 306,000 sales sold that week, rising to number two on the Digital Songs chart. With the new Hot 100 peak, Rihanna gained her twenty-fourth top ten on the chart, surpassing Whitney Houston's tally of 23. The song entered the Canadian Hot 100 at number 58, for the week dated December 8, 2012. It re-entered the chart for the week of February 23, 2013 at number 37. The following week, it leaped to number three.
In the United Kingdom, it debuted on the UK R&B Chart at number 16 on November 25, 2012, due to strong digital download sales following the release of "Unapologetic". It also entered the UK Singles Chart at number 102 in the same week. Following Rihanna's performance of the song on "The X Factor" the previous week, "Stay" re-entered the UK Singles Chart at number six on December 22, 2012. The following week it climbed to a new peak of number four. Over the next five weeks, the song fluctuated inside the top ten, again returning to its number four peak on two separate occasions. As of February 2013, "Stay" has sold over 394,000 copies. "Stay" debuted in Ireland at number 15 for the week ending December 13, 2012. Elsewhere in Europe, the song debuted at number 53 in both France and Switzerland, following the release of the album. After three weeks of charting outside of the top 100, "Stay" returned to its former peak of 53 in France on January 5, 2013. It reached a peak of number two in its twelfth week on the chart.
Music video.
Background.
The music video for "Stay" was directed by Sophie Muller. On February 10, 2013, whilst walking the red carpet of the 55th Grammy Awards, Rihanna held an interview with Ryan Seacrest who officially revealed that the music video would premiere on E! News the following day. Rihanna described the production saying, "The video was really, really simple. I pretty much stayed put in a bathtub, and we shot it really tight, really close. There's Mikky Ekko in the video as well. This is the first time I've ever collaborated with him, so I'm excited about that because he's actually the one who wrote the song and I kinda just fell in love with it so much and in love with the tone of his voice and we wanna keep him a part of it, so you'll see him in the video." The singer added, "It's a very emotional song and it's personal, so you just think about, it's almost like telling a story, and when you tell a story, even to yourself — if you're saying it out loud and expressing how you feel — it needs to be powerful because it needs to be authentic." On February 11, Rihanna leaked an "uncut" version of the video on Twitter prior to the official premiere, featuring the singer performing to the track in one singular take, without Mikky Ekko. The official version premiered on E! News later that day. It was then uploaded to Rihanna's official VEVO account at 8AM ET the following day.
Synopsis.
The video opens with a shot of running water. Rihanna is then presented undressing and climbing into a bathtub. Throughout the rest of the video, the singer is presented nude in the tub full of cloudy green water; subtle camera angles protect her modesty. Rihanna is shown wearing little make-up and with long hair tangled and wet over one side of her face. The singer seems morose and sad as she occasionally flickers her eyes to the ceiling and puts her head in her hands, showing off long manicured nails and a diamond stud earring. The low-key video also features Mikky Ekko, who performs his parts of the song separately including scenes of him perched on the edge of a different bathtub, gazing into a mirror, in front of an unlit fireplace, and sitting on a grand chair. The video switches between the pair throughout the course of the video until it concludes with a single tear falling from Rihanna's eye as she sinks lower into the bathtub.
Reception.
Eleanor Gower of the "Daily Mail" thought the slow moving number shows Rihanna at her most vulnerable. A reviewer of The Huffington Post commented, "The heartfelt ballad, from her latest album "Unapologetic", is full of emotion - and the video matches that, as a stripped-down Rihanna soaks in a tub." August Brown of the "Los Angeles Times" commented on the video saying, "we kind of want to curl up in a hot shower and have a good cry ourselves." They continued saying, "It's kind of an echo of her famous "We Found Love" video, with that clip's quick-cut, drugged-up frenzy of bad romance replaced with solitary, locked-off shots that feel more intimate than exploitative. She looks amazing, but the focus isn't so much her body as the look of constant devastation on her face. Brown summarised the clip as being "appropriatly minimalistand concluded calling it "a beautiful video that broaden's Rihanna's emotional-musical palette." Bené Viera of VH1 commented on the video saying, "Usually the tough girl posturing is a cover up for a very sensitive soul. Rihanna cut the ‘I don’t give an eff’ attitude for four minutes of makeup free, teary-eyed, glistening wet, raw emotion in the video for 'Stay.'" Sarah Flanigan of Yahoo! thought the video shows "a softer side of [Rihanna's personality audiences rarely get to see." She also stated, "There are no gimmicks, no flashy clothes, just a very raw and emotional performance allowing her to tell this love story in her own words." Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV labelled the video as "perfectly heartbreaking/emotionally vulnerable" and thought the "baptismal effect" of the video "feels like a seamless transition from Rihanna's 'Diamonds' video." Tamar Anitai also of MTV compared the video to Britney Spears' "Everytime" (2004), writing that both videos "are equal parts stunning and sobering, haunting and harrowing, and both feature impossibly famous singers reflecting upon damaged relationships while inviting us into their well-designed bathrooms as they vulnerably perform their ablutions."
Live performances.
As part of promotion for the release of "Unapologetic" on November 19, 2012, Rihanna premiered "Stay" on "Saturday Night Live" on November 10, 2012. She also performed the album's lead single "Diamonds". Rihanna performed a solo version of "Stay", without guest vocalist Ekko. Rihanna wore a Bob Marley dress and adorned red lipstick. Jocelyn Vena for MTV praised the singer's performance, writing "Rihanna used her touching vocals to prove that not only can she sex up a performance but she can also sing the heck out of one." Erika Ramirez noted that Rihanna "belted out the song." 
During the seven days prior to the release of the album, Rihanna embarked on the 777 Tour, a seven-date promotional tour where she performed seven concerts in seven different cities in seven different countries across North America and Europe. Not included on the set list at the first concert in Mexico City, she performed "Stay" at the second concert in Toronto as part of a medley with "Love the Way You Lie". The solo version of the song was performed the third concert in Stockholm. At the fourth concert in Paris, it was performed as the ninth song out of 13 in between "S&M" and "Where Have You Been", preceded by a snippet of "Take Care". The fifth and sixth concerts were held in Berlin and London, respectively, where Rihanna performed "Stay" both nights in between "S&M" and "Unfaithful". The seventh and final concert was held in New York City, where "Stay" was also performed. Erika Ramirez for "Billboard" attended all seven concerts as part of the press committee, where she described the audience as being in a "trance" as the singer performed the song. 
Rihanna performed "Stay" at the final of the ninth series of "The X Factor" on December 9, 2012. Once she had finished performing the song, it transitioned into an acoustic version of "We Found Love" followed by the original version. Rihanna wore a short white dress, with white T-bar shoes, diamond earrings and matching silver jewellery. The singer performed "Stay" together with Mikky Ekko at the 2013 Grammy Awards on February 10, 2013. The performance featured the singer standing in front of a "dimly lit set" and was dressed in a long "curve-hugging" dark dress. Mikael Wood of "Los Angeles Times" positively reviewed the performance and wrote that it was the most memorable moment of the night. Charley Rogulewski of "Vibe" in a review of the rendition wrote, "Her [Rihanna's] beautiful voice took center stage during the duet, assuring those watching why she was worthy of her six Grammys". A reviewer of Capital FM wrote that Rihanna looked visibly moved by the performance as she showed her "impressive vocals".
Covers.
A short teaser of American singer Adam Lambert performing a cover of "Stay" was released online on February 11, 2013. The singer revealed via Twitter that it was only a preview in rehearsals and that there was "more to come". The video release came after Lambert praised Rihanna and Ekko's Grammy performance the previous night, saying "best she's ever sounded!! Wow. Full of such beautiful and haunting emotion." The singer later performed a full version of the song, with the album track "Underneath" from his album "Trespassing", at his "We Are Glamily" tour in Tokyo. On February 15, 2013, a video was unveiled of Vin Diesel performing a karaoke style cover of the song, which he recorded for his partner for Valentine's Day. The recording featured the music video running in the background.
On February 20, 2013 the Jonas Brothers covered the song during the concert in Monterrey as part of their 2012/2013 World Tour.
Credits and personnel.
Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Unapologetic", Def Jam Recordings, SRP Records.
