Mr Selfridge is a British period television drama produced by ITV Studios for ITV and PBS which began airing on 6 January 2013.
Development and production.
It was announced on 24 May 2011 that ITV were in discussions with ITV Studios about developing an adaptation of Lindy Woodhead's period novel "Shopping, Seduction & Mr Selfridge". Andrew Davies was confirmed to be working on the script. 
It was originally planned to be screened in 2012. However, it is claimed that ITV were forced to push back airing the drama due to rival BBC airing similarly themed drama series "The Paradise". 
Set in 1909 London during a time period where women are enjoying an ever increasing amount of freedom, it tells the story of Harry Gordon Selfridge, the founder of Selfridges department store. On 8 February 2013, ITV announced "Mr Selfridge" had been commissioned for a second series to air in 2014. Anthony Byrne who directed three episodes of series one will return to direct some of the new episodes. 
A set to the north of London was built to house a replica of the 1909 Selfridge's store interior. The exterior of the store was recreated in Chatham Docks in Kent. The disused Aldwych tube station was used to film Rose Selfridge travelling on the London Underground and scenes in the first episode featuring Victor Colleano, Agnes Towler and her brother George.
Casting.
An American casting director was employed to find an actor suitable to play Harry Selfridge. Jeremy Piven's agent informed him of the role. Producer Chrissy Skinns and director Jon Jones met Piven in Los Angeles and were impressed by his understanding of the character. Executive producer Kate Lewis was "thrilled to attract" Frances O'Connor to the role of Rose Selfridge because she had been a long term fan. Former "Coronation Street" actress Katherine Kelly signed up to play Lady Mae Loxley. But the actress later declined to return for the show's second series. The trio's casting was announced in March 2012 alongside Grégory Fitoussi (Henri Leclair), Aisling Loftus (Agnes Towler), Zoe Tapper (Ellen Love) and Trystan Gravelle (Victor Colleano).
Reception.
In a poll hosted by MSN more than 80% of readers said they would continue watching the show following the first episode. Phil Hogan writing for "The Guardian" bemoaned the story development. He observed that there is "so much crisis with so little drama". The "Daily Mail's" Ian Hyland was impressed with the series and praised the performances of Piven, Tapper and Loftus. Ross Sweeney from Cultbox said that the show had direction but lacked "actual substance and any real surprises". He praised the costume designers for their "astonishing attention to detail". Susanna Lazarus of the "Radio Times" opined that the character's earnestness detracted from the realism of the story. She added the female cast created the "plot tension" needed to maintain viewership. Gabriel Tate of "Time Out" branded it an unsubtle, daft series with glorious production values but felt it was "ideal escapism for a Sunday night". He also stated that the character of Agnes Towler was "the heart of the show". Benjamin Secher from "The Daily Telegraph" said that "Mr Selfridge" is "less cosy, more charismatic" production "The Paradise". A "sumptuous, frothy drama" and "entertaining spectacle", but ultimately Secher did not believe the story. MSN critic Dan Owen branded it "sumptuous Sunday evening viewing". He thought the "wonderful" sets and costumes were better than those featured in fellow period drama "Downton Abbey".
International broadcasts.
The programmme has been received international distribution the broadcaster's ITV Studios Global Entertainment brand. ITV sold the series to a number countries at the 2012 Mipcom event. In addition they have pre-sold the show to Australia's Seven Network and yes in Israel. 
