Hotel Transylvania is a 2012 American 3D computer-animated comedy film produced by Sony Pictures Animation and distributed by Columbia Pictures. It was directed by Genndy Tartakovsky, the creator of "Samurai Jack", "Dexter's Laboratory", and "Sym-Bionic Titan", and produced by Michelle Murdocca. The film features the voices of Adam Sandler, Andy Samberg, Selena Gomez, Kevin James, Fran Drescher, Steve Buscemi, Molly Shannon, David Spade and Cee Lo Green.
The film tells a story of Dracula, the owner of Hotel Transylvania, where the world's monsters can take a rest from human civilization. Dracula invites some of the most famous monsters, including Frankenstein's monster, Mummy, a Werewolf family, and the Invisible Man, to celebrate the 118th birthday of his daughter Mavis. When the hotel is unexpectedly visited by an ordinary 21-year-old traveler named Jonathan, Dracula must protect Mavis from falling in love with him before it is too late.
Released on September 28, 2012, the film was met with mixed critical reception, while the general population received it very favorably. Despite mixed reviews, "Hotel Transylvania" set a new record for the highest-grossing September opening weekend ever, earning a total of $332 million on a budget of $85 million. The film was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film. A sequel, titled "Hotel Transylvania 2", is scheduled to be released in theaters on September 25, 2015.
Plot.
In the aftermath of the death of his wife Martha (Jackie Sandler), Count Dracula (Adam Sandler) designs and builds a massive five-star hotel in which to raise his daughter Mavis (Selena Gomez). Famous monsters such as Frank (Kevin James) and his wife Eunice (Fran Drescher), Wayne and Wanda Werewolf (Steve Buscemi and Molly Shannon) and their massive immediate family, Griffin the Invisible Man (David Spade), and Murray the Mummy (Cee Lo Green) often come to stay at the hotel which is completely human free and safe for monsters.
On her 118th birthday, Dracula allows his daughter to leave the castle in order to explore the human world, but he sets up an elaborate plan using his zombie bellhops disguised as humans to make them seem intimidating and frighten her home. The plan works, but the zombies inadvertently lure a human; 21-year-old Jonathan (Andy Samberg) to the hotel. Dracula frantically disguises him as a Flesh Golem and passes him off as Johnnystein, a distant cousin of Frank's right arm. Johnny soon encounters Mavis and the two 'Zing'; a form of magical attraction. Unable to get Johnny out of the hotel without notice, Drac quickly improvises that Johnny is a party planner, brought in to bring a fresher approach to his own traditional and boring parties. Johnny quickly becomes a hit to the other monsters, especially Mavis, and even begins to gain Dracula's respect. He tells Johnny the reason they hate humans was for the death of his wife at the hands of an angry mob shortly after Mavis was born, and is surprised at his understanding and knowledge of the lore.
Johnny attempts to leave after his confession, but is brought back by Mavis. After showing her the beauty of a sunrise, she is re-inspired to give humans another chance. Meanwhile, Quasimodo (John Lovitz) learns that Johnny is a human and kidnaps him in order to cook him but Dracula intervenes and magically freezes Quasimodo to keep him from telling anyone that he is a human. The party is a great success, but when Mavis kisses Johnny, Dracula is sent over the edge and in his outburst confesses to deceiving Mavis with the town. Quasimodo, still frozen, bursts in and The Fly (Chris Parnell) translates his frozen language that reveals Johnny's humanity, but Mavis is undeterred by her attraction and wants to be with Johnny, even though he is human. But Johnny rejects her out of respect for her father and leaves the hotel.
Discovering that Mavis and Johnny shared a Zing, Dracula manages to convince the monsters, who are now trying to leave the hotel, to help him find and reunite them and they learn he is bound on a flight out of Transylvania soon. They head to the airport and encounter a Monster Festival along the way, instead of being frightened by the real monsters appearing, they instead help Dracula by providing him shelter from the sunlight so he can get to the airport quickly only to see Johnny's plane taking off. He takes the risk and gives chase, burning in the sunlight. After getting Johnny's attention, Dracula makes his way to the front of the plane, using his mind-controlling power to control the pilot (Brian Stack) to help him apologize for his actions. Johnny accepts Dracula's apology and Drac manipulates the pilot to return to the Transylvanian airport for a refuel and Dracula returns Johnny to Mavis, who confesses that their Zing was mutual and the two kiss, making Dracula realize his little girl is all grown up and can make her own decisions.
The film ends with Dracula and his friends being shown in traditional animation (in the style of Genndy Tartakovsky's cartoons) during the credits, as well as a few paintings of Johnny and Mavis on their travels together.
Cast.
Hydra Heads voiced by Paul Brittain, Craig Kellman, Tom Kenny, Brian McCann, Jonny Solomon, and Jim Wise.
Production.
"Hotel Transylvania" has been in development since 2006, when Anthony Stacchi and David Feiss were set to direct the film. In 2008, Jill Culton took over the directing position, and around 2010, Chris Jenkins, with Todd Wilderman. In February 2011, Genndy Tartakovsky took over as the sixth director to direct his feature directorial debut. 
In less than a year, Tartakovsky rewrote the script and reimagined the film to follow the energy, organic-ness and exaggeration of the 2D animation, particularly of the Tex Avery's cartoons. "I took all the aesthetics I like from 2-D and applied them here," Tartakovsky said. "I don't want to do animation to mimic reality. I want to push reality." "I wanted to have an imprint so you'd go, 'Well, only Genndy can make this.' It's hard, especially with CG, but I feel there's a lot of moments that feel that they're very me, so hopefully it'll feel different enough that it has a signature to it."
In November 2011, it was announced that Miley Cyrus would voice Mavis, Dracula's teenage daughter, but in February 2012, Cyrus left the film. It was later announced that Selena Gomez would replace Cyrus.
Release.
"Hotel Transylvania" premiered on September 8, 2012, at the Toronto International Film Festival. Distributed by Columbia Pictures, the film received a wide release on September 28, 2012. Since October 26, 2012, the film's showings in Regal Entertainment Group Cinemas have been exclusively accompanied by a new traditionally animated short film, "Goodnight Mr. Foot". Based on "Hotel Transylvania", the short was directed and animated by Genndy Tartakovsky.
Marketing.
The film's first international trailer was released on March 27, 2012. The US domestic trailer debuted on April 24, 2012, and was attached to "The Pirates! Band of Misfits". The second trailer debuted on June 21, 2012, and was seen on some prints of "Brave".
Home media.
"Hotel Transylvania" was released on DVD, Blu-ray, and Blu-ray 3D on January 29, 2013. It was accompanied by the short animated film, "Goodnight Mr. Foot".
Reception.
Critical response.
"Hotel Transylvania" has received generally mixed to negative reviews from critics, praising the direction and animation, but criticizing its script. Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 43% of critics gave the film positive reviews, with an average rating of 5.3/10 based on 132 reviews. The site's critical consensus reads: ""Hotel Transylvania"s buoyant, giddy tone may please children, but it might be a little too loud and thinly-scripted for older audiences." Another review aggregate, Metacritic, calculated an average score of 47 out of 100, based on 32 reviews. CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend revealed that the average grade cinemagoers gave "Hotel Transylvania" was an A- on an A+ to F scale.
IGN editor Geoff Chapman rated the film 9 out of 10 and wrote "This is a fun film, full of quirky gags and lovable characters. There are a few songs that smack a bit like soundtrack marketing for the kids, and the story is of course fairly predictable, but this movie is about enjoying a fun journey with great characters. It's a romp that kids and families will all enjoy. "Hotel Transylvania" is definitely somewhere you'll want to check in."
Box office.
The film has earned $148,313,048 in North America, as of February 15, 2013, and $184 million in other countries, for a worldwide total of $332,613,048. Officially reported budget for the film was $85 million, although some reports claimed that the film actually cost $100 million.
It topped the box office with $11 million on Friday, and $42.5 million domestically and $50.6 million worldwide for the weekend, breaking the record for the largest-grossing September opening ever, ahead of "Sweet Home Alabama" ($35.6 million). It is also the highest-grossing debut for Sony Pictures Animation, beating "The Smurfs" opening ($35.6 million). According to the Sony's president of worldwide distribution Rory Bruer, Sony was very satisfied with the film's performance: ""Hotel Transylvania" is performing beyond anyone's imagination, and the holds are ridiculous. It exceeds expectations in every new market it opens in."
Video games.
A social game based on the film, titled "Hotel Transylvania Social Game", and made by Sony Pictures Interactive, was released on August 15, 2012. The game allows players to create their own Hotel Transylvania, where they must take care of the hotel's guests.
Another video game, titled "Hotel Transylvania", developed by Way Forward and published by GameMill Entertainment, was released on September 18, 2012, for Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS at retail. The game was also released in the Nintendo eShop in North America on November 15, 2012.
A mobile game, titled "Hotel Transylvania Dash", developed by Sony Pictures Consumer Products Inc. and PlayFirst, was released to iTunes App Store on September 20, 2012. The game is a variation of "Hotel Dash" mobile game and features the film's art and characters.
A mobile digital storybook app, titled "Hotel Transylvania BooClips Deluxe App", developed by Castle Builders and Sony Pictures Animation, was released to iTunes App Store, Nook Store, Google Play for the Android, iBookstore, Microsoft's Metro, and for the PC and Mac via www.BooClips.com, both in English and in Spanish, on September 20, 2012.
"Goodnight Mr. Foot".
"Goodnight Mr. Foot" is a traditionally animated short film based on "Hotel Transylvania", featuring Bigfoot from the film. Premiering as a Halloween treat on October 26, 2012, the short was shown exclusively before the theatrical shows of "Hotel Transylvania" in Regal Entertainment Group Cinemas. As Sony Pictures Animation's first traditionally animated film, it was written and directed by Genndy Tartakovsky, who also drew every key frame of the short. Animated in the style of Bob Clampett, Tex Avery, and Chuck Jones, Tartakovsky created the short in four weeks during the final production stages of the main film. Bigfoot (who has a non-speaking role in "Hotel Transylvania") was voiced by Corey Burton while the Witch Maid was voiced by Rose Abdoo. Both voice actors provided additional voices in "Hotel Transylvania".
Taking place before the events in "Hotel Transylvania", the short stars Bigfoot, whose rest in Hotel Transylvania is being constantly disturbed by an overly enthusiastic witch maid.
Sequel.
Genndy Tartakovsky, the director of the film, commented in October 2012 the possibility of the sequel: "Everyone is talking about it, but we haven't started writing it. There are a lot of fun ideas we could totally play with. It's a ripe world." On November 9, 2012, it was announced that a sequel has been greenlit, and is set for release on September 25, 2015. Tartakovsky will not return for the sequel, as he is already directing a 2014 adaptation of "Popeye".
