Ryan Rodney Reynolds (born October 23, 1976) is a Canadian film and television actor. Reynolds is known for playing the roles of Michael Bergen on ABC's sitcom "Two Guys and a Girl" (1998–2001), as well as Marvel Comics characters Hannibal King in ' (2004) and Wade Wilson / Deadpool in ' (2009). He also played DC Comics superhero Hal Jordan / Green Lantern in "Green Lantern" (2011). He has also appeared in films such as "National Lampoon's Van Wilder", "Just Friends", "Definitely, Maybe", "The Proposal", "The Change-Up", and "Safe House".
Early life.
Reynolds was born in Vancouver, British Columbia. His father, Jim, is a food wholesaler, and his mother, Tammy, is a retail salesperson. He is of Irish ancestry and was raised as a Roman Catholic. The youngest of four brothers, he graduated from Kitsilano Secondary School in Vancouver in 1994. He later attended Kwantlen Polytechnic University, also in Vancouver, until dropping out. Two of his elder brothers work as police officers in British Columbia, one of whom is a Royal Canadian Mounted Police member.
Career.
Reynolds' career began in 1990 when he starred as "Billy" in the Canadian-produced teen soap "Hillside", distributed in the United States by Nickelodeon as "Fifteen". In 1996 he co-starred with Melissa Joan Hart in the TV movie "Sabrina the Teenage Witch". As an adult, Reynolds starred in the National Lampoon movie "Van Wilder" and the American television series "Two Guys, A Girl and a Pizza Place", playing medical student Michael "Berg" Bergen. In 1993–94 he had a recurring role in "The Odyssey" as Macro. He also cameoed in "Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle" as a nurse, appeared in "The In-Laws" with Michael Douglas and Albert Brooks, as well as the Canadian production "Foolproof".
In 2005 he played a waiter named Monty in "Waiting...", and as music executive Chris Brander in the romantic comedy "Just Friends" alongside Amy Smart and Anna Faris. Reynolds played the protagonist in the 2008 film "Definitely, Maybe". He has also appeared in the second season finale of the television series "Scrubs". In 2007, Reynolds guest-starred as Brendan's friend Hams in the episode "" of the TBS sitcom "My Boys". In 2009, he portrayed Andrew Paxton, starring opposite Sandra Bullock, in "The Proposal", and Mike Connell in "Adventureland".
Although he has performed primarily in comedies, Reynolds underwent intense physical training to play an action role as the character of Hannibal King in the 2004 film "". Reynolds played George Lutz in the 2005 remake of the 1979 horror film "The Amityville Horror". Additionally, he played an FBI agent alongside Ray Liotta in the 2006 crime action film "Smokin' Aces".
In a March 2005 interview, Reynolds spoke of his interest and involvement in a possible film adaptation of "Deadpool" with screenwriter David S. Goyer, as well as the possibility of playing the incarnation of The Flash known as Wally West in an adaption of the popular DC Comics character in the upcoming movie project. Reynolds portrayed Deadpool in the X-Men spinoff "" and was announced to portray him again in a spin-off, "Deadpool" which is due out in 2013. It was later confirmed that the "Deadpool" film will be a reboot, ignoring the events that took place in "X-Men Origins" and establishing a new backstory for the character.
He also starred in the Spanish thriller "Buried", which screened at the Sundance film festival.
In June 2010, Reynolds was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Reynolds portrayed superhero Hal Jordan/Green Lantern in Warner Bros.' film "Green Lantern", released June 17, 2011 in 3D; this made him one of the few actors to headline in movies based on both Marvel and DC characters.
Reynolds is scheduled to portray Nick Cruz in the Universal Pictures film adaptation of Dark Horse Comics' "R.I.P.D." ("Rest in Peace Department"), which has a planned release in 2013. In January 2012, Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski announced that Reynolds would star in the film "Big Eyes" alongside Reese Witherspoon.
Personal life.
Relationships.
In 2002, Reynolds began dating Canadian singer Alanis Morissette. The two announced their engagement in June 2004. In February 2007, representatives for Morissette and Reynolds announced they had mutually decided to end their engagement. Morissette said her album "Flavors of Entanglement" was created out of her grief after the breakup.
Soon after the end of his relationship with Morissette in 2007, Reynolds began dating American actress Scarlett Johansson. The couple announced their engagement in May 2008, and married on September 27, 2008 in a quiet ceremony near Tofino, British Columbia. On December 14, 2010, Reynolds and Johansson announced that they had separated. Reynolds filed for divorce in Los Angeles on December 23, 2010; Johansson filed her response simultaneously. The divorce was finalized on July 1, 2011.
In October 2011, it was reported that Reynolds had begun dating his "Green Lantern" co-star Blake Lively. In June 2012, Reynolds and Lively purchased a home in Bedford, New York. The couple married on September 9, 2012, at Boone Hall Plantation in Mount Pleasant, South Carolina.
In the media.
In October 2008 Reynolds wrote for "The Huffington Post" regarding his plan to run the New York City Marathon for his father, who suffers from Parkinson's disease.
Reynolds appeared in "People"s Sexiest Man Alive lists in 2008 and 2009, and was awarded the top honor in 2010. In April 2011, he was ranked #15 on "People"'s Most Beautiful 2011 list.
On February 12, 2012, Reynolds appeared on the BBC's "Top Gear" as the Star In a Reasonably-Priced Car. He posted a time of 1.43:7.
Beliefs.
Although raised Catholic, Reynolds no longer practices. In an interview, he said, "Religion poisons everything good in this world".
