Ted (stylized as ted) is a 2012 American fantasy comedy film directed, co-produced, co-written by Seth MacFarlane, and starring MacFarlane alongside Mark Wahlberg and Mila Kunis in leading roles. The supporting cast includes Joel McHale and Giovanni Ribisi.
The film is the feature-length directorial debut of MacFarlane, produced by Media Rights Capital and distributed by Universal Pictures. It was released on June 29, 2012, to critical and commercial success, becoming the 12th highest-grossing film of the year, the highest-grossing R-rated film of the year, and the highest-grossing original R-rated comedy of all time. The film also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song. On "Jimmy Kimmel Live!", it was announced that there are plans for a sequel.
Plot.
The film opens in the south of Boston on Christmas Eve 1985 where a young boy named John Bennett is apparently finding it hard making friends after a group of bullies who pick on a Jewish kid refuse to let him play with them. On Christmas morning John gets a teddy bear from his parents (Ralph Garman & Alex Bostein) as a present, and names the toy "Teddy" (or "Ted" for short). That night he wishes Ted to be alive and a falling star passes by, granting John his wish. The next morning Ted comes to life with the mind of a human, such as walking on two legs and talking with a human voice, much to the terror and horror of John and his parents at first but soon become over-joyed. Ted as a result soon becomes a world-wide celebrity. 
A quarter of a century later John (Mark Wahlberg) and Ted (voiced and motion-captured by Seth MacFarlane) are still best friends and live together along with John's girlfriend Lori Collins (Mila Kunis) in an apartment in south Boston. Lori worries her partner can't move on with his life as he continues doing drugs and drinking with Ted. The girls at Lori's office suggest she'd leave him if he chooses Ted over her, which Lori can't bring herself to do. Lori much to her annoyance is pestered by her employer Rex (Joel McHale) who apparently has a crush on her and thinks she is better off with him over John. One night after a dinner date John and Lori return home to find Ted hanging with four hookers, with one of them doing a poo on the floor. John and Lori take this as the last straw and John helps him get a job interview at a local supermarket. Despite his rude attitude to the manager Ted gets a job anyway working at as a check-out worker. He falls in love with fellow new worker Tami-Lynn (Jessica Barth) and the two have oral sex during their shift. Instead of getting fired Ted is promoted, much to his annoyance. Ted also has John who works at a rental car company to skip work and hang with him, which John does, using Lori for his excuses. One night John and Lori go to Rex's house-warming party, where Ted tells John on the phone Sam Jones of Flash Gordon is in his apartment. John at first refuses as he fears to betray Lori (who thinks he is finished with Ted) but soon agrees to see his childhood hero. At Ted's place John and Ted befriend Sam Jones (himself) and the trio have the time of their life at Ted's house-warming party, such as doing shots, drugs and Ted doing karaoke. Sam punches through Ted's bedroom wall which angers Ted's next door Chinese neighbor Ming (Robert Wu) who Sam mistakes for Emperor Ming and attacks him. Eventually John discovers the time and attempts to leave, but Lori finds out he lied to her and tearfully dumps him. John blames it on Ted and orders him to stay away.
Eventually, Ted and John confront each other about their ruined friendship in John's hotel room and have a brawl after John provokes Ted, but soon manage to reconcile after the TV falls on John's crotch. To repair John's relationship with Lori, Ted arranges through Norah Jones (played by herself) for John to express his love for Lori with a song during a concert, being held at the Hatch Shell. Although John's performance proves an embarrassment, Lori is touched by the attempt while repelled by Rex's sneering. Later, Ted goes to visit Lori and explains that he was responsible for John's lapse: however, he offers to leave them alone forever if she goes to speak with him. Lori is persuaded, but moments after she leaves, Ted is kidnapped by Donny and Robert. He is taken to their house as Robert's unfortunate playmate.
Ted manages to distract Robert with a game of hide and seek and reaches a phone to contact John (but not before his ear is ripped off by Robert, though Ted staples it back on when out of Robert's sight), but is soon recaptured. Realizing that Ted is in danger, John and Lori find Donny's residence and chase him and Robert to rescue Ted. The chase leads to Fenway Park. Eventually Ted and Donny begin to climb up one of the stadium's towers. Ted gets himself damaged and just when Donny grabs him on the tower, Ted falls onto the field, torn completely in half. Donny is forced to flee when a police car shows up. As John and Lori gather his stuffing, Ted relays his wish that John be happy with Lori and that she is more important than him as his life fades away.
Unable to accept Ted's death, John and Lori return to her apartment to try to repair him, but it proves useless. That night, Lori makes a wish on a falling star. The next morning, Ted is magically restored (although he initially pretends to be mentally retarded) and the couple reconcile with Ted, who encourages John and Lori to resume their relationship. With that resolution, John and Lori get married (with Sam Jones as their priest) and Ted accepts having his own life.
Production.
Seth MacFarlane's directorial debut is a live-action effort, with computer animation handled by visual effects facilities Tippett Studio and Iloura. MacFarlane wrote the screenplay with his "Family Guy" colleagues Alec Sulkin and Wellesley Wild. MacFarlane announced the film in the February 10, 2011, episode of "Conan". Filming began in May 2011 in Boston, Norwood and Swampscott, all in Massachusetts.
The film's North American release was scheduled for July 13, 2012, but it was pushed to June 29, 2012, both to avoid competition with ' and following the delay of '. The film was released in Australia on July 5, 2012, and on August 1, 2012 in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
In a making of video, it was revealed that MacFarlane originally wanted to make "Ted" into an animated TV show, much like his previous works "Family Guy" and "American Dad".
Soundtrack.
The film's soundtrack was released by Universal Republic Records on June 26, 2012. It features the score by Walter Murphy and songs by various artists such as Norah Jones and Queen. Seth MacFarlane co-wrote the opening theme "Everybody Needs a Best Friend" with Murphy. The song was later nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Song at the 85th Academy Awards, and Norah Jones performed the song at 85th Academy Awards.
Track listing.
All tracks by Walter Murphy except where indicated.
Other songs not included in the soundtrack, but used in the film include select tracks from Queen's "Flash Gordon" soundtrack: "Football Fight", "Battle Theme" and "The Hero", as well as the "Knight Rider Theme" by Stu Phillips, "Stayin' Alive" by "Bee Gees" and "The Imperial March" by John Williams. The film trailers used the songs "Best Friend" by Harry Nilsson and "How You Like Me Now?" by The Heavy.
Marketing.
To promote the film, Universal Pictures teamed up with Axe in a marketing campaign that involved the titular character and the brand's hair care product Axe Hair. In one commercial, Ted takes a woman on a date to a fancy restaurant, where he brings her to orgasm under the table before handing another man a box of Axe Hair gel.
In January 2013 star Mark Wahlberg said the titular character would be making an appearance at the 85th Academy Awards, which Seth MacFarlane is set to host.
Release.
Critical reception.
"Ted" has received generally favorable reviews, with critics praising Seth MacFarlane's comic performance, as well as Mark Wahlberg's portrayal of John Bennett. The film currently has a 69% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 194 reviews, with an average score of 6.4/10, and the site's consensus saying: ""Ted" 'romance versus bromance' plot is familiar, but the film's held aloft by the high-concept central premise and a very funny (albeit inconsistent) script." At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the film received an average score of 62, based on 37 reviews, which indicates "generally favorable reviews". Roger Ebert gave the film three-and-a-half stars out of four, citing the film as "the best comedy screenplay so far year," also praising the film on the fact that it "doesn't run out of steam."
Nathan Rabin of "The A.V. Club" gave the film a "B" grade. Brent McNight of "Beyond Hollywood" commented on the jokes: "Some of these jokes hit, some jokes miss." On the other hand, A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" called "Ted" "boring, lazy and wildly unoriginal."
Box office.
"Ted" earned $539,815,487 of which $218,815,487 came from the United States and Canada and 321,000,000 from foreign territories, making it Universal's highest grossing film in 2012, ahead of "Snow White and the Huntsman" and "Battleship", the only one to pass the $400 million mark, eventually grossing $8 million, $3.8 million and $1.8 million in the three countries respectively. It also grossed $2.1 million in both Indonesia and Singapore, and $1.4 million in Thailand.
In January 2013, Ted opened at No. 1 in Japan, its final market, with $4.5 million, the best start ever for an R-rated comedy there. In comparison, it grossed more in its opening weekend than "The Hangover Part II" made in its entire run. The following weekend, it retained the No. 1 spot for the second consecutive frame, grossing $3.6 million at 137 dates, for a 10-day market cumulative total of $11.2 million. By its third weekend, the film stayed at the No. 1 spot for a third week, with earning down less than 10%, pushing "Ted"'s overseas total past the $300 Million mark, and making it the the top grossing R-rated comedy of all time in Japan. It then had its fourth consecutive weekend at No. 1, drawing another $3 million at 354 locations in the country. Its cumulative total stands at $31.2 million grossed so far.
Europe.
"Ted" debuted with $14.3 million in the United Kingdom, making it the third-best debut ever for a Universal film behind "" and "King Kong", eventually grossing over $48.9 million in the country. Ted was released in cinemas across the UK on August 3 
The film had a $7.4 million launch in Germany, holding #1 spot for three-straight weeks, eventually grossing over $31.4 million.
In Spain, it opened with $2.3 million, which is the highest ever for an original R-rated comedy there, eventually grossing over $14.3 million.
The film also had the best Hollywood comedy debut ever in Russia, grossing $5.5 million, eventually grossing $17 million.
"Ted" spent its first four weeks atop the weekend box office in both the Netherlands, and Austria, eventually grossing $8.4 million, and $6.2 million in those countries respectively. The movie also opened at No. 1 in Belgium, with 
$587,000, eventually grossing $4.4 million.
In Italy, "Ted" had a second place start, grossing $3.3 million in its opening weekend there, moving up to No. 1 on its second week, with $4.2 million grossed. It has since grossed $14.1 million there.
In France, "Ted" debuted at No. 2, grossing $3 million in 348 theatres during its opening weekend, eventually grossing $11.5 million in the country.
North America.
"Ted" earned $2.6 million in midnight showings in the United States and Canada. For its opening day, "Ted" scored one of the best R-rated comedy debuts ever since "The Hangover" with an estimated $20.2 million. The film earned a total of $54.4 million in its opening weekend, well over second-place R-rated "Magic Mike"s $39.2 million. Its overall weekend gross set a record for the highest original R-rated comedy opening in history. It was the first time two R-rated films grossed more than $21 million each during a weekend.
In Mexico, the film debuted in first place with $2.1 million, grossing $13.4 million.
Oceania.
It also debuted at #1 in Australia and New Zealand, grossing over $35.5 million and $3.5 million respectively. Its $13.1 million opening in Australia, of which $4.5 million were from previews, was Universal's biggest opening ever in the country.
South America.
In Brazil, it opened with $1.4 million at 273 sites, moving up to 1st place in the country on its third week of release. It has since grossed $8.8 million there.
"Ted" also grossed $4.6 million in Argentina, 2 million in Chile, 1.9 million in Peru, and 1.7 million in Colombia.
Home media.
"Ted" was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the United States on December 11, 2012 by Universal Studios Home Entertainment. Both formats were released in Australia on November 21, 2012, in an "Extended Edition". It was released on Blu-ray and DVD in the UK on November 26, 2012.
Accolades.
The song "Everybody Needs a Best Friend" was nominated for Best Original Song at the 85th Academy Awards. The film also won a People's Choice Award for Best Comedy Movie.
Sequel.
During the 2012 "American Dad!" Comic-Con panel, Seth MacFarlane stated that he would be open to a sequel to "Ted". In September 2012, chief executive Steve Burke said that the studio would be looking to make a sequel to "Ted" "as soon as possible".
On "Jimmy Kimmel Live!", MacFarlane explained that there are plans for a sequel.
On "Anderson Live", Mark Wahlberg has confirmed that a sequel is in the works and it will be the first in his career, while also revealing that he and Ted (as played by MacFarlane) will appear at the 85th Academy Awards.
It was announced on Facebook that the sequel will begin filming in March 2013.
