María de la Soledad Teresa O'Brien (born September 19, 1966) is an American broadcast journalist. She is the anchor of CNN's morning news program "Starting Point" which premiered on January 2, 2012, and airs weekdays from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. ET.
Along with "Early Start", "Starting Point" replaced "American Morning", which aired from 2001 to 2011. O'Brien co-anchored "American Morning" from July 2003 to April 2007, with Miles O'Brien (no relation).
Personal life.
O'Brien's parents, both immigrants, met at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland.
"The Church Across the Street" Guideposts, April 2004</ref>
O'Brien's parents married in 1958 in Washington, D.C. Her father Edward, an Australian (from Toowoomba, Queensland) of Irish descent, was a mechanical engineering professor. Her mother, Estella, who is Afro-Cuban, was a French and English teacher. O'Brien is the fifth of six children, who all graduated from Harvard College; O'Brien attended Harvard from 1984 to 1988, but did not obtain a degree until she returned in 2000. Her siblings are law professor Maria (born 1961); corporate lawyer Cecilia (born 1962), businessman Tony (born 1963) – who heads a documents company; eye surgeon Estela (born 1964); and anesthesiologist Orestes (born 1967).
At the time, interracial marriage in Maryland was illegal, so O'Brien's parents married in Washington, D.C. where marriage laws were less restrictive. The newly wedded O'Briens then moved to the Long Island community of St. James, where Soledad O'Brien was born and raised. She graduated from Smithtown High School East in 1984. On the NPR quiz show "Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!", O'Brien explained that in Spanish her full name means, "The Blessed Virgin Mary of Solitude". When she started working in TV, many people recommended that she change her name, but she refused.
O'Brien states that she does not speak Spanish fluently and that has sometimes resulted in some awkward exchanges with people who assume she does, including former US Vice President Al Gore.
Since 1995, O'Brien has been married to Bradley Raymond, co-head of investment banking at Thomas Weisel Partners. Together they have two daughters, Sofia (October 2000) and Cecilia (March 2002); and twin sons Charles and Jackson (August 2004).
Television career.
Soledad O'Brien began her career as an associate producer and news writer at WBZ-TV, then the NBC affiliate in Boston. She joined NBC News in 1991, and was based in New York as a field producer for the "Nightly News" and "Today". O'Brien then worked for three years as a local reporter and bureau chief for San Francisco NBC affiliate KRON. At KRON she was a reporter on "The Know Zone." The program later moved to CNET without O'Brien.
O'Brien was featured on a regular segment of the Discovery Channel program "The Next Step", holding the position of "Sun Microsystems Infogal."
NBC News.
Starting in 1996 and during the dot-com boom, O'Brien anchored MSNBC's weekend morning show and the cable network's award-winning technology program "The Site", which aired weeknights from the Spring of 1996 to November 1997. The show was unique in that she interacted with a virtual character Dev Null, played by Leo Laporte in a motion capture suit.
O'Brien co-anchored "Weekend Today" with David Bloom beginning July 1999. During that time, she contributed reports for the weekday "Today Show" and for weekend editions of "NBC Nightly News", and covered such notable stories as John F. Kennedy Jr.'s plane crash and the 1990s school shootings in Colorado and Oregon.
CNN.
"American Morning".
O'Brien moved to CNN where she joined Miles O'Brien to co-anchor CNN's flagship morning program "American Morning" from New York City in July 2003. In 2005, she covered the Hurricane Katrina aftermath in New Orleans, where she interviewed then head of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Michael Brown. On April 16, 2007, reportedly due to lagging ratings, O'Brien was replaced by former Fox News anchor Kiran Chetry (O'Brien's co-host at the time, Miles O'Brien, was replaced as well; former co-host Bill Hemmer had previously moved to Fox News).
Post-"American Morning".
O'Brien has recently completed a documentary entitled "Latino In America" documenting the lives of Latinos living in America. She continues to work as a reporter for CNN, mainly hosting "In America" documentaries and occasionally filling in for Anderson Cooper on "Anderson Cooper 360". She also anchored exit poll coverage during CNN's coverage of the primaries and caucuses in the 2008 United States presidential race. She also has filled in for Paula Zahn on "Paula Zahn Now" whenever Zahn was unable to make the broadcast (Zahn has since stopped working for CNN as of August 2, 2007).
O'Brien anchored a CNN special, "Black in America", in July 2007. The program documented the successes, struggles and complex issues faced by black men, women and families forty years after the death of Martin Luther King Jr. In the first installment, O'Brien investigated how James Earl Ray, an armed robber and escaped convict, had already spent a year on the run just a month before his path collided with Dr. King in Memphis, Tennessee. In "The Black Woman & Family," O'Brien explored the varied experiences of black women and families and investigated the disturbing statistics of single parenthood, racial disparities between students and the devastating toll of HIV/AIDS. The fifth installment of the Black in America series aired in December, 2012.
On September 8, 2008, FactCheck.org said that O'Brien had inaccurately asserted during an interview with a McCain campaign spokesperson that vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin, as Governor of Alaska, had slashed the special education budget by 62%, when she had increased it.
She has been accused numerous times of liberal bias by conservative guests, including John Sununu. 
"Starting Point".
In 2011, CNN canceled "American Morning" and replaced it with two new programs, "Early Start" and "Starting Point". O'Brien began anchoring "Starting Point" on January 2, 2012.
It was announced February 21, 2013, that O'Brien is leaving morning show and starting the Starfish Media Group production company.
Honors and recognition.
In April 2008 O'Brien became the first recipient of the Soledad O’Brien Freedom’s Voice Award, an award created in her name by Morehouse School of Medicine, "to recognize outstanding catalysts for social change."
O'Brien has won an Emmy award for co-hosting the Discovery Channel’s "The Know Zone". In 2007 she was honored with the NAACP President's Award.
O'Brien won the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health's "Goodermote Humanitarian Award" in 2008 for her reporting of Hurricane Katrina and the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami "Ms. O’Brien has shown the world tragedies of human conflict, natural disasters, chronic and infectious diseases," said Michael J. Klag, MD, MPH, dean of the Bloomberg School of Public Health. 
She is a member of the National Association of Black Journalists, which named her the Journalist of the Year 2010 and the National Association of Hispanic Journalists. O'Brien is also is a member of the Board of Directors of The After-School Corporation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to expanding educational opportunities for all students. She also serves on the board of directors of The Harlem School of the Arts. O'Brien was inducted as an honorary member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Incorporated in February 2012.
O'Brien has given several keynote speeches over the years, including the undergraduate commencement at Bryant University in May 2007, where she was presented with a Doctor of Humane Letters honorary degree, the convocation speech at Cornell University's Commencement in May 2007, a speech at Binghamton University commencement in December 2007, and the keynote speech at the 2008 annual National Association of Student Personnel Administrators (NASPA) Conference in Boston, MA in March 2008.
In 2006 she was featured in the "Newsweek" cover story "15 People Who Make America Great". She has been named in "People's" 50 Most Beautiful in 2001 and in "People en Español's" 50 Most Beautiful in 2004. She was named to "Irish American Magazine'"s "Top 100 Irish Americans" on two occasions. She is also on "Black Enterprise" magazine's 2005 Hot List. Also in 2005, she was awarded "Groundbreaking Latina of the Year" award by Catalina magazine.
Career timeline.
November 2010 "The Next Big Story: My Journey Through the Land of Possibilities" written by Soledad O'Brien and Rose Marie Arce published.
