Sex positions are positions which people may adopt during or for the purpose of sexual intercourse or other sexual activities. Sexual acts are generally described by the positions the participants adopt in order to perform those acts. Though sexual intercourse generally involves the sexual penetration of the body of one person by another, or simply direct stimulation of the sex organ of one by another, a sex position may not necessarily involve penetration or direct stimulation, and may be non-penetrative instead.
Three categories of intercourse are commonly practiced: vaginal intercourse, involving vaginal penetration by the penis; oral intercourse, involving oral caress of the penis or vagina with a partner's mouth; and anal intercourse, involving insertion of the penis into a partner's anus. Sex acts may also involve other forms of genital stimulation, such as solo/mutual masturbation, which may involve rubbing or penetration by the use of fingers or hands or by a device (sex toy) such as a dildo or vibrator. There are numerous sex positions which the participants may adopt in any of these types of sexual intercourse or acts, creating an almost limitless number of sex positions. In addition to others, this list uses Alfred Kinsey's six primary positional categories.
History.
The earliest known European medieval text dedicated to sexual positions is the "Speculum al foderi", sometimes known as "The Mirror of Coitus" or literally "a mirror for fuckers", a 15th century Catalan text discovered in the 1970s.
Exclusively penetrative positions.
These positions involve the insertion of a penis or other phallus (such as a strap-on dildo) into a vagina or anus.
Penetrating partner on top with front entry.
The most used sex position is the missionary position. In this position, the participants face each other. The receiving partner lies on his/her back with legs apart, while the penetrating partner lies on top. This position and the following variations are primarily used for vaginal intercourse, although they can also be used for anal sex.
Penetrating from behind.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.
Receiving partner on top.
These positions are sometimes called the "woman on top", "cowboy" or "cowgirl" positions. Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.
Sitting and kneeling.
Most of these positions can be used for either vaginal or anal penetration.
Less common positions.
These positions are more innovative, and perhaps not as widely known or practiced as the ones listed above.
The penetrator straddles one of the legs of the receiver, who is lying on their side.
The receiver lies face down legs spread on the edge of the bed and parallel to the floor, while the penetrator stands behind, holding both legs.
Using furniture or special apparatus.
Most sex acts are typically performed on a bed or other simple platform. As the range of supports available increases, so does the range of positions that are possible. Ordinary furniture can be used for this purpose. Also, various forms of erotic furniture and other apparatus such as fisting slings and trapezes have been used to facilitate even more exotic sexual positions.
Positions to promote or prevent conception.
Pregnancy is a potential result of any form of sex where sperm comes in contact with the vaginal area (typically vaginal sex, but pregnancy can result from anal sex, digital sex with sperm fluids on the fingers, or even sperm that is on the body and is transferred to the vaginal area) between a fertile female and a fertile male. (Men and women are typically fertile by the time they reach puberty.) Oral sex itself can never result in pregnancy. However, if not careful, it can result in pregnancy if sperm on the hands or body comes in contact with the vaginal area. Though certain sexual positions are believed by some to produce more favorable results than others, none of these are effective means of contraception.
Positions during pregnancy.
The goal is to prevent excessive pressure on the belly and to restrict penetration as required by the particular partners.
Some of the positions below are popular positions for sex during pregnancy.
Non-exclusively penetrative positions.
Oral sex positions.
Oral sex is the term given to genital stimulation by the mouth. It may be penetrative or non-penetrative, and may take place before, during, as, or following intercourse. It may also be performed simultaneously (for example, when one partner performs cunnilingus, while the other partner performs fellatio), or only one partner may perform upon the other; this creates a multitude of variations.
Sixty-nine.
Simultaneous oral sex between two people is called "69". It is called the "congress of the crow" in the "Kama Sutra". Partners may be female or male. They can be lying side-by-side, lying one on top of the other, or standing with one partner holding the other upside down.
Non-penetrative positions.
"Non-penetrative sex" or "frottage"—the general term for rubbing one's genitals on one's partner. This may include the partner's genitals or buttocks. As part of foreplay or to avoid penetrative sex, people engage in a variety of other non-penetrative sexual behavior, which may or may not lead to orgasm.
The slang term "humping" may refer to masturbation—thrusting one's genitals against the surface of non-sexual objects, clothed or unclothed; or it may refer to penetrative sex.
Genital-genital rubbing.
"Genital-genital rubbing", sometimes referred to as "GG rubbing", is generally understood as sexual intercourse in a narrower sense, and often among same-sex partners. Sex by mutual genital rubbing is sometimes grouped with 'frottage'. Other terms like 'non-penetrative sex' or 'outercourse' are also used.
Group sex.
Various people of gender and orientation may participate in group sex. While group sex does not imply that all participants must be in sexual contact with all others simultaneously, some positions are only possible with three or more people.
As with the positions listed above, more group sex positions become practical if erotic furniture is used.
Multiple penetration.
A person may sexually penetrated multiple times simultaneously. Penetration may involve use of fingers, toes, sex toys, or penises. Scenes of multiple penetration are common in pornography.
Effects of physical disabilities and limitations.
Different sex positions result in differences in the depth of sexual penetration and the angle of penetration. Many attempts have been made to categorize sex positions. Alfred Kinsey categorized six primary positions, but the number of positions that can be used for sex is essentially limitless. Sex manuals usually present a guide to sex positions.
Some people are limited by physical disabilities in the sex positions which they may use without pain or other discomfort. Other physical limitations of one or both participants also limit the sex positions which they may adopt. For example, the spoons position is recommended when either partner has back problems; the "Starfish position" is recommended to achieve orgasms more easily and the missionary position may be uncomfortable for the receiving partner if the weight of the inserting partner, relative to the receiving partner's, is a problem. Also, the standing positions may be unsuitable if there is a significant height difference between the participants.
