Chris Hemsworth (born 11 August 1983) is an Australian actor. Best known for his role as Thor in the Marvel Studios films "Thor" (2011) and "The Avengers" (2012); and as Kim Hyde in the Australian TV series "Home and Away" (2004). He's also appeared in "Star Trek" (2009), "A Perfect Getaway" (2009), "The Cabin in the Woods" (2012), "Snow White and the Huntsman" (2012), and "Red Dawn" (2012). In 2013, he will appear in the film adaptation of "", based on the book by Nathaniel Philbrick.
In 2013, he won People's Choice Award Favorite Action Movie Star for his roles in "The Avengers" & "Snow White and the Huntsman".
Early life.
Hemsworth was born in Melbourne, the son of Leonie, a teacher of English, and Craig Hemsworth, a social-services counselor. He was raised both there and in the Northern Territory, in a little Aboriginal community in the Outback, called Bulman. He has stated, "My earliest memories were on the cattle stations up in the Outback, and then we moved back to Melbourne and then back out there and then back again. Certainly most of my childhood was in Melbourne but probably my most vivid memories were up there in Bulman with crocodiles and buffalo. Very different walks of life." He attended high school at Heathmont College before his family again returned to the Northern Territory, and then moved a few years later to Phillip Island. He is the middle of three boys; his brothers Luke (older) and Liam (younger) are also actors.
Career.
In 2004, Hemsworth auditioned for the Australian soap opera "Home and Away" role of Robbie Hunter (played by Jason Smith), but did not receive the part. He was subsequently recalled for the part of Kim Hyde and moved to Sydney to join the cast, appearing in 171 episodes of the series. He left the cast of "Home and Away" on 3 July 2007.
In 2009, Hemsworth portrayed James T. Kirk's father, George Kirk, in the opening scenes of J. J. Abrams' film "Star Trek". He played the character Kale in the thriller "A Perfect Getaway" the same year. He went on to play Sam in "Ca$h", which was the first film he shot when he arrived in the United States. The film's director, Stephen Milburn Anderson, said Hemsworth had only been in the United States for six weeks when he had auditioned for the role, recalling, "Here's a guy who is young, has the right look, is a very good actor and, let's face it, he's beautiful. So I say, we need to get this guy in. I was very impressed". In November 2010, "The Hollywood Reporter" named Hemsworth as one of the young male actors who are "pushing – or being pushed" onto the Hollywood "A-List".
He is best known for his role as the Marvel Comics superhero Thor in the 2011 Marvel Studios film "Thor". He and cast-mate Tom Hiddleston, who ultimately played the antagonist Loki, had each auditioned for the role, for which Hemsworth said he put on 20 pounds of muscle. Hemsworth reprised the role in the 2012 film "The Avengers" as one of the six superheroes sent to defend Earth from his adopted brother, Loki.
He starred in the horror film "The Cabin in the Woods", which though shot shortly after the release of "Star Trek" (2009) went unreleased until 2012. It led Hemsworth to audition for the role of Thor at Joss Whedon's insistence. Also that year, Hemsworth starred opposite Kristen Stewart in the film "Snow White & the Huntsman" as the Huntsman. He also played Jed Eckert in the 2012 "Red Dawn" remake, a role he was cast in after MGM saw dailies footage of a scene from "Cabin in the Woods". Hemsworth received the part of Thor two days after being hired for "Red Dawn".
In 2013, Hemsworth will reprise his role as Thor in the sequel "", set to start filming in August 2012. He is also set to star in Ron Howard's action film "Rush" as Formula 1 driver James Hunt. Additionally, Hemsworth is scheduled to star in the 2014 thriller "Shadow Runner".
Personal life.
Hemsworth began dating Spanish actress Elsa Pataky in early 2010 after meeting through their mutual representatives. They married in December 2010, and have a child together, daughter India Rose (b. 2012).
