"One Way or Another" is a song by American New Wave band Blondie.
Song information.
Written by Debbie Harry and Nigel Harrison for the band's third studio album, "Parallel Lines" (1978), the song was inspired by one of Harry's ex-boyfriends who stalked her after their break up. The song was released as the fourth single in the US as the follow-up to "Heart of Glass". "One Way or Another" reached number twenty-four in the Billboard "Hot 100". Although never officially released as a single in the United Kingdom, the song charted there in February 2013. "Rolling Stone" ranked the song #298 on its list of The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time.
The song was included on the US and Canadian versions of the band's first hits compilation, "The Best of Blondie" (1981), but not on international releases.
Blondie released a manipulated live version of the song (with the audience noise removed) as the theme for the 1999 US television series "Snoops". This version was released in the US as a bonus track on the US "Live" version of their album "Livid (Live)". The original un-edited live version was included on the European / non-US "Livid" version.
Film appearances.
The song is featured in the films "Little Darlings" (1980), "Carpool" (1996), "Beverly Hills Ninja" (1997), "Donnie Brasco" (1997), "Coyote Ugly" (2000), "Mean Girls" (2004), "Three and Out" (2008), "The Spy Next Door" (2010), "Monte Carlo" (2011), "Puss in Boots" (2011) and "So Undercover" (2012), as well as the television series "Veronica Mars". It plays over the end credits of the film "Seed of Chucky" (2004). It is also heard in the opening moments of "The A-Team" episode, "Incident at Crystal Lake", and the Mexican flash animated comedy film "El Agente 00-P2" during a car chase.
Cover versions.
Alvin and the Chipmunks covered this song in 1983 for the episode "The Incredible Shrinking Dave" from their TV series. Skate punk band Face To Face also covered it as a B-side on their 7" "No Authority" in 1991. The song was covered in 1998 by the actress Melissa Joan Hart for an episode of her TV series, "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch". It was released later that year on the show's soundtrack album. The UK singer Sophie Ellis-Bextor recorded a cover version for the soundtrack of the 2002 film "The Guru". Singer Mandy Moore recorded a cover for the 2006 film "Aquamarine". Naya Rivera and Cory Monteith covered the song as a mashup with "Hit Me With Your Best Shot" for the "Glee" episode, Mash Off. English-Irish boy band One Direction covered "One Way or Another" as a mashup with "Teenage Kicks", called "One Way or Another (Teenage Kicks)" as the 2013 "Comic Relief" single.
Their version reached number one in the UK, and caused Blondie's original version to enter the UK Singles Chart Top 100 on download sales.
In popular culture.
The song is a playable track on "Rock Band 2", "Guitar Hero World Tour" and '. The song is also featured in '.
This song is also featured in several 2004 Swiffer commercials.
This song appears on The Simpsons episode Bart-Mangled Banner.
Actress Kristen Bell did a karaoke version of this song in one episode of the TV series Veronica Mars.
Actress Jorja Fox sang the song during one episode of the first season of the TV series .
In "The Rugrats Movie" (1998), Angelica sings her own version of the song with different lyrics (written by Eryk Casemiro), the soundtrack album includes a longer version of the song heard in the movie.
Rapper G-Dep interpolates this song on his song called "One Way" on his album, Child of the Ghetto.
The song was featured in the third season of "Glee" in an episode entitled "Mash Off" where the character Santana Lopez sang the song as part of a mash up of "One Way Or Another"/"Hit Me With Your Best Shot".
The song was also featured in the second season of "The Glee Project", in the sixth episode entitled "Fearlessness". The contestants had to sing the song as part of a mash up of "One Way Or Another"/"Hit Me With Your Best Shot".
Debbie Harry performed the song as the opening act of her episode of The Muppet Show in 1981.
The song is the title track for Channel 4's 2005-2006 drama "Sugar Rush".
