Kelly Brianne Clarkson (born April 24, 1982) is an American pop rock singer, songwriter, and occasional actress. She rose to fame as the winner of the first season of "American Idol" in 2002, and was the runner-up of "World Idol" the following year. Clarkson has since become an international platinum recording artist with over 21 million album sales and 36 million singles worldwide, according to "Billboard" and Nielsen SoundScan. In a career spanning over a decade, Clarkson has accumulated eighty number ones on the "Billboard" charts, and eleven number one singles worldwide.
Clarkson signed onto RCA Records by talent manager Simon Fuller and music executive Clive Davis after "Idol", and released a double A-side single "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This". The single topped the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, breaking the record for the biggest jump to #1 in the chart's history and became the best-selling single of the year in the United States. Released in 2003, Clarkson's debut album "Thankful" went on to be certified 2x platinum and sold over 4.5 million copies worldwide. Its lead single, "Miss Independent" became an international hit, earning Clarkson her first Grammy nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance. Clarkson developed a rock-oriented sound with the release of her second album, "Breakaway", in 2004 under the management of Jeff Kwatinetz. The album was certified 6x platinum and sold over 14 million copies worldwide, earning Clarkson two Grammy Awards for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for the hit single "Since U Been Gone". Clarkson took full creative direction with the release of her third album "My December" in 2007. Despite the lack of mainstream promotion by the label, "My December" debuted at number two on the U.S. "Billboard" 200, and was voted the fifth best album by the readers of "Billboard". Its lead single, "Never Again" became a top ten hit and has since sold over one million digital downloads. In 2009, Clarkson released her fourth studio album, "All I Ever Wanted", which became a critical and commercial success. Its worldwide hit single, "My Life Would Suck Without You", surpassed "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This" for the biggest leap to number one on a single week in the history of the "Billboard" Hot 100 Chart from number 97, a record it still holds today. 
Clarkson released her fifth album, "Stronger," in 2011, which generated international chart-topping singles, including "Mr. Know It All," and "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)", which is the best selling American Idol single to date with four million downloads in the U.S. The album won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 55th Grammy Awards, making Clarkson the first and only artist to win the award twice. In 2012, Clarkson released "", which debuted at number eleven on the "Billboard" 200. The lead single, "Catch My Breath" is Clarkson's twenty-fourth entry on the "Billboard" Hot 100. Clarkson also released a Country duet with Vince Gill titled "Don't Rush" as the second single after performing it live on the 2012 CMA Awards. , Clarkson and Jason Aldean's 2010 Don't You Wanna Stay has sold over two million digital downloads, making it the best-selling country collaboration in history.
Renowned as "The Original American Idol", Clarkson is widely known for her vocal versatility, range, and heroine image. Her music has mainly dealt with themes of heartbreak, independence, and self-empowerment for women and young teens. Apart from her work in music, Clarkson has also ventured into television and film. Clarkson's film debut in the romantic musical "From Justin to Kelly" (2003) earned her two nominations by the Teen Choice Awards for Choice Movie Breakout Stars and Choice Chemistry with Justin Guarini. Clarkson appeared in "American Dreams" as Brenda Lee, in "Reba", on "The Voice" as a guest advisor, on "Duets" as a mentor and judge, etc. Clarkson's musical work has also gained her numerous accolades, including three Grammy Awards, three MTV Video Music Awards, twelve Billboard Music Awards, four American Music Awards and a Women's World Award. In 2012, Clarkson was ranked nineteenth on VH1's list of "100 Greatest Women in Music." In 2013, Forbes ranked Clarkson No. 1 on "Top-Earning American Idol Contestants" from May 2011 to May 2012. "Billboard" also ranked Clarkson as the 14th-best-selling artist of the 2000s, as well as the top 200 album sellers of the Nielsen SoundScan era at number 187.
Life and career.
Early life and career beginnings.
Clarkson was born in Fort Worth, Texas to Jeanne Ann Rose, a first-grade English teacher, and Stephen Michael Clarkson, a former engineer. Descending from Hellenic and Welsh roots and raised as a Baptist, Clarkson has an older brother, Jason, who appeared in one of her music videos, and an older sister, Alyssa. Clarkson's parents divorced when she was seven years old, forcing her brother to live with their father; she stayed with their mother and her sister went to live with an aunt. Clarkson's mother later married her second husband Jimmy Taylor. 
According to both Clarkson, her family struggled financially, and after her parents divorced, music became her refuge. She initially wanted to become a marine biologist but changed her mind after viewing the film "Jaws". Clarkson was educated at Pauline Hughes Middle School and in the seventh grade, the school's choir teacher, Cynthia Glenn, overheard her singing in a hallway and asked her to audition for the school choir, in which Clarkson told her that she had never received any professional vocal training. Clarkson later graduated from Burleson High School, at which she performed in several musicals such as "Annie Get Your Gun", "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" and "Brigadoon". She sang at her high school talent show, after which an audience member shared some inspiring words with her: "God has given you this gift. You've got to sing. You're destined to sing." Clarkson continued singing and soon started classical training, hoping that music would be her ticket to a college scholarship. Upon graduating from high school, Clarkson was offered full scholarships to The University of Texas at Austin, University of North Texas and Berklee College of Music, but later decided decline to pursue a career in music, explaining: "I've already written so much music and wanted to try it on her own", later figuring "you're never too old to go to college."
Upon graduation, Clarkson worked several jobs to finance a demo, recording material and tried market it to record labels, but received little response. Clarkson turned down two recording contracts from Jive Records and Interscope Records, stating "They would have completely pigeonholed me as a bubblegum act. I was confident enough that something better would come along." In 2001, she traveled to Los Angeles, trying to pursue a career in music. She appeared as an extra in a few television series such as "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch" and "Dharma & Greg" and briefly worked with musician Gerry Goffin to record five demo tracks in trying to secure a record deal. Lack of other career opportunities and a fire incident in her apartment forced Clarkson to return to Burleson, where she worked at a movie theater, promoted Red Bull energy drinks, and worked as a telemarketer and ultimately as a cocktail waitress in a comedy club.
2002–03: "American Idol" and "World Idol".
Upon returning to Burleson, Clarkson was encouraged by her friends to audition for the inaugural season of the reality television series "American Idol: The Search for a Superstar" in May 2002. Despite receiving a golden ticket in the series premiere, Clarkson made her first appearance during the second episode. Clarkson went on to win the competition on September 4, 2002 at the then Kodak Theatre (now Dolby), earning 58% of the votes against runner-up Justin Guarini and without being sent into the bottom three throughout the season. In an interview in 2012, Clarkson referred the inaugural season as "ghetto", explaining: "On our season we were like kids in camp. Nobody knew what to do. The show was ever-changing every day. They did one season of "Pop Idol" in the UK but America is a very different market. They dropped us off in a mall and said find some clothes to wear on national television. I am maybe the closest to white trash you can get. What do I buy? White pants I guess? I definitely looked like a cocktail waitress."
Immediately after winning "American Idol", Clarkson was signed to a record deal with RCA Records, 19 Recordings, and S Records by talent manager Simon Fuller, who created "American Idol"; and music mogul Clive Davis, who was slated to executive-produce her debut album. Clarkson was later accused of working with a record company prior to winning "American Idol". "American Idol"'s rules stated that a contestant was not allowed to compete on the program if they had been linked to a record company. However, she was cleared of all allegations, as she only had a contract in order to conduct demonstration work. On September 17, 2002, her debut double-A-side single, "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This", was released. Both songs were performed by Clarkson during the season finale of "American Idol". The single debuted at the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart on the week ending September 21, 2002 at number 60. The following week, it climbed to number 52, and subsequently ascended to number 1, breaking a 38-year-old record set by the British band The Beatles for the biggest leap to number one after their single "Can't Buy Me Love" rose from number 27 to number 1 in April 1964. It became her first number one single in the United States and Canada and eventually went on to become the best-selling single of 2002 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
On December 25, 2003, Clarkson participated in the television special competition "World Idol" in London along with the inaugural winners of the several "Idol" television series around the world. Clarkson was contractually obligated to participate, and performed Aretha Franklin's "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman". On January 1, 2004, she became the runner-up behind the first "Norwegian Idol" Kurt Nilsen.
2003–04: "Thankful".
Executive produced by Davis, Clarkson's debut album "Thankful" was released on April 15, 2003. The album contained aspects of pop, contemporary R&B, and gospel music, with several established musicians such as Christina Aguilera, Diane Warren, The Underdogs, and Babyface contributing on to the tracks. Released during the urban-R&B dominance, the album was well received by several critics. However, several critics noted that her early achievement was established due to her performances on "American Idol". "Allmusic" critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine praised the album for its vocal ability: "throughout this record, (Clarkson) makes it seem effortless and charming. She can croon, she can belt out a song, she can be sexy and sassy while still being graceful and as wholesome as the girl next door." Henry Goldblatt of "Entertainment Weekly" remarked: "Clarkson glides through octaves with the masterful control of someone who's been doing this for decades." Clarkson supported "Thankful" by performing in different locations around the world, such as 2003 NRL grand final, the first season of "Australian Idol", and the second series of "Pop Idol". She and "American Idol" season 2 runner-up Clay Aiken co-headlined the Independent Tour throughout the United States in 2004. "Thankful" debuted at number 1 on the "Billboard" 200 chart and went on to become a commercial success. It was later certified double platinum by the RIAA, platinum in Canada, and gold in Japan and Australia. 
Its lead single, "Miss Independent", became her first international hit—charting in the top ten in five national charts, including the United States, and was later certified gold by the RIAA. It earned Clarkson her first Grammy Award nomination for "Best Female Pop Vocal Performance" at the 46th Grammy Awards. Its follow-up single, "Low", was released to moderate success. And its final single, "The Trouble with Love Is", was released as a promotional single for the British romantic film "Love Actually" and failed to chart in the United States. Her first video album, "Miss Independent", was released on November 18, 2003 and was certified gold by the RIAA.
Clarkson made her film debut with Guarini with the release of the musical romantic comedy film "From Justin to Kelly" in June 2003. The film was poorly received by critics and was unsuccessful at the box office, with Clarkson explaining that she was "contractually obligated" to do the film. Between 2002, Clarkson, along with "American Idol" judges Paula Abdul and Randy Jackson and hosts Brian Dunkleman and Ryan Seacrest, participated in the season premiere of the eighth season of the television comedy series "MADtv". She also portrayed Brenda Lee in two episodes of the television drama "American Dreams" between 2003 and 2004.
2004–06: "Breakaway".
Trying to distance herself from her "American Idol" image, Clarkson decided to part ways with Fuller and 19 Management and hired the services of talent manager Jeff Kwatinetz of The Firm. She took more creative control and developed a more pop rock-oriented sound with the production of her second studio album, "Breakaway". Executive-produced by Davis, "Breakaway" was released on November 30, 2004. Clarkson co-wrote six of the tracks with pop and rock songwriters such as former Evanescence band members Ben Moody and David Hodges, Kara DioGuardi, Dr. Luke and Max Martin. The title track was co-written by pop rock singer Avril Lavigne. The album received critical acclaim, with Erlewine of "AllMusic" remarking: "What gives "Breakaway" its spine are the driving, anthemic pop tunes, numbers that sound simultaneously mainstream and youthful, which is a hard trick to pull off, and they are the tracks that illustrate that Clarkson is a rare thing in the 2000s: a pop singer who's neither hip nor square, just solidly and enjoyably in the mainstream." "Breakaway" became a commercial success and eventually became her most successful album to date. After debuting at number 3 on the "Billboard 200" in 2004, the album's chart longevity allowed it to become the third-best-selling album of 2005 in the United States and was certified sextuple platinum by the RIAA. The album also enjoyed success throughout the world; it topped the charts in the Netherlands and Ireland and became the world's seventh-best-selling album of 2005 and went on to sell over 12 million copies worldwide — becoming the most successful album by an "Idol" contestant in history. Clarkson supported "Breakaway" with the Breakaway World Tour — consisting of three sub-tours from 2005 to 2006. It also garnered Clarkson several accolades, including a Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album at the 48th Grammy Awards. 
All of the singles from "Breakaway" became international hits: its titular lead single, "Breakaway", originally served as an original song for the Disney film "" in 2004. The single became a commercial success — peaking at number 6 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and eventually became her longest-running No. 1 song, where it was No. 1 for 28 weeks on the "Billboard" Adult Contemporary Audience chart. The follow-up single, "Since U Been Gone", became the album's most successful release — peaking at number 2 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and eventually becoming her most successful single on the "Billboard" Hot 100 to date. It garnered Clarkson numerous accolades, including two MTV Video Music Awards and a Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance at the 48th Grammy Awards. Furthermore, the single was critically acclaimed not only by the pop music scene but as well as by the rock music scene—such as Ted Leo, Fall Out Boy, Simple Plan, Yellowcard, Switchfoot, and Evanescence. The third and fourth singles, "Behind These Hazel Eyes" and "Because of You", also followed suit—peaking at number 6 and 7 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, respectively. "Because of You" also received critical acclaim and more success worldwide, by topping the charts in the Netherlands, Denmark, and Switzerland. Clarkson performed all the singles in various award shows — she performed "Since U Been Gone" at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards and at the 2006 BRIT Awards; and "Because of You" at the 48th Grammy Awards. The final single, "Walk Away", also enjoyed chart success, peaking at number 12 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. Despite releasing "Walk Away" as her only single in 2006, Clarkson still became the most-played artist of 2006 in the United States.
Clarkson's second video album, "Behind Hazel Eyes", was released on March 29, 2005. In 2005, she performed and participated in the thirtieth season of the American comedy series "Saturday Night Live", and the reality series "Damage Control (TV series)" with Simple Plan frontman Pierre Bouvier. She performed "The Star-Spangled Banner" at Game 2 of the NBA Finals. She also performed during the festivities All-Star Game and the 2006 Winter Olympics in Torino, Italy; In 2006, Clarkson recorded a song entitled "Go" as a free download for the Ford Motor Company advertising campaign. She has also performed "What Hurts the Most" with Rascal Flatts at the ACM Awards and "Cigarettes" with the country duo The Wreckers during one of their shows in Texas in 2006.
2007–08: "My December".
On June 22, 2007, Clarkson's third studio album, "My December", was released. Unlike "Breakaway", the album relied on darker themes and was more rock-oriented. All of the album's tracks were co-written by Clarkson and she opted to collaborate with her band members rather than her previous producers and collaborators. Its production and release became a subject of a dispute with RCA, particularly with Davis (who ultimately decided not to executive produce the album) and Kwatinetz. Davis noted the album's lack of professional production input and wanted to her to re-record tracks with a more mainstream appeal—to which she refused. The album received substantial positive reception and debuted at number 2 on the "Billboard 200", but lack of promotion due to reluctance of RCA led Clarkson to dismiss Kwatinetz and Live Nation to cancel its accompanying tour, the My December Tour, and reschedule it into a smaller scale with supporting acts Jon McLaughlin, Sean Kingston and Mandy Moore. Clarkson later hired the services of talent manager Narvel Blackstock of Starstruck Management. Blackstock is the husband of country artist Reba McEntire, of whom Clarkson is a close friend. A month after the album's release, Clarkson issued an apology to Davis; she remarked: "He has been a key advisor and has been an important force in my success to date. He has also given me respect by releasing my new album when he was not obligated to do so. I really regret how this has turned out and I apologize to those whom I have done disservice." "My December" was certified platinum by the RIAA and had sold over 2.5 million copies worldwide.
Its lead single, "Never Again", became a commercial success due to its promotion in "American Idol". It debuted and peaked at number 8 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, becoming her highest debut on the chart. The subsequent singles, "Sober", "One Minute", and "Don't Waste Your Time", failed to follow suit by charting in a single chart. In 2007, Clarkson, along with Jeff Beck, performed a cover of Patty Griffin's "Up to the Mountain" on the "American Idol" "Idol Gives Back" charity special — which was released as a promotional single and charted at number 56 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. She later performed "Never Again" and "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band" (with Joe Perry) at the sixth season finale of "American Idol". On 7 July 2007, Clarkson performed on the American leg of Live Earth concert. Clarkson also performed on the fifth season of "Canadian Idol" (where she became a guest mentor), the fourth season finale of "Swedish Idol", 2007 NFL opening kickoff festivities, and at the halftime show for the Dallas Cowboys and New York Jets game on Thanksgiving Day. 
Clarkson partnered with NASCAR during their 2007 season, appearing in televised advertisements, performed at pre-race concerts, promoted NASCAR Day, and appeared at the Champions' Banquet in December. In April 2008, Clarkson participated in a Papal Youth Rally at the campus of St. Joseph's Seminary, Dunwoodie in Yonkers, New York, performing a mini-concert for those in attendance. That was the Papal visit of Pope Benedict XVI. She performed Schubert's "Ave Maria" for the Pope later in the day following the Pope's speech.
Throughout 2008, Clarkson began her musical endeavors country music by pairing with Reba McEntire, recording an hour-long "CMT Crossroads" special at Nashville's Ryman Auditorium on February 22, 2007. Introduced by Dolly Parton, she performed "Why Haven't I Heard From You" and "Does He Love You" with Martina McBride on the television special "CMT Giants: Reba McEntire". Clarkson also appeared on an episode of McEntire's sitcom "Reba", that aired on January 14, 2007. At the Academy of Country Music Awards on May 16, 2007, Clarkson and McEntire sang a duet of "Because of You", which also became the lead single from McEntire's album "", the song peaked at number 50 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals at the 50th Grammy Awards. Clarkson and McEntire also embarked on the 2 Worlds, 2 Voices Tour 2008 to support "Reba: Duets" and "My December".
2009–10: "All I Ever Wanted".
Clarkson's fourth album, "All I Ever Wanted", was released on March 10, 2009. Its production oversaw Clarkson returning to a mainstream-oriented sound by reuniting with previous collaborators Dr. Luke, Martin, and DioGuardi, as well as collaborating with new ones including Howard Benson, Claude Kelly, Ryan Tedder, Glen Ballard, Matt Thiessen and Katy Perry in contributing tracks for the album. The release of "All I Ever Wanted" was met with positive acclaim from music critics for its lighter themes. The album also became a commercial success; it debuted at number one on the "Billboard" 200 and stayed there for two weeks. Clarkson supported "All I Ever Wanted" with the All I Ever Wanted Tour from 2009–2012. As of May 2012, the album has sold 944,000 copies in the United States and garnered Clarkson a second nomination for a Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album.
Its first single, "My Life Would Suck Without You", became an international hit. It entered the "Billboard" Hot 100 at number 97 and rose to number one the following week—breaking the record for the biggest jump to number one on a single week previously held by Britney Spears's "Womanizer". It also marked the second time Clarkson broke the record, the first being the ascent of "Before Your Love"/"A Moment Like This" in 2002. It also topped the charts in the United Kingdom, Canada and Hungary. The second single, "I Do Not Hook Up", continued the chart success by peaking at the number 20 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The third single, "Already Gone", reached number 13 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The release of "Already Gone" became a subject of an another dispute with RCA — particularly with its similarities with Beyoncé's song "Halo", both of which were produced by Tedder. Further promotion for the album was abruptly ended at the release of its titular fourth and final singles, "All I Ever Wanted", which peaked at number 96 on the "Billboard" Hot 100; and "Cry", which saw a limited release.
Clarkson performed as one of many main artists for the return of "VH1 Divas" in September 2009. She also became a guest mentor on the Dutch television series "X Factor" in November 2009. Clarkson continued her country ventures by pairing with Jason Aldean to record the duet "Don't You Wanna Stay" for his album "My Kinda Party" in November 2010. They performed it together on the tenth season of "American Idol", at the 2010 CMA Awards and at the 54th Grammy Awards. It received numerous country accolades, including a nomination for a Grammy Award for Best Country Duo/Group Performance at the 54th Grammy Awards.
2011–12: "Stronger".
Clarkson's fifth studio album, "Stronger", was released on October 21, 2011. Clarkson described that the album was "was influenced by Prince, Tina Turner, Sheryl Crow, Radiohead and there's a little bit of a country vibe/influence on a couple of songs." Clarkson collaborated with several producers including Greg Kurstin, Ester Dean, Darkchild, Toby Gad, Steve Jordan and Howard Benson. The album has received positive acclaim, with several music critics noting the album's predominant R&B and country influences as well as newly-developed dance-pop themes. "Stronger" became a commercial success, debuting at number 2 on the "Billboard" 200, and has sustained chart longevity. The release of the album was accompanied by a limited release of Clarkson's first extended play, "The Smoakstack Sessions", which featured alternate versions of "Stronger" and "All I Ever Wanted" songs. Clarkson supported "Stronger" with two concert tours—the Stronger Tour and the co-headlining the 2012 Summer Tour with The Fray. "Stronger" was certified Platinum by the RIAA.
The lead single, "Mr. Know It All", became an international hit, peaking at number 10 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and topping the charts in Australia and South Korea. It was later re-released as her first solo country single in 2012. The second titular single, "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)", also became an international hit and the album's most successful single. It topped the "Billboard" Hot 100 for three non-consecutive weeks—becoming her most commercially successful single to date by charting in over twenty-nine national charts. As of August 2012, it has sold over 4 million copies in the United States and the United Kingdom. The third single, "Dark Side", was released to moderate success.
Clarkson promoted "Stronger" in several countries, including 2011 NRL Grand Final, and the British, American, German and, Australian versions of "The X Factor". The song "Tell Me A Lie" on the debut album by the boy band One Direction was co-written by Clarkson, which was originally intended for "Stronger". Her second extended play, "iTunes Session", was released on December 23, 2011—its promotional single, a cover of "I'll Be Home For Christmas", was released and peaked at number 93 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. "iTunes Session" later debuted at number 85 on the "Billboard" 200.
2012–present: "Duets", "Greatest Hits – Chapter One" and sixth studio album.
In 2012, Clarkson became a guest mentor on Blake Shelton's contestants on season two of the American television series "The Voice"—with this feat, Clarkson becomes the only former television singing-competition contestant to appear on "American Idol", "The X Factor" and "The Voice". On 5 February 2012, Clarkson performed The Star-Spangled Banner at Super Bowl XLVI to widespread critical acclaim. Clarkson performed at the 54th Grammy Awards on February 12, 2012. She and Jason Aldean sang their hit "Don't You Wanna Stay".
From May to July 2012, Clarkson became a mentor on the reality television series "Duets". She later released the promotional single "Get Up (A Cowboys Anthem)" for use in Pepsi's NFL advertising campaign.
Clarkson's first greatest hits album, called "" was released on November 19, 2012. As with the release of "Stronger", the album was accompanied by an acoustic EP, "The Smoakstack Sessions Vol. 2". The first single off the album is called "Catch My Breath", which she wrote with her music director Jason Halbert and Eric Olson. The single was released on October 15, and achieved moderate commercial success. The accompanying music video was released on November 11, 2012. She also promoted the single with performances on The Voice, VH1 Divas and other television shows.
On October 30, Clarkson released the soulful country duet with Vince Gill, "Don't Rush," as the second single from the album. On October 2, 2012, Blake Shelton's Christmas album, "Cheers, It's Christmas", was released, featuring a duet with Clarkson on "There's a New Kid in Town." In December, she appeared on Shelton's Christmas special, which aired on NBC.
On December 5, 2012, it was announced that Clarkson was nominated for three categories for the 55th Grammy Awards in 2013, Best Pop Vocal Album for "Stronger", Record of the Year, and Best Pop Solo Performance for "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)". The song was also up for Song of the Year—though she herself was not a nominee since she is not a writer of the song. Clarkson won the Grammy award for Best Pop Vocal Album on February 10, 2013. In winning, she became the first artist to win more than once in this category. 
Clarkson appeared on Jewel's "Greatest Hits" album. The two duet on Jewel's song "Foolish Games".
Clarkson is currently working on her sixth studio album. Clarkson has stated that the sound and theme of the new material that she is creating is lighter and happier than her previous work due to her relationship with Brandon Blackstock. Darkchild, who co-wrote and produced Clarkson's song "I Forgive You", is a confirmed collaborator along with Greg Kurstin ("Stronger, Dark Side").
Clarkson performed "My Country, 'Tis of Thee" at President Barack Obama's second inauguration on January 21, 2013. Clarkson performed Tennessee Waltz and Natural Woman at the 55th Grammy Awards as tribute to Patti Page and Carole King.
Artistry.
Voice.
Clarkson possesses the vocal range of a soprano, which has been described as dynamic, robust, and emotive. Clarkson has also been noted for her vocal versatility and technically skilled delivery, in reviewing a live performance of Clarkson's Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" stated she "showed off a voice that moved in all sorts of ways, without ever appearing to strain" continuing "Ms. Clarkson, who has a malleable voice and a boatload of vocal confidence, might be a soul siren in the making". However in a separate review of "Stronger" Caramanica stated that Clarkson's voice is "too huge, too violent" for warmer and sweeter vocal stylings, stating "she’s on a par with Taylor Swift when it comes to vengeance, and she’ll do it louder and with more brutality in comparison to her contemporary."
Regarding the quality of Clarkson’s voice Arion Berger of "Rolling Stone" commented that "her high notes are sweet and pillowy, her growl is bone-shaking and sexy, and her midrange is amazingly confident for a pop posy whose career is tied for eternity to the whims of her "American Idol" overlords." Dr. Luke, a songwriter and producer of some of Clarkson's hits, stated that "She has powerful lungs. She's like the Lance Armstrong of vocal cords."
In an interview with "Good Morning America", Simon Cowell was asked of the then six "American Idol" winners, who he thought had the best voice. Cowell immediately answered that Clarkson did "by a mile", noting that she was "up there" with other great singers such as Celine Dion.
"Esquire" wrote that Clarkson has “the best voice in the history of pop music". Reviewing "Stronger", Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" states, Clarkson has, “One of music’s most remarkable voices.” Regarding the controversial practice of lip-syncing, Clarkson claims that she never has, and never will lip-sync, elaborating in an interview with Cory Myers; "I’ve actually never done that. Because I’m terrified, if I ever did that, something horrible would happen, the track would skip…I have a really unhealthy fear about it. So no, I’ve never done that".
Influences.
Clarkson has often cited soul musicians such as Aretha Franklin, Whitney Houston, Mariah Carey and Etta James as well as rock musicians Radiohead, Garbage, Aerosmith, and Jimi Hendrix as her influences. Her audition performance of James' song "At Last" and her final performance of Franklin's "(You Make Me Feel Like) A Natural Woman" on "American Idol" garnered critical praise from both the judges of the program as well as from the public. Clarkson also said that she has been influenced by Tina Turner and Annie Lennox. At age eight, Clarkson was first inspired to venture into music during visit to an African-American church in Fort Worth. She recalled: "I was like, 'Wow, whatever they're feeling, I want to feel it too'."
Personal life.
Relationships.
Clarkson began dating talent manager Brandon Blackstock in February 2012. Blackstock is singer Reba McEntire's stepson through her marriage to Narvel Blackstock, who is Clarkson's manager. In a May 2012 interview, Clarkson told the "Daily Mail", "Brandon is my manager's son. I've known him for six years but he was married. Then, suddenly, there he was at the Super Bowl and he was single." Clarkson and Blackstock got engaged on December 14, 2012.
Political views.
On December 29, 2011, Clarkson posted on Twitter that she would vote for US Congressman Ron Paul as a 2012 presidential candidate, saying, "I love Ron Paul. I liked him a lot during the last Republican nomination and no one gave him a chance. If he wins the nomination for the Republican Party in 2012 he's got my vote. Too bad he probably won't." After stating her support for Paul, she came under fire on Twitter, due to her pro gay rights views. She later apologized for the Tweet, saying she did not intend to offend anyone. In a recent interview with "Rolling Stone" magazine, Clarkson was asked about her comments in support of Paul and she replied with, "All I did was tweet what I thought, and people went crazy! All of a sudden, people were like, 'You hate gay people' – what? I didn't even endorse him. All I said was that I like him. I voted for Barack, so it's not even like I'm a hardcore Republican." In 2012, Clarkson stated she would, again, vote for President Barack Obama. Clarkson stated, “I can’t support Romney’s policies as I have a lot of gay friends and I don’t think it’s fair they can’t get married.” She also cited women's rights issues by saying, “I’m not a hardcore feminist, but we can’t be going back to the 50s.”
Philanthropy.
In April 2007, Kelly Clarkson took part on the "Idol Gives Back", a fundraiser for people in poverty in both Africa and the United States, performing "Up to the Mountain" along with Jeff Beck. According to her statings, she wanted to perform that song rather than her new single "Never Again", which seemed to her inappropriate for the event, and didn't want to promote herself, despite the label's pressures. She would also perform a five-song set later that year on the American leg of Live Earth concerts opting for environmental awareness about climate change. She is currently an ambassador of "March of Dimes", raising money regularly and assisting in volunteer service, having walked for "March for Babies" as well, for the cause of improvement of the health of mothers and babies. Clarkson, additionally, got involved in the organization "Houses of Hope", who take care and build orphanages for children in South Africa who have been affected by HIV/AIDS, abuse and poverty. She has visited those children and also participated in the "A Night for Hope" fund-raiser concert (held by Clarkson's background vocal singers, Jill and Kate), where she performed a song she wrote after her trip to South Africa, "You Still Won't Know What It's Like". Clarkson is also supporting organizations Save the Children, UNICEF, "Do Something" and "STOMP Out Bullying" among others as well as music causes like the Save the Music Foundation. She has a ranch in Texas for unwanted animals, which includes amputee goats, blind dogs, and horses with colic; there are more than 80 animals at the sanctuary. She helps provide veterinary care for them and finds them an adoptive family.
Tours.
Headlining/Co-headlining 
Promotional
Filmography.
Source: IMDb
