Good Luck Charlie is an American television sitcom, which premiered on April 4, 2010, on Disney Channel. The series was created by Phil Baker and Drew Vaupen, who wanted to create a program that would appeal to entire families, as opposed to children only. It revolves around a Denver family, the Duncans, as they try to adjust to the births of their fourth and fifth children, Charlotte "Charlie" Duncan (Mia Talerico) and Toby Duncan. In each episode, Teddy Duncan (Bridgit Mendler) creates a video diary containing advice for Charlie about their family and life as a teenager. Teddy tries to show Charlie what she might go through when she is older in the video diaries for future reference. Each video diary ends with Teddy (or someone else from the family, even Charlie) saying the eponymous phrase, ""Good luck, Charlie"".
Among other decisions, executives included adult-centric scenes and changed the series title from "Oops" to "Love, Teddy" and finally to "Good Luck Charlie" in order to ensure the series would appeal to all family members. "Good Luck Charlie" premiered on Disney Channel in the United States on April 4, 2010. It premiered in Canada on April 5, 2010, the United Kingdom and Ireland on May 14, 2010, and in Australia and New Zealand on July 23, 2010. "Good Luck Charlie" was renewed for a second season, with production beginning in August 2010 with a season premiere on February 20, 2011. A feature-length Christmas Disney Channel Original Movie based on the series entitled "Good Luck Charlie, It's Christmas!" began production in March 2011 for a December 2011 premiere.
On August 29, 2011, Disney Channel announced that they had renewed the series for a third season. The third season premiered on May 6, 2012 and concluded on January 20, 2013. On July 12, 2012, Disney Channel announced that they renewed the series for a fourth season. According to a Fuse interview, Mendler has stated that Season 4 might be its final one.
Premise.
The series centers on the Duncan family, who are still adjusting to the birth of their fourth child, Charlotte "Charlie" Duncan (Mia Talerico). When parents Amy (Leigh-Allyn Baker), a nurse, and Bob (Eric Allan Kramer), an exterminator, return to work, they ask their three older children—PJ (Jason Dolley), Teddy (Bridgit Mendler), and Gabe (Bradley Steven Perry)—to help raise their little sister. At the same time, Teddy, PJ, and Gabe try to deal with school and typical social challenges in their life.
The events of each episode become material for a video diary Teddy is making for her younger sister. Teddy hopes the videos will provide useful advice for Charlie after they have both grown up and Teddy has moved out. Also at the end of each video, she (and/or other cast members) states, "Good luck, Charlie" or may even say it indirectly such as "Wish them good luck, Charlie." During the movie, Amy reveals to Teddy that she is pregnant with her fifth child, which Teddy is trying to adjust to but this story plot is not carried into the actual series until the third season. In the third season, Amy gives birth to a baby boy, Toby.
Characters.
Main characters.
Teddy R. Duncan (Bridgit Mendler) is the protagonist of the series, and Charlie's older and only sister, and the second oldest in the Duncan children. Feeling that she will not be around as much when her baby sister Charlie is grown, she produces and directs video diaries for her, hoping that it will give her advice that will help her be successful as a teenager at the end of every episode and at the end of every video diary she says 'good luck charlie'. Her best friend is Ivy Wentz. She is usually a straight-A student. It was mentioned in "Sun Show: Part 1", that her parents were expecting a boy, hence the generally masculine name "Teddy". She dated Spencer Walsh in season 1, but they broke up after she caught him hanging around with a pretty, dim-witted brunette named Skyler, breaking her heart. She and Skyler later become friends despite Teddy and Ivy being annoyed by her at times because of her dumbness but they get used to it, as it is in her nature. She and Skyler also compete in a Battle of the Bands contest, but when Skyler and PJ get together, they combine the two bands together, winning the contest. She and Spencer later get back together in season 2, where Spencer kisses her and says that hurting her was the stupidest thing he's ever done. Throughout the show Teddy has had numerous boyfriends including Derek, a very relaxed guy with a motorbike who could be quite ditzy sometimes; and Evan, a boy that Teddy once liked until she realized that he was into Pokeo - a little kids card game and dumps him because of this in a L.A.R.P. (live-action role play) in the park. Teddy shows a lot of care towards her brothers, as demonstrated when she saves PJ from falling out of a tree house window on the condition of him needing to drive her where ever she wanted for a month, or when Gabe gets a black eye from Jo and Teddy offers to help him with his problem. Teddy is known as a "goody-goody" (G.G.) from her best friend Ivy. It is revealed in "Bye Bye Video Diary", that the reason she wants Charlie to have video diaries with advice in them, because she wants Charlie to grow up to be a good girl. She and Spencer get back together in 'Can You Keep A Secret?'. 
Episodes.
"Shake It Up" crossover.
In Season 2, "Good Luck Charlie" released a crossover episode with " Shake It Up" titled "Charlie Shakes It Up". It is about Teddy, Amy, and Charlie visiting Chicago to see Great Aunt Nell, but they mistake that they got a car rented by Nell that takes them to the set of "Shake It Up, Chicago!", where they are mistaken for dancers. Meanwwhile, PJ and Gabe have a yard sale out of stuff from the attic.
Development and production.
The "Good Luck Charlie" pilot, entitled "Study Date", was shot in February 2009, at Sunset Bronson Studios (where "Hannah Montana" was taped) and the series was picked up later that year. The show's production occurs at Sunset Bronson Studios in Los Angeles even though the show is set in Denver, Colorado. Starting with the 2nd season, the series is taped at Los Angeles Center Studios, where "Shake It Up" is also taped. The show operates on a weekly schedule. Scripts for a new episode are issued on Monday before a read-through, Wednesdays are rehearsal and network run-through day, final scripts are issued on Thursday, and the episode is shot in front of a live studio audience on Friday night. According to Mendler, occasionally "episodes are too big to handle with a live audience [and are taped without an audience, but mostly they're live".
"Good Luck Charlie" was created by Phil Baker and Drew Vaupen, who have been writing together since 1993 on shows ranging from "Suddenly Susan" to "Sonny with a Chance". The pair aspired to create a program that would appeal to entire families rather than simply kids. Inspired by the success of reruns of shows such as "Full House" and "George Lopez" with young audiences, Vaupen and Baker turned to family sitcoms. "We wanted to do a show about a family, to bring back a family sitcom and make it about a real family, not wizards, nobody's a pop star, nobody has a TV show", said Vaupen, referring to "Wizards of Waverly Place", "Hannah Montana", and "Sonny with a Chance".
Veteran writer-producer Dan Staley ("Cheers") later joined the show as executive producer. Disney’s Gary Marsh said “because most network television abandoned the traditional sitcom, Disney has been able to snatch up a lot of experienced talent for behind the camera, including executive producer Dan Staley…”
"Good Luck Charlie"s central family, the Duncans from Denver, Colorado, was carefully crafted for broad appeal. While the series is still told primarily through the view point of the Duncan children, the children's parents, Amy and Bob, are less on the periphery and writers attempt to add scenes that adult viewers can relate to. For example, in one scene in the pilot episode Amy confesses to Bob that she is overwhelmed with becoming a working new mother again. "She's not sure she can pull this off", says Bonnet. "And just playing that scene the way we did, a very real scene between husband and wife, kind of makes this show different". The writers also try to include jokes for adult viewers while remaining chaste enough for their young target audience. Unlike most previous Disney Channel series such as "Sonny with a Chance", "Hannah Montana", or "Cory in the House", both parents are seen in the Duncan family. "It felt like the right time to have a show with two parents, to debunk the myth that Disney never has the mom in the picture", says Adam Bonnett, Senior Vice President of original programming for Disney Channel. "Because it is a myth".
Because a series about the rich and famous might alienate viewers in a troubled economy, the Duncans were made middle-class. According to Gary Marsh, Entertainment President of Disney Channel Worldwide, "We want to do is acknowledge the reality of the times in which we live, where two parents work, where kids are expected to help out around the house in meaningful ways. Real-life issues happen. Everyone isn't living "The Life of Riley" all the time".
Naming.
Broadening Disney Channel's appeal was a concern when choosing the names of the characters and the title of the program. "You want a title that says, a) this is a sitcom and, b) this is something that will interest the main demographic but also we're trying to expand the Disney brand beyond just girls", Vaupen commented. The series' title was originally ""Love, Teddy"", the phrase Teddy had used to end her video diary entries during development. However, ""Love, Teddy"" immediately felt feminized and almost excludes boys", Vaupen said. "We also didn't want to have the word 'Baby' in the title because that would exclude certain people". The Duncan baby was originally named "Daisy" during development, but producers thought that "Charlie", which is generally a masculine name, would attract more boys.(Copy of original)</ref>
Casting.
As "Good Luck Charlie" is low concept and character-driven, "the actors not only had to carry the show, they also had to have "pitch-perfect" chemistry with each other to make the family dynamic believable". Bonnet says Disney Channel executives "just fell in love with" Bridgit Mendler, who stars as the series' protagonist, a teenager named Teddy Duncan. "She has all the attributes of a Disney star", said Bonnet. Mendler first heard about "Good Luck Charlie" in late November 2008. After several rounds of auditions and cast reads, she finally secured the part in January 2009. Both Mendler and Jason Dolley, who plays Teddy's older brother PJ, have starred in early Disney Channel series and movies prior to being cast in Good Luck Charlie; Mendler had a recurring role on "Wizards of Waverly Place" and Dolley starred in "Cory in the House" and other Disney Channel television movies. "Variety" magazine's Brian Lowry says their careers "the Disney Channel's knack for identifying young performers and rolling them from one project to the next, in a fashion reminiscent of the old studio system". Both Eric Allan Kramer, who plays Bob Duncan, and Leigh-Allyn Baker, who plays Amy Duncan, have also guest starred on other Disney Channel shows, and both Baker and Allen had respectively guest starred in one episode each of the NBC sitcom "My Name Is Earl", where "Charlie" writers Erika Kaestle & Patrick McCarthy had served as writers and supervising producers. Both Baker and Kramer were in the same episode of the NBC sitcom "Will and Grace". Baker says Disney had been "courting [her for awhile to play a mom", but she had always felt too young. "I kind of feel like hey, you know what? When I'm done with this stint, I'll actually be the age everyone thinks I am to be able to play the part". Baker, who was a new mother herself, was nine months pregnant at the time she was auditioning for the role.
 – Like most series featuring baby actors, producers of "Good Luck Charlie" had originally intended to have twins play Charlie Duncan, the title character and the Duncans' new baby. Hiring two babies would allow for longer work days without violating child labor laws as well as the ability to substitute one child for the other if one was unavailable. However, the show makers were unsuccessful in finding the proper set of twins and decided to cast instead. Marsh says hiring Talerico, who was ten months old at the time she was cast, was their highest risk while creating the show: "It's like flying without a net. She may have a bad day and we can't shoot and it'll cost us tens of thousands of dollars. But so far, so good. She's the most obedient actor I've ever worked with".
Reception.
The series's premiere earned positive reviews. It also currently holds a 8.2 rating on TV.com, and 6.9 rating from 2,957 users on IMDb.com,which is rated only 0.3 less than "Two and a Half Men" currently. Robert Lloyd of "The Los Angeles Times" described it as a "professional sitcom from sitcom professionals" with efficient jokes and typical sitcom characters, and situations which are "willfully arranged". However, Lloyd praised the series for offering a "contextually novel picture of a teenage girl taking care of her baby sister with a persuasive nonchalance and practical ease that transcends the strenuous comedy that surrounds it". Neal Justin of the "Star Tribune" said the "slapstick heavy, laugh-track fueled sitcom" had no redeeming qualities other than "keeping your 11-year-old sedated for a half hour". Rob Owen of the "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" said "Good Luck Charlie" would appeal to kids, but not adults. "Parents have seen the same sort of show done before and better in ABC's 1980s-era TGIF lineup", wrote Owen. Contrarily, Brian Lowry of "Variety" magazine said "Good Luck Charlie" was "a surprisingly refreshing throwback to ABC's "TGIF"-style sitcoms". He commented that while the series did not "push sitcom boundaries", it was "sprightly" and "pleasantly handled".
Viewership.
The series premiered to 4.6 million viewers, making it the highest-rated series premiere for a Disney Channel Original Series since "The Suite Life on Deck" in 2008, and the week's highest-rated cable program. "Maclean's" reported that overall, the first season "has been doing about as well as Disney’s more successful shows – "The Suite Life" and so on".
On June 24, 2012, the episode "Special Delivery" became the most-watched episode ever of "Good Luck Charlie", earning 7.48 million viewers, surpassing the episode "Snow Show (Part 1)" which had 7.24 million viewers as well as the episode "Kit and Kaboodle" that garnered 5.03 million viewers and the series' pilot episode "Study Date" which had 4.68 million viewers.
Music.
The series theme song is "Hang in There Baby". "I'm Gonna Run to You", which was co-written by Bridgit Mendler, was featured in the telemovie, "Good Luck Charlie, It's Christmas!". It was released on iTunes on November 12, 2011, and peaked at number 15 on Radio Disney's Top 30 Countdown on January 23, 2012. "You're Something Beautiful" was featured in the 1-hour special episode, "Special Delivery". All three songs are sung by Bridgit Mendler.
Film.
"Good Luck Charlie, It's Christmas!" also known as ""Good Luck Charlie: The Road Trip Movie"" is a 2011 Christmas film based on the series. The film premiered December 2, 2011 on the Disney Channel. The film was directed by Arlene Sanford and written by Geoff Rodkey. The Disney Channel Original Movie follows the Duncan family on their road trip to Amy Duncan's parents' house for Christmas.
Indian adaptation.
An Indian adaptation of the show, titled "Best of Luck Nikki", premiered on Disney Channel India on April 3, 2011. Sheena Bajaj plays Dolly Singh, a character similar to that of Teddy Duncan.
