Alexander Rae "Alec" Baldwin III (born April 3, 1958) is an American actor who has appeared on film, stage, and television.
Baldwin first gained recognition through television for his work, for two seasons (6 and 7), on the soap opera "Knots Landing", in the role of Joshua Rush. He has since played both leading and supporting roles in films such as "Beetlejuice" (1988), "The Hunt for Red October" (1990), "The Marrying Man" (1991), "The Shadow" (1994), "The Aviator" (2004) and "The Departed" (2006). His performance in the 2003 film "The Cooler" garnered him an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination.
From 2006 to 2013, he starred as Jack Donaghy on the NBC sitcom "30 Rock", receiving critical acclaim for his performance and winning two Emmy Awards, three Golden Globe Awards, and seven Screen Actors Guild Awards for his work on the show, making him the male performer with the most SAG Awards ever.
He is the eldest of the Baldwin brothers working in Hollywood and a columnist for "The Huffington Post".
Early life.
Baldwin was born in Amityville, Long Island, New York. He is the son of Carolyn Newcomb (née Martineau) and Alexander Rae Baldwin, Jr., a high school history/social studies teacher and football coach. Baldwin was raised a Roman Catholic, in a family of Irish, English, and French descent. He has three younger brothers, Daniel, William, and Stephen, who also became actors. Baldwin has two sisters, Beth Baldwin Keuchler (born 1955), and Jane Baldwin Sasso (born 1965).
Baldwin attended Alfred G. Berner High School in Massapequa Long Island, and played football there under Coach Bob Reifsnyder, who is in the College Football Hall of Fame. In New York City, Baldwin worked as a busboy at the famous disco, Studio 54. From 1976 to 1979, he attended George Washington University, afterwards transferring to New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where he studied with Academy Award winner Bryan Nguyen at the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute, and, later still, being accepted as a member of the Actors Studio. Baldwin would eventually return to NYU in 1994, graduating with a BFA that year. On May 12, 2010, he gave a commencement address at New York University and was awarded a Doctor of Fine Arts degree, honoris causa.
Career.
Stage.
Baldwin made his Broadway debut in 1986, in a revival of Joe Orton's "Loot" alongside Zoë Wanamaker, Željko Ivanek, Joseph Maher and Charles Keating. This production closed after three months. His other Broadway credits include Caryl Churchill's "Serious Money" with Kate Nelligan and a revival of Tennessee Williams' "A Streetcar Named Desire", for which his performance as Stanley Kowalski garnered an Tony Award nomination for Best Actor. Baldwin also received an Emmy nomination for the 1995 television version of the production, in which both he and Jessica Lange reprised their roles, alongside John Goodman and Diane Lane. In 1998, Baldwin played the title role in "Macbeth" at the Public theater alongside Angela Bassett and Liev Schreiber in a production directed by George C. Wolfe. In 2004, Baldwin starred in a revival of "Twentieth Century" with Anne Heche.
On June 9, 2005, he appeared in a concert version of the Rodgers and Hammerstein musical "South Pacific" at Carnegie Hall. He starred as Luther Billis, alongside Reba McEntire as Nellie and Brian Stokes Mitchell as Emile. The production was taped and telecast by PBS on April 26, 2006. In 2006, Baldwin made theater news in Roundabout Theatre Company's Off-Broadway revival of Joe Orton's "Entertaining Mr. Sloane". In 2010, Baldwin starred opposite Sam Underwood in a critically acclaimed revival of Peter Shaffer's "Equus", directed by Tony Walton at Guild Hall in East Hampton, New York.
On March 19, 2013, he will make his return to the stage as Harold in Orphans on Broadway. The show will also star Shia LeBouf as Treat.
Television.
Baldwin's first major acting role was as Billy Aldrich on the daytime soap opera "The Doctors" from 1980 to 1982. In fall 1983, he starred in the short-lived television series "Cutter to Houston". He then co-starred in the television series "Knots Landing" from 1984 to 1986. In 1986, Baldwin starred in "Dress Gray", a four-hour made-for-television miniseries, as an honest cadet sergeant who tries to solve the mystery of a murdered gay classmate. The film was adapted by Gore Vidal from the novel by Lucian Truscott IV.
From 1998 to 2002, Baldwin was the U.S. narrator for the children's show "Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends", narrating all 52 episodes of Series 5 and Series 6. Baldwin appeared in a celebrity edition of "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire" in November 2000, competing against Jon Stewart, Charlie Sheen, Vivica A. Fox and Norm Macdonald. He won $250,000 for PAWS, and used Kim Basinger as one of his "phone-a-friend" partners. He voiced Blue Barron in "Teen Titans".
In 2002, Baldwin appeared on two episodes of "Friends" as Phoebe Buffay's overly enthusiastic love interest, Parker. He also portrayed a recurring character in a number of episodes in seasons 7 and 8 of "Will & Grace", in which he played Malcolm – a "top secret agent" and the lover of Karen Walker (Megan Mullally). He also guest-starred in the first live episode of the series. Baldwin wrote an episode of "Law & Order" entitled "Tabloid", which aired in 1998. He played the role of Dr. Barrett Moore, a retired plastic surgeon, in the series "Nip/Tuck".
On July 7, 2007, Baldwin was a host at the American leg of Live Earth, which was broadcast on NBC.
Baldwin stars in the NBC sitcom "30 Rock", which first aired October 2006. Baldwin met his future co-stars Tina Fey and Tracy Morgan while appearing on "Saturday Night Live", and is only one of two actors Lorne Michaels has extended a standing offer for them to host the show should their schedule permit (the other being Christopher Walken). He has received two "Emmy Awards", two Golden Globe awards and seven Screen Actors Guild Awards for his role. Baldwin received his second Emmy nomination for Best Actor in a Television Comedy or Musical as Jack Donaghy in 2008, marking his seventh Primetime Emmy nomination and first win. He won again in 2009. Since season 3, Baldwin has been credited as producer of the show.
Baldwin joined TCM’s "The Essentials" Robert Osborne as co-host beginning in March 2009.
Baldwin co-hosted the 82nd Academy Awards with Steve Martin in 2010. He has hosted "Saturday Night Live" 16 times through the season-37 premiere on September 24, 2011, and holds the record for most times hosting the show.
On February 4, 2012, Baldwin hosted the 2011 NFL Honors awards show. Baldwin also hosted the second show on February 2, 2013.
Film.
Baldwin made his film debut with a minor role in the 1987 film "Forever, Lulu". In 1988, he appeared in "Beetlejuice" and "Working Girl". He gained further recognition as a leading man with his role as Jack Ryan in "The Hunt for Red October" (1990).
Baldwin met his future wife Kim Basinger when they played lovers in the 1991 film "The Marrying Man". He appeared with Basinger again in "The Getaway", a 1994 remake of the 1972 Steve McQueen film of the same name. Next, in a brief role, Baldwin played a ferocious sales executive in "Glengarry Glen Ross" (1992), a part added to the film version of David Mamet's Pulitzer Prize-winning stage play (including the monologue "Coffee's for closers"). Later that year, he starred in "Prelude to a Kiss" with Meg Ryan, which was based on the Broadway play. The film received a lukewarm reception by critics and grossed only $22 million worldwide.
In 1994, Baldwin made a foray into pulp fiction-based movies with the role of the title character in "The Shadow". The film made $48 million. In 1996 and 1997, Baldwin continued to work in several thrillers including "The Edge", "The Juror" and "Heaven's Prisoners".
Baldwin shifted towards character acting, beginning with "Pearl Harbor" in 2001. He played Lt. Col. James Doolittle in the film, which, with a worldwide box office of $449,220,945, remains the highest grossing film Baldwin has appeared in during his acting career. Baldwin was nominated for an Academy Award, a Golden Globe, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for his performance in the 2003 gambling drama "The Cooler". He appeared in Martin Scorsese's "The Aviator" (2004) and "The Departed" (2006). In 2006, he starred in the film "Mini's First Time", alongside Nikki Reed and Luke Wilson. Baldwin performed opposite Sarah Michelle Gellar in the 2007 romantic comedy, "Suburban Girl". In 2009, he co-starred in the hit romantic comedy "It's Complicated" with Meryl Streep and Steve Martin. In 2001, he voiced Butch in "Cats & Dogs".
Baldwin directed and starred in "The Devil and Daniel Webster" with Anthony Hopkins, Jennifer Love Hewitt and Dan Aykroyd in 2001. The then-unreleased film became an asset in a federal bank fraud trial when investor Jed Barron was convicted of bank fraud while the movie was in production. The film eventually was acquired by The Yari Group without Baldwin's involvement. In 2007, the Yari Film Group announced it would give the film, now titled "Shortcut to Happiness", a theatrical release in the spring and cable film network Starz! announced it had acquired pay TV rights for the film. "Shortcut to Happiness" was finally released in 2008. Baldwin, displeased with the way the film had been cut in post-production, demanded that his directorial credit be changed to the pseudonym "Harry Kirkpatrick".
In 2009, Baldwin appeared in a series of commercials for Hulu that premiered during the Super Bowl broadcast.
In 2010, Baldwin made a five-second cameo appearance with comedian Andy Samberg in a musical video titled "Great Day" featured on the bonus DVD as part of Lonely Island's new album "Turtleneck & Chain".
Baldwin has also worked as voice actor in films such as "The Royal Tenenbaums", "", "Thomas and the Magic Railroad" and "The SpongeBob SquarePants Movie".
Radio.
On January 12, 2009, Baldwin became the host of "The New York Philharmonic This Week", the nationally broadcast radio series of the New York Philharmonic. He has recorded two nationally distributed public service radio announcements on behalf of the Save the Manatee Club.
On October 24, 2011, WNYC public radio released the first episode of Baldwin's new podcast "Here's the Thing", a series of interviews with public figures including artists, policy makers and performers. The first two episodes featured actor Michael Douglas and political consultant Ed Rollins.
Personal life.
Baldwin and his family are Catholic.
Marriages.
In 1990, Baldwin met his future wife, actress Kim Basinger, when they played lovers in the film "The Marrying Man". They married in 1993 and had a daughter, Ireland Baldwin, in 1995. On January 12, 2001, Basinger filed for a divorce, which was finalized in 2002.
In summer 2011, Baldwin began dating Hilaria Thomas, an instructor with Yoga Vida in Manhattan, who is 26 years his junior. Baldwin and Thomas moved from the Upper West Side to Greenwich Village that August. The couple became engaged in April 2012 and married on June 30, 2012, at St. Patrick's Old Cathedral in New York City. The couple announced in February 2013 they were expecting their first child.
Runway incident.
In December 2011, Baldwin was on an American Airlines flight at Los Angeles airport, and playing Words with Friends on his phone while waiting for takeoff. When instructed to put away the "electronic device" by the flight attendant, he reportedly became belligerent, and was eventually removed from the plane. He later publicly apologized to the passengers who were delayed but not the airline or federal regulators.
A 2012 commercial for Capital One credit cards, for which Baldwin is a spokesperson, makes humorous reference to the event: A Viking character from the ad series asks about the phone Baldwin is using, to which Baldwin facetiously replies that it is not to be used on the runway, ending with a chiding "No!" A commercial for Best Buy also humorously referenced the event: Words With Friends co-creators Paul Bettner and David Bettner are on a plane and are interrupted by a flight attendant looking down at them, clearing her throat and signaling them to put their phones away.
Baldwin also made a guest appearance on "Saturday Night Live"'s Weekend Update segment posing as the captain of the plane from which he was removed.
"A Promise to Ourselves".
In 2008, Baldwin and Mark Tabb published their book "A Promise to Ourselves: A Journey Through Fatherhood and Divorce", which chronicles Baldwin's seven-year battle to remain a part of his daughter's life.
Baldwin contends that after their separation in December 2000, his former wife, Kim Basinger, endeavored to deny him access to his daughter by refusing to discuss parenting, blocking visitation, not providing telephone access, not following court orders, not dropping their daughter off for reasons of convenience, and directly lobbying the child. He contends she spent over $1.5 million in the effort.
Baldwin called this parental alienation syndrome. Baldwin has called the attorneys in the case "opportunists" and has characterized Basinger's psychologists as part of the "divorce industry". He has faulted them more than Basinger, and writes, "In fact, I blame my ex-wife least of all for what has transpired. She is a person, like many of us, doing the best she can with what she has. She is a litigant, and therefore, one who walks into a courtroom and is never offered anything other than what is served there. Nothing off the menu, ever."
Baldwin wrote that he has spent over a million dollars, has had to put time aside from his career, has had to travel extensively, and needed to find a house in California (he lived in New York), so he could stay in his daughter's life.
Baldwin contended that after seven years of these issues, he hit a breaking point, and on April 11, 2007, left an angry voicemail message in response to another unanswered arranged call in which Baldwin called his daughter a "rude, thoughtless little pig". He contends that the tape was sold to TMZ, which released the recording despite laws against publishing media related to a minor without the permission of both parents. Baldwin admitted he made a mistake, but asked not to be judged as a parent based on a bad moment. He later admitted to "Playboy" in June 2009 that he contemplated suicide over the voice mail that leaked to the public. Of the incident, he said "I spoke to a lot of professionals, who helped me. If I committed suicide, Kim Basinger's side would have considered that a victory. Destroying me was their avowed goal."
During the autumn of 2008, Baldwin toured in support of the book, speaking about his experiences related in it.
Political views.
Baldwin serves on the board of People for the American Way. He is an animal rights activist, and a strong supporter of PETA, for which he has done work that includes narrating the video entitled "Meet Your Meat". His wife has joined the cause, fronting for PETA's Cruelty-Free Shopping Guide. Baldwin also lent his support to the Save the Manatee Club by donating his time to record several public service announcements for the group, which had contacted him following his role in "Bonfire of the Manatees", an episode of "The Simpsons" in which he was the voice of a biologist working to save the endangered mammals.
During his appearance on the comedy late night show "Late Night with Conan O'Brien" on December 12, 1998, eight days before President Bill Clinton was to be impeached, Baldwin said, "If we were in another country ... we would stone Henry Hyde to death and we would go to their homes and kill their wives and their children. We would kill their families, for what they're doing to this country." Baldwin later apologized for the remarks, and the network explained it was meant as a joke and promised not to rerun it.
Baldwin said in a 2006 interview with "The New York Times" that if he did become involved in electoral politics, he would prefer to run for Governor of New York. When asked if he were qualified for the office, Baldwin responded that he considered himself more qualified than California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger. In June 2011, "The Daily" reported that Baldwin was mulling a 2013 run for Mayor of New York City in the wake of a potential early race shakeup after candidate Congressman Anthony Weiner's sexting scandal. However, on December 21, 2011, Baldwin said he was abandoning plans to run for the office and would instead continue in his role on "30 Rock".
In February 2009, Baldwin spoke out to encourage state leaders to renew New York's tax break for the film and television industry, stating that if the "tax breaks are not reinstated into the budget, film production in this town is going to collapse and television production is going to collapse and it's all going to go to California".
During the 2011 Emmy Awards, Baldwin was slated to appear in a taped skit. However, the producers of the show cut a portion of the skit containing a reference to Rupert Murdoch and the News International phone hacking scandal. Baldwin told "Access Hollywood Live" that he asked them not to air his performance. Producers complied and he was replaced with Leonard Nimoy.
