Logan Wade Lerman (born January 19, 1992) is an American actor, known for playing the title role in the 2010 fantasy-adventure '. He appeared in commercials in the mid-1990s, before starring in the series "Jack & Bobby" (2004–2005) and the movies "The Butterfly Effect" (2004) and "Hoot" (2006). Lerman gained further recognition for his roles in the western ', the thriller "The Number 23", the comedy "Meet Bill", and 2009's "Gamer" and "My One and Only". He played d'Artagnan in 2011's "The Three Musketeers", and starred in the teen drama "The Perks of Being a Wallflower" (2012).
Background.
Lerman was born in Beverly Hills, California. His mother, Lisa (née Goldman), works as his manager, and his father, Larry Lerman, is a businessman and orthotist. He has two siblings, Lindsey and Lucas, both older. Logan and his family are Jewish. Most of his relatives work in the medical profession. His family owns and operates the orthotics and prosthetics company "Lerman & Son", which is managed by his paternal grandparents, Mina (Schwartz) and Max Lerman, and had been founded by his great-grandfather, Jacob Lerman, in 1915. Logan's family had left Europe in the 1930s, because of the Nazi regime, and settled in California in the 1940s.
Lerman is a self-described "film geek", having stated that he is "shaped by movies", and that he is a "creative person". He has expressed an interest in being involved in "everything that goes into making a film", including wanting to write, produce, and direct. His favorite directors include Paul Thomas Anderson, Stanley Kubrick, David Fincher, and Peter Bogdanovich, and he has cited "American Beauty", "Defending Your Life", and "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind" as being among his favorite films. Lerman has described himself as "reserved and quiet", "a homebody", and "not a big fan of sports". He graduated from Beverly Hills High School. In 2010, he applied to study creative writing at New York University, but has postponed his attendance.
Acting career.
Early work.
Lerman had a passion for movies from a young age, though he started acting "just for fun" and "to do something to get out of school". He began auditioning for roles in the late 1990s, and first appeared in commercials. He made his film debut in 2000's "The Patriot", playing William Martin, one of the children of Mel Gibson's character. The same year, he appeared in another Mel Gibson film, "What Women Want", playing Gibson's character as a child. In 2001's "Riding in Cars with Boys", he played the son of Drew Barrymore's character. Lerman has stated that while appearing in his earliest roles as a child, he did not have "any conscious awareness of what I was doing or what was going on" and "didn’t have a good experience".
In 2003, Lerman played nine year-old Luke Chandler in the CBS made-for-television film "A Painted House", based on the early life of author John Grisham and set in Black Oak, Arkansas in the early 1950s. "A Painted House" was filmed in Lepanto and Clarksdale, Mississippi, in 2002. A review from the Boston Globe described Lerman as a "promising newcomer", with the Telegraph-Herald commenting on the character having been "quietly and effectively played". The role won him a Young Artist Award for Best Performance by a Leading Young Actor in a television production. He next appeared in the 2004 thriller film "The Butterfly Effect", portraying a seven year-old version of Ashton Kutcher's character, Evan Treborn. digitallyOBSESSED's reviewer described Lerman as "definitely a child actor to watch".
Lerman had quit acting for a "year or so" in the early 2000s, when he was ten. He made a "conscious decision" to embrace acting as a profession when he was twelve, having developed an interest in the film making process. In 2004, he was cast in the television series "Jack & Bobby", playing one of the title roles, Robert "Bobby" McCallister, a 12 year-old "extremely bright social misfit" in Missouri who was destined to become President of the United States as an adult. The show ran on The WB Television Network during the 2004–2005 season, receiving some positive positive reviews but low ratings, and was subsequently canceled, though Lerman won another Young Artist Award for his performance. Lerman has stated that he "started taking things seriously" about his career after appearing on the show. The Boston Herald's reviewer mentioned that Lerman's performance had a "blend of vulnerability and strength," while Entertainment Weekly's reviewer had noted that "Lerman lends Bobby a bedraggled optimism".
Continuing his film work, Lerman had his first starring role in a motion picture, playing Roy Eberhardt in the children's adventure "Hoot"; his character moves to Florida from Montana and attempts to save endangered burrowing owls. Lerman stated that the film's message is "that you can be any age and make a difference". "Hoot" began filming in July 2005 in South Florida, opened on May 5, 2006, and won him a third Young Artist Award, this time for Best Performance in a Feature Film - Leading Young Actor (2007). The Washington Post's reviewer commented that "Lerman shows some life as Roy", though his role was "an anomaly in a sea of insipidity", while the San Francisco Chronicle's reviewer disliked Lerman's performance.
In 2007, Lerman appeared in the thriller "The Number 23", in which he played the son of Robin Sparrow (Jim Carrey), a man who becomes obsessed with conspiracy theories. That year, he also appeared in the critically acclaimed western remake "". In the film, he played William Evans, a teenager who looks up to criminal Ben Wade (Russell Crowe) while shunning his father (Christian Bale's character), in a role that did not exist in the original version of the story. Lerman received positive reviews for his role, and was again nominated for the Young Artist Award - Best Performance in a Feature Film - Leading Young Actor (2008). It was the second consecutive year he received a nomination in that category, although this time he did not win. USA Today stated that he was among the film's "best supporting players", while Rolling Stone gave Lerman a "shout-out" and Newsday stated that he delivers a "credibly explicit note".
In 2008, Lerman co-starred in the comedy "Meet Bill", as The Kid (his character is never referred to by name), a teenager mentored by Bill (Aaron Eckhart). "Meet Bill" was filmed in June 2006 in Missouri, premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2007, and received a theatrical release on April 4, 2008. Hollywood.com stated that the film was uneven, though Lerman "displays a supreme confidence". In 2009, he appeared in the science fiction film "Gamer", as Simon, a teenage gamer who controls one of the characters in a video game played with live human subjects ("Gamer" was filmed in November 2007). Also that year, Lerman had a leading role in the Renée Zellweger comedy feature "My One and Only", playing a teenage character based on actor George Hamilton - depicted as an aspiring writer who, after his parents split, accompanies his mother and brother on a cross-country trip, eventually arriving in Hollywood. Bloomberg's reviewer described Lerman as appealing, with the Los Angeles Times' Betsy Sharkey stating that the character "captures the ease with which an angry teen will use a growing vocabulary to wound a parent".
"Percy Jackson" - present.
In spring 2009, Lerman was cast in the lead role of Percy Jackson in the film ', based on the book by Rick Riordan. The movie was filmed in 2009 in Vancouver and was released in February 2010. Lerman has stated that he was not familiar with the book series when he received the script. Regarding the similarities between Lerman's character and Harry Potter, Lerman told an interviewer: "Honestly, my character doesn't have much in common with Harry Potter besides the fact that he's an unlikely hero who's thrown into a huge situation". Lerman had been signed to appear in two more "Percy Jackson" films, and has stated that he would like to star in adaptations of all five books in the series. The second film in the series, subtitled ', was filmed from April 2012 to July 2012, and has a release date set for August 16, 2013.
Lerman is represented by the Creative Artists Agency. During his teenage years, Lerman and his family had viewed his acting work as just a "hobby" before college; his parents had only become more comfortable with acting as a career in 2010.
In August 2010, Lerman appeared in "Change the Odds", a public service announcement video for the Stand Up to Cancer charity; the video also featured Dakota Fanning, Zac Efron, Andrew Garfield, and other actors. Lerman's next role was d'Artagnan, in director Paul W. S. Anderson's 3D film version of "The Three Musketeers", which was filmed from August 2010 to November 2010, and was released in the U.S. on October 21, 2011. Lerman was cast in the role without having to audition. He trained in sword fighting for three months and wore hair extensions to portray d'Artagnan, whom he has described as "the most different character to me that I've ever played". The film received negative reviews, with Michael Phillips of the Chicago Tribune writing that "Lerman already has done solid work... but he's a blank slate here".
Lerman starred in a film adaptation of Stephen Chbosky's novel "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", playing the lead role, Charlie; filming began in May 2011 and ended later that summer, and the film was released in September 2012. Lerman has described the film as a "life epic", and stated that he had been "torturing for... a few months in order to get inside Charlie's head". The movie received positive reviews, as did Lerman's performance, with Leonard Maltin writing that Lerman and his co-stars are "soulful", and "lift this film above the norm for coming-of-age stories". For his performance, Lerman has been nominated for Best Young Actor/Actress by the Broadcast Film Critics Association.
Lerman will play Lou in the independent drama film "Stuck in Love", starring alongside Greg Kinnear, Jennifer Connelly, and Lily Collins; filming took place in spring 2012 in North Carolina.
Lerman has been cast as Ham, the son of prophet Noah, in the Biblical epic "Noah", directed by Darren Aronofsky. Filming began in July 2012, taking place in New York and Iceland; the film has a release set for March 28, 2014. In 2011, Lerman signed to star in "The Only Living Boy in New York", an independent film written by Allan Loeb, and to be directed by Marc Webb; the story is a coming-of-age drama in which Lerman's character's father has an affair. As of October 2011, a filming start date had not been set.
Other work.
Lerman is a friend of actor Dean Collins, who played his best friend on "Jack & Bobby"; they remained close after the series' cancellation, and worked together again on "Hoot", where Collins had a supporting role. In their spare time, the two collaborated on comedic short films. As well as acting, they wrote, directed, and shot the videos, often enlisting the help of family and friends. The shorts were uploaded to YouTube under the joint account name of "monkeynuts1069".
In 2006, Dean Collins and Lerman formed a band, Indigo, along with musician Daniel Pashman; Collins sang lead vocals, Lerman played keyboard and guitar, and Pashman played the drums. In 2011, Lerman stated that Indigo is "not a serious band right now", and that music is his biggest passion after film. He plays the piano and is a fan of movie music compositions. Lerman also writes and creates loglines for stories.
Blackbook magazine wrote that Lerman "aspires to be the head of a studio one day".
