The "Star Wars" sequel trilogy is the upcoming third trilogy in the "Star Wars" film series. It will consist of "Episodes VII" through "IX" and will follow after "" in the saga's chronology. The trilogy was planned around 1975 by creator George Lucas but remained unproduced and was apparently abandoned in the 1990s. In 2012, with the announcement of its acquisition of Lucasfilm, The Walt Disney Company announced plans for "Star Wars Episode VII" in 2015, followed by "Episode VIII" and "Episode IX".
Story.
Lucas biographer Dale Pollock, who had read the original twelve stories written by Lucas, noted that the new episodes would involve character Luke Skywalker in his 30s or 40s. In an interview, Pollock stated that "the three most exciting stories were 7, 8 and 9. They had propulsive action, really interesting new worlds, new characters. I remember thinking, 'I want to see these 3 movies.'" Pollock expects the screenplays to follow the treatments written by Lucas.
"Star Wars Thrawn Trilogy" author Timothy Zahn had been briefed by Lucas on his plans for the various Star Wars trilogies during discussions of the Thrawn trilogy writing. After the Disney announcement, Zahn's trilogy had been speculated as the basis for the new trilogies, but Zahn stated that the Thrawn trilogy would fall into the gap between "Episode VI" and "Episode VII". The third film trilogy would involve Luke's children, as each of the three trilogies would involve different generations of the Skywalkers. Zahn also discussed the speculation about any conflict between the films and the Expanded Universe, stating that the “The books were always just the books.” The Thrawn trilogy did introduce things that were used in later "Star Wars" books and the later Lucas "Star Wars" movies, such as the name of the planet Coruscant, indicating Lucas “has been keeping a close eye on what has been done”.
History.
Initial vision: nine or twelve films (1976–1981).
Mark Hamill has stated that Lucas told him in 1976, while filming ' in Tunisia, that four "Star Wars" trilogies were planned. Lucas suggested Hamill could have a cameo role in "Episode IX", which might be filmed in 2001. A "Time" magazine story in March 1978, quoting Lucas, also contained the assertion there would be 10 further "Star Wars" films after '. Gary Kurtz was also aware of proposed story elements for Episodes VII to IX before 1980.
Following the success of in 1977, George Lucas expanded his plans for the "Star Wars" saga to include three trilogies rather than two. In 1980, at the time of the release of "The Empire Strikes Back", Lucas was saying there were seven further "Star Wars" films he wanted to make. He said he had "twelve-page outlines" for those films. In an interview with Steranko in "Prevue" magazine published in late 1980, Lucas described how the expansive scope of "Star Wars" had started with an overlong screenplay: "So, I took the screenplay and divided it into three stories, and rewrote the first one. As I was writing, I came up with some ideas for a film about robots, with no humans in it. When I got to working on the Wookiee, I thought of a film just about Wookiees, nothing else. So, for a time, I had a couple of odd movies with just those characters. Then, I had the other two films, which were essentially split into three parts each, two trilogies. When the smoke cleared, I said, 'This is really great. I'll do another trilogy that takes place after this.' I had three trilogies of nine films, and then another couple of odd films. Essentially, there were twelve films." He then added that he had "eliminated the odd movies, because they really don't have anything to do with the Star Wars saga. ... I'm just going to keep it pure. It's a nine-part saga that has a beginning, a middle and an end. It progresses over a period of about fifty or sixty years with about twenty years between trilogies, each trilogy taking about six or seven years." In this interview, Lucas also stated that he had "titles and ten-page story outlines for each of" the nine episodes. In an interview with Gary Kurtz in the same magazine, Kurtz said, "hether or not all nine or twelve films actually get made depends on how George feels as time goes along. The series may happen the way he originally planned or may completely change. As the films are made, each of the stories develops. As each is finished, I think the direction of the saga may change a bit."
In an interview with "Starlog" magazine published in September 1981, Lucas confirmed that he had the nine film series plotted, cautioning "but it's a long way from the plot to the script. I've just gone through that with "", and what seems like a great idea when it's described in three sentences doesn't hold together when you try to make five or six scenes out of it. So plots change a lot when they start getting into script form."
Uncertainty about further "Star Wars" films (1983–1994).
In interviews during the release of "Return of the Jedi", Lucas spoke of the toll that making the first trilogy had taken on his life. He would not be drawn into committing to when he would continue the saga (of which Episodes I to III were always understood to be the next trilogy that would be produced). "I look upon the three "Star Wars" films as chapters in one book," he told "Time" magazine in a story published in May 1983, the month of "Jedi"'s release. "Now the book is finished, and I have put it on the shelf."
In May 1987, during a Star Wars 10th Anniversary convention, Lucas confirmed that he would eventually continue the saga, starting with Episodes I to III. Episodes VII to IX were still confirmed as part of "nine floating around there somewhere". As late as 1994, Lucas wrote in the foreword of the special edition of "Splinter of the Mind's Eye" by Alan Dean Foster, "As the saga of the Skywalkers and Jedi Knights unfolded, I began to see it as a tale that could take at least nine films to tell – three trilogies."
Abandonment of sequel trilogy (1997–2012).
In publicity interviews relating to the release of the 1997 "Special Editions" of Episodes IV to VI and the planned "", Lucas began to convey that it was unlikely that he would make the sequel trilogy. At a 1997 "Special Edition" press conference Lucas remarked, "Everyone said, 'Well, are you going to do sequels to the first three?' But that was an afterthought; I don't have scripts on those stories. The only notion on that was, wouldn't it be fun to get all the actors to come back when they're 60 or 70 years old and make three more about them as old people. That's how far that has gone, but the first six will definitely get finished." In a 1997 issue of "Star Wars Insider", Lucas said, "The whole story has six episodes... If I ever went beyond that, it would be something that was made up. I really don't have any notion other than, 'Gee, it would be interesting to do Luke Skywalker later on.' It wouldn't be part of the main story, but a sequel to this thing." In an online Q&A hosted by Leonard Maltin and published in December 1997, Lucas was asked "Will we ever get to see Episodes 7, 8 and 9?", to which he answered, "Right at this moment, the answer is no. Once the prequel trilogy is complete I plan to put "Star Wars" on the shelf and walk away from it for good. There are many other kinds of films I would like to make."
A further comment Lucas made at that 1999 press conference noted the "nine year commitment" required to make a "Star Wars" trilogy. The theme of the commitment required, and his age, were the subject of his remarks in following years about why his position had changed about the sequel trilogy. In 2002, he described his past answers about the sequels in this way: "Basically what I said as a joke was, 'Maybe when Harrison and Carrie are in their 70s, we'll come back and do another version.' The thing I didn't realize then, and that I do realize now very clearly, is that not only would they be in their 70s, but "I" would be in my 70s too." In 2007 Lucas described making the films at that age as "An idea that seemed amusing at the time, but doesn't seem realistic now", and suggested that 'off-the-cuff' comments he had made in earlier years about the sequel trilogy had been misconstrued as absolute statements. In relation to his decision to begin work on the prequel trilogy when he did, he also said: "To start "Star Wars" when you're 65, the chances of finishing it are diminished" (a remark that could equally refer to the sequel trilogy).
In early May 2002, just before the worldwide release of ' and while Lucas was working on the script for ', rumors of "Star Wars Episodes VII", "VIII", and "IX" were posted on the Internet. In reply, Lucas noted that there would be no "Star Wars Episodes VII", "VIII", and "IX" since the time feels right to move on: Lucas also noted "Ultimately, the saga will be six films, a 12-hour story. Then people can watch all six films together as they were intended to be seen."
A little over two years later, in September 2004, Lucas squashed rumors that the 2005 release of "Episode III" would be followed by additional sequels: "There is no "VII", "VIII", "IX". There never has been. ... The story was originally intended to be "IV", "V", and "VI". But I had a back story which I found fascinating, and now you've got the full story from beginning to end. There really isn't any more." Despite this, the "Chicago Tribune's" entitled a May 2005 summary of American film critic Gene Siskel's "Star Wars" review, "Star Wars Episode VII." A month later, franchise producer Rick McCallum confirmed that Lucas would not be making "Episodes VII", "VIII", and "IX".
In an interview published in "Total Film" in May 2008, Lucas also ruled out anybody else ever making the sequel trilogy (or other future "Star Wars" features). Asked if he was happy for new "Star Wars" tales to be told after he was gone, Lucas replied: "I've left pretty explicit instructions for there not to be any more features. There will definitely be no Episodes VII–IX. That's because there isn't any story. I mean, I never thought of anything. And now there have been novels about the events after Episode VI, which isn't at all what I would have done with it. The "Star Wars" story is really the tragedy of Darth Vader. That is the story. Once Vader dies, he doesn't come back to life, the Emperor doesn't get cloned and Luke doesn't get married..." The phenomenon of the "Star Wars" 'Expanded Universe', with stories told in novels, comic books and other media, also appears to have been a factor in Lucas seeing no need to produce a sequel trilogy: "Whatever it is that happens afterward, that isn't the core "Star Wars" story that I like to tell," he said in 2008. "There really isn't any story to tell there. It's been covered in the books and video games and comic books, which are things I think are incredibly creative but that I don't really have anything to do with other than being the person who built the sandbox they're playing in."
In July 2008, Lucas explained the logical difficulties of making a "Star Wars Episode VII": 
In January 2012, Lucas continued to assert that there would be no "Episode VII". In an appearance on "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart", Lucas stated that the aerial combat footage in his 2012 American war film "Red Tails" "is as close as you’ll get to ["Star Wars"] "Episode VII"." In an interview with "The New York Times", discussing mixed fan reactions to the prequel trilogy and to alterations made to the original trilogy (such as Ewoks blinking and the bar scene where Greedo now shoots first) Lucas said, regarding further "Star Wars" films: "Why would I make any more, when everybody yells at you all the time and says what a terrible person you are?" Even Dan Rather, former U.S. news anchor for the "CBS Evening News", joked in 1999: "I have to get to the multiplex to see "Star Wars Episode VII: There's Something About Anakin"."
As Lucas took steps to retire from Lucasfilm in 2012, he experienced a change of heart. Lucas revealed plans to film "Episodes VII", "VIII", and "IX" to series stars Mark Hamill and Carrie Fisher in August 2012 in confidence. At that time, he indicated that he would not direct the films and that Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy would produce. He did not discuss Fisher and Hamill's involvement in the production and he did not disclose that he was planning to sell Lucasfilm.
Disney–Lucasfilm trilogy.
On October 30, 2012, it was announced that The Walt Disney Company would acquire Lucasfilm for US$4.05 billion, half in cash and half in shares of Disney. Privately held Lucasfilm would become a unit of Disney, like Marvel Entertainment and Pixar. As part of the announcement, Disney announced that "Star Wars Episode VII" would be released in 2015; additional Star Wars films would then be released every two or three years apart. Lucasfilm already had "Episode VII" in early-stage development.
Disney chief executive and chairman Bob Iger told the "Financial Times" that the deal would slightly reduce returns to shareholders over the next two years, but that it would become profitable for them in 2015, once "Episode VII" is released.
Episode VII.
"Star Wars Episode VII" is an upcoming film from Lucasfilm scheduled to be released by Walt Disney Pictures in 2015. It is to be the first "Star Wars" film produced under Disney's ownership of Lucasfilm. Lucasfilm president Kathleen Kennedy will serve as executive producer of the film, and George Lucas will serve as creative consultant.
As part of the Lucasfilm purchase, Disney received an "extensive story treatment" by Lucas for "Episode VII." Neither Lucas nor Disney revealed any details of the plot at the film's announcement. It has been confirmed by both companies that "Episode VII" will be an original story and not directly based on the various novels, graphic novels, or other materials in the "Star Wars" Expanded Universe that take place during the post-"Return of the Jedi" time period. This includes, most notably, Timothy Zahn's 1991 novel "Heir to the Empire", the first installment in Zahn's Thrawn Trilogy, which was originally considered by some fans to be "Episode VII". In a video interview that was part of the purchase announcement, Kennedy stated that she and Lucas had already met with writers to discuss the film script. Less than two weeks after the purchase, it was announced that Michael Arndt, the Academy Award-winning screenwriter for "Little Miss Sunshine" and "Toy Story 3", had been chosen to write the screenplay. According to reports, Arndt's treatment of the film is said to call for much older versions of the main characters returning along with other fan favorites.
In an August 2012 meeting with series stars Carrie Fisher and Mark Hamill, Lucas disclosed that he would not direct the sequels. This was confirmed as part of the Lucasfilm purchase and no director was named at that time. Not long after the announcement, the media speculated openly on possible directors; the list included Matthew Vaughn, Steven Spielberg, Neill Blomkamp, Alfonso Cuarón, Darren Aronofsky, Joss Whedon, Jon Favreau, Joseph Kosinski, Colin Trevorrow, J. J. Abrams, Brad Bird and Rian Johnson. Spielberg ruled himself out as a possible director, citing his incompatibility with the genre. In addition, Zack Snyder and Quentin Tarantino, who were both rumored to have been evaluated for the directing position, denied the rumors. Abrams said he is "looking forward to the next iterations of Star Wars, but I will be going as a paying moviegoer." Brad Bird said that his next film would be a science-fiction film, but not Star Wars. "I will be first in line to see the new Star Wars." Colin Trevorrow also ruled himself out for "Episode VII". Jon Favreau was more open to the idea of directing the film. Disney contacted Guillermo del Toro to find out if he was interested, but del Toro declined, citing commitments to projects of his own and suggesting Brad Bird as a more suitable choice. Producer Frank Marshall, husband of Kathleen Kennedy and long-time collaborator with her in The Kennedy/Marshall Company, said that the search for a director was down to "a couple of candidates". On January 24, 2013, several news outlets revealed that J. J. Abrams was close to signing a deal to direct "Episode VII". On January 25, 2013, The Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm officially announced Abrams as director and producer, along with Bryan Burk and their company Bad Robot Productions. Production on all of the film's battle scenes will start this summer in the United Kingdom.
Media speculation also focused on the possible return of series stars Mark Hamill, Carrie Fisher, Harrison Ford, Billy Dee Williams, Ewan McGregor and Samuel L. Jackson. Carrie Fisher was recorded on video stating that she would like to reprise the role of Princess Leia. It was reported that Ford was open to returning to the role of Han Solo, and all three were "upbeat" to return. Billy Dee Williams' character, Lando Calrissian, has been reported to be in Arndt's story treatment, and Williams has stated that he would be interested in reprising the role for the film. Ewan McGregor, who played Obi-Wan Kenobi in the prequel trilogy, said that he was open to the possibility of playing the character in "Episode VII". Samuel L. Jackson, who played Mace Windu in the prequels, also expressed his excitement and desire to return to the franchise. On February 15, 2013, several media outlets reported that Ford had signed on to the film, but it has not been confirmed by Ford or Lucasfilm. Also in February 2013, John Williams, composer on all previous "Star Wars" films, expressed his interest in working on the new trilogy, stating: "Now we’re hearing of a new set of movies coming in 2015, 2016… so I need to make sure I’m still ready to go in a few years for what I hope would be continued work with George ". It is unclear who Abrams is considering for the music, as he is a frequent collaborator of Michael Giacchino.
Mark Hamill commented about the sequels in late February 2013 stating that "they are talking to us" and he is scheduled to meet with writer Michael Arndt and Kathleen Kennedy. Hamill stated that so far nobody has signed a contract though there appears to be interest in the entire cast. Hamill said prior to the Disney sale that along with Fisher they met with Lucas who asked them if they had any interest in returning and they would not re-cast their roles and write the characters out of the script. Hamill told Lucas that he wanted the franchise to go back to the way it was, in the sense that it was much more carefree and lighthearted and humorous. He also stated that he wanted the original cast of Ford, Fisher, Williams, along with Peter Mayhew and Anthony Daniels to be included in the new sequels making sure that everyone was one board and not just one person. Hamill was also asked about the script and he said he hasn't seen anything although speculated that the film would be based around the offspring of the original cast and he would play a Obi-Wan type role.
Episodes VIII and IX.
Lawrence Kasdan, writer of ' and ', and Simon Kinberg will write and produce "Episode VIII" and "Episode IX". "The Hollywood Reporter" subsequently reported that Kasdan and Kinberg would be working on future "Star Wars" projects, but not necessarily on "Episode VIII" and "Episode IX". It was also reported that Disney would release "Star Wars" films "every two to three years".
