Grand Theft Auto V, commonly shortened to GTA V, is an upcoming open world action-adventure video game being developed by Rockstar North in the United Kingdom and published by Rockstar Games. The game will be the first major title in the "Grand Theft Auto" series since "Grand Theft Auto IV" (2008), and a continuation of the fictional universe that was introduced in that game. The 15th game in the series overall, "GTA V" is to be set in fictional Los Santos in the state of San Andreas and its surrounding areas, based on modern-day Los Angeles and Southern California. A rendition of Los Santos was previously featured as one of three cities in ', released in 2004.
According to Rockstar, "Grand Theft Auto V" is destined to be their biggest open world game to date. The game will concentrate on "the pursuit of the almighty dollar". In a break with recent tradition, "GTA V" will feature three playable protagonists. 
"Grand Theft Auto V" was officially announced on 25 October 2011, after much speculation. The debut trailer for the game was unveiled on 2 November 2011. The first demo of the game was revealed to press on 11 October 2012. The second trailer of "GTA V" was announced on 5 November 2012, and released on 14 November 2012.
A highly anticipated game, "GTA V" is due for release on 17 September 2013, for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360. A release for the PC or Wii U is being considered by Rockstar, but has not been officially announced.
Gameplay.
"Grand Theft Auto V" "evolves nearly every mechanic" found in previous games in the series. "GTA Vs world is bigger than the worlds of "Red Dead Redemption", ' and "Grand Theft Auto IV" combined. Areas in the game world include beach fronts, mountains, the wilderness, a "Salton Sea" region, a military base and the suburbs. The ocean floor is fully detailed and can be explored.
"GTA V"s single-player story is told through three player-controlled protagonists. They are Michael, Trevor and Franklin, criminals whose stories interconnect as they complete missions together. During story missions, the player can switch between the protagonists as they work together to accomplish an objective; in one such mission, Michael rappels down the side of a building, Franklin provides covering fire with a sniper rifle, and Trevor controls the getaway helicopter.
Outside of missions, the player is free to swap between the protagonists and explore the game's open world, which includes a fully-fledged ecosystem. The camera zooms out to a "Google Earth-style" perspective when switching characters and then drops into wherever the chosen character is. Even when the player is not controlling them, each character will still go about their own business across Los Santos. As any of the protagonists, the player can engage in activities such as yoga, triathlons, Jet Skiing, base-jumping, tennis, golf, scuba diving or go to the gym. Each character will have unique hobbies, which can be completed with the protagonists' friends, but the dating system from "GTA IV" does not return. "San Andreas"' RPG-like player customisation is also absent, but the player can customise the clothing of each character. Characters can "flip off" people, "something Rockstar recommends you do in varied circumstances to see different reactions from people". Depending on the area, people react differently.
The mobile phone introduced in "GTA IV" returns, but many of its features have been altered. The mobile phone is mainly used for activities and can also be used to access the in-game internet. There will be a "vibrant and fun" economy system, but the player won't be able to buy property as in ' and ' . Shooting has evolved "a long way" in terms of feel and mechanics, and the melee combat is improved over that of previous "GTA" titles. 
"GTA V" will feature more vehicles than in any "GTA" to date, including huge variety of cars, trucks, bikes, helicopters, planes, ATVs and jet skis. The cars will feel less "boatlike" than in "GTA IV", they will "hold on better to the ground" and the driving mechanic will feel "more like a racing game".
Multiplayer.
Multiplayer will feature "Crews" similar to "Max Payne 3". The new Social Club functionality will connect play across multiple titles, starting with "Max Payne 3" and "GTA V". By playing both games' multiplayer, crews that the player set up in one will be carried over to the other. GTA V will let players form private crews with friends, or join public crews. Players can be a member of up to five at the same time, and completing tasks as a crew will gain experience points for the player. In late 2012, Rockstar said that "refining open-world multiplayer into something really special" had been a huge focus in the development of "GTA V".
Premise.
The narrative of the game follows three characters with interconnected stories. Michael is a retired former bank robber in his early forties who lives with his dysfunctional family on the proceeds of his former life in the upper-class suburb of Rockford Hills, based on Beverly Hills. Trevor Phillips, his former partner, lives alone in a trailer in the desert of Blaine County, his reckless and psychopathic behaviours being fuelled by a drug addiction. Franklin makes a living in Vespucci Beach — based on Venice Beach — as a repo man for an unscrupulous Armenian car dealership. The three acquaintances are drawn into Los Santos' criminal underworld "in the pursuit of the almighty American dollar". According to Dan Houser, each of the protagonists is unlike any primary character that has appeared in a "Grand Theft Auto" title to date: Michael represents a protagonist who "won" and is now trying to adjust to life after his story has come to an end; Trevor is styled after a supporting character who has been re-cast in the role of protagonist; and Franklin is someone who has had no real exposure to a life of crime until the events of the game.
Development.
In September 2009 during an earnings call, Take-Two Interactive CEO Strauss Zelnick answered a listener's question about the next "Grand Theft Auto". He replied, "We're not going to announce it, we're not going to announce when we are going to announce it, and we are not going to announce a strategy about announcing it or about when we are going to announce it either, or about the announcement strategy surrounding the announcement of the strategy."
In a November 2009 interview with "The Times", "Grand Theft Auto" producer Dan Houser discussed his work, including the future of the series. Houser stated that he planned to co-write a script that reached about one thousand pages in length. In the same interview, Houser explained the company's basic workflow of creating new games in the series, which involves coming up with the city first, and then the lead character later.
In July 2010, Rockstar North posted seven job ads related to a new title. The firm looked to fill positions including environment artists, physics programmers and character animators. The job ad for the latter asking for those with "professional experience developing a third person action game". It was unknown if Rockstar was hiring for "GTA V", or the firm was bulking up its "Agent" team.
In June 2011, sources allegedly close to the developer told GameSpot that the title is "well under way", with final touches like mini-games already being applied, and a 2012 release "pretty likely". "It's the big one," they also said of the game, noting that "GTA V"s scale is vast.
Dan Houser said that though "GTA V" will introduce a musical score for missions inspired by previous Rockstar titles "Red Dead Redemption" and "Max Payne 3", the series' traditional radio stations will remain. The immense size of Los Santos was necessary to accommodate flying. Dan Houser said that he argued against a new installment leaving the series' traditional US setting. The idea to include three main protagonists in "GTA V" came from the interweaving plots of "GTA IVs ' expansions. Houser argued that all of the best games come out at the end of each generation, stating that the time has been spent getting the most out of current tech. Rockstar North head Leslie Benzies stated that "we hope that "GTA V" will do for multiplayer open world games what "GTA III" did for open world single-player games."
In January 2013, two investment companies increased their share in Take-Two months ahead of the release of "GTA V".
Marketing.
Announcements.
On 25 October 2011, Rockstar Games announced "Grand Theft Auto V" via their Twitter account, which included the #GTAV hashtag and a link to their homepage, which displayed the game's logo. The 'V' in the logo is styled like a bank note. A message was printed below the logo stating that a trailer would be released on 2 November 2011. The following day, Rockstar put a "Grand Theft Auto V" trailer countdown on their homepage. Shares of Take-Two Interactive, the parent company of Rockstar Games, jumped seven percent following the revelation that "Grand Theft Auto V" is in development. Around the same time, video game website Kotaku claimed that it had been told that rumours about Rockstar being set to make a switch to reality by recreating real-world Los Angeles for "GTA V" "are true" by "a source familiar with the game". Kotaku said that "GTA V" will be set in "some version of L.A." and also claimed that multiple sources are saying that the game will feature more than just one playable character.
On 2 November 2011, Rockstar released the debut trailer for "Grand Theft Auto V". Giving fans a first look at the upcoming title, the trailer revealed the setting to be Los Santos, the fictional version of Los Angeles and its California surroundings, including Hollywood ("Vinewood") and rural hills and valleys, and revolved around the story of Michael. Additional features revealed in the trailer included golf, planes, jetskis, and a working gym. The song used in the trailer is "Ogdens' Nut Gone Flake" by the British band The Small Faces.
On 3 November 2011, Rockstar Games announced that "Grand Theft Auto V" was in full development and that it would take place within Los Santos and its "surrounding hills, countryside and beaches", and that it would be "the largest and the most ambitious game Rockstar has yet created", with Sam Houser describing it as a "radical reinvention of the "Grand Theft Auto" universe". A version of Los Santos was previously featured in 2004's "", along with two other cities that were part of that rendition of the state of San Andreas (Las Venturas and San Fierro, based on Las Vegas and San Francisco, respectively). Rockstar parent Take-Two called "GTA V" "a bold new direction in open-world freedom, storytelling, mission-based gameplay and online multiplayer," while confirming that its story will focus on "the pursuit of the almighty dollar in a re-imagined, present-day Southern California." No release date or platforms were provided in the announcement.
On 8 November 2011, Take-Two's second quarter financial earnings report included an update on future product launch dates, with the newest game to be added to the list was "GTA V", which carried a "TBA" release. On 2 February 2012, during Take-Two's third quarter financial report, CEO Strauss Zelnick said developer Rockstar is making "incredible progress". On 13 February 2012, in a Question and Answer section on their blog, a nameless Rockstar representative said that the developer is toiling away diligently and hopes to reveal more in a few months time.
On 29 October 2012, it was reported that a Polish fan site had published an image of some pre-order posters, which suggested that "GTA V" would arrive in "Spring 2013". The image contains the previous "Pest Control" artwork, as well as a previously-unseen illustration of a thug with a baseball bat and an angry-looking dog on a chain. A day later, it was reported that a branch of the British videogame retailer Game in Brighton published a similar picture of "GTA V" artwork on Twitter, again showing a spring 2013 release date. The promotional material shows off a new set of artwork for the game, including a female police officer, arresting a blonde woman, and a gun-toting man (later revealed to be Trevor) on a quad bike. Later that day, Rockstar announced that "GTA V" will be released sometime during Q2 2013 for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360, and that pre-orders would begin on 5 November 2012. On 1 November 2012, a user on the GTAForums spotted an apparent piece of pre-order artwork for the game in a Walmart store in Toronto. The promotional material shows another version of the blonde woman (without Vasquez). Around the same time, a number of locations from the game was revealed in a set of exclusive screenshots for pre-order customers. The images were housed in miniature picture viewers, a collectible for those who pre-order the game.
Rockstar intended to release "Grand Theft Auto V"s second promotional trailer on 2 November 2012, the first anniversary of the release of the game's debut trailer in 2011. However, Hurricane Sandy severed power in Rockstar's New York offices, effectively delaying the release. The trailer was later released on 14 November 2012. The trailer focuses on all three protagonists, depicting their relationship with other characters and the areas in which they reside, such as scenes showing Michael and his son are often in urban uptown areas. Additional features revealed in the trailer included tennis, dirtbike racing, skydiving, jets and freight trains hauling tankers and cargo containers. The song used in the trailer is "Skeletons" by American singer, songwriter Stevie Wonder.
On 31 January 2013, Rockstar announced that "GTA V" would miss its original Q2/Q3 2013 launch window, and would be released on 17 September 2013. Rockstar Games founder Sam Houser attributed the delay for "extra development time" on the project. In a later post on the announcement thread on their website, Rockstar slammed what it labels "conspiracy theories" about the delay, attributed the delay to make "the game to be as good as it needs to be." In a later conference call with investors, Take-Two's Strauss Zelnick implied that the chance of a "dual-generation launch" for "GTA V" is unlikely.
Promotion.
On 12 July 2012, in a Q&A section on their blog, Rockstar released two new screenshots from the game, and stated "We just have not been in a position to show more of the game than the trailer and will not be for a while yet." On 31 July 2012, during Take-Two's first quarter financial call, a representative from Take-Two said that "GTA V" "is in full development and making substantial progress". On 20 August 2012, Rockstar released a trio of new screenshots on their blog, entitled "Transport", showing an in-game car, a jet, and confirming the return of pedal bikes. Two days later, Rockstar released three new screenshots from the game highlighting leisure activities; tennis, dirt biking and parachuting. On 24 August 2012, Rockstar released four new screenshots on their website, entitled "Business", showing criminal activities in the game such as flying planes, stealing cars and shooting at police helicopters. On 24 October 2012, Rockstar released the first official artwork, titled Pest Control, and stated "Lots of info coming next month. Get ready." On 8 November 2012, "Game Informer"'s "GTA V" cover story was revealed in their December issue. On Christmas Eve 2012, Rockstar released five new screenshots for "GTA V", showing a plane, fighter jet, blimp, shark, scuba gear, submarine, and a rottweiler in the passenger seat of a car.
Rockstar are collaborating with several retail outlets on pre-order bonuses available through store chains throughout the world. Which of the pre-order bonuses the player received depends upon where they pre-order the game. Early pre-order customers received an image viewer keychains, offering players an "exclusive look at new locations within the game". There are five different image viewers, each showing off a location from "GTA V". At GameStop, early players also received a double-sided poster. The official online Rockstar Games store, the Rockstar Warehouse, offers a "KIFFLOM" T-shirt as the pre-order bonus. The T-shirt is a light-blue colour with "KIFFLOM" printed on the front in white, and the phrase "The Tract is not yet Written" on the back. "KIFFLOM" is the motto of a fictional religious cult called "Epsilon", within the "GTA" universe.
Downloadable content.
On 30 October 2012, Take-Two CEO Strauss Zelnick suggested that Rockstar has "a lot of interesting stuff" planned for "GTA V"'s DLC, but that it was "way too early" to begin discussing it.
Controversy.
Despite being unreleased at the time, in December 2012, in light of the Sandy Hook massacre, U.S. senator Joe Manchin suggested that the sale of violent video games, particularly pointing out Rockstar's "Grand Theft Auto" series and its upcoming video game "Grand Theft Auto V", should be banned.
