Grimm is an American police procedural fantasy television drama series. It debuted in the U.S. on NBC on October 28, 2011. The show has been described as "a cop drama—with a twist... a dark and fantastical project about a world in which characters inspired by Grimms' Fairy Tales exist", although the stories and characters inspiring the show are also drawn from other sources.
Grimm ran on Fridays for the entirety of its first season. In March 2012, NBC renewed the show for a second season, which premiered on Monday, August 13, 2012, and continued on Mondays for four episodes, before returning to its original Friday timeslot on September 10.
Synopsis.
Homicide Detective Nick Burkhardt of the Portland Police Bureau learns he is descended from a line of "guardians" known as "Grimms", charged with keeping balance between humanity and the mythological creatures of the world, called "Wesen" (the German word for "creature / being", pronounced "vessin" here). Throughout the episodes, he must battle against an assortment of dangerous creatures, with help from his friend Monroe (who is a reformed creature), and his partner Detective Hank Griffin.
Episodes.
Many of the episodes are loosely based on stories written by The Brothers Grimm, albeit with considerable artistic license. Other episodes are based on other sources, including fables and legends, not written by The Brothers Grimm.
Development and production.
In January 2011, NBC announced that it had ordered a series titled "Grimm". David Greenwalt and Jim Kouf co-wrote the pilot, which was directed by Marc Buckland. Filming for the pilot began in March in Portland, Oregon. In May 2011 NBC announced that it had picked up the series for a full season.
Greenwalt and Kouf serve as executive producers for the series along with Sean Hayes and Todd Milliner. The series is produced by Universal Media Studios and Hazy Mills Productions. It is filmed on location in and around Portland. Greenwalt and Kouf told KGW they chose Portland because of its plentiful forests in the city's two largest parks, Washington Park and Forest Park.
On September 30, 2011, NBC delayed the debut of "Grimm" by one month, moving the premiere to October 28, 2011, so it could premiere closer to Halloween. On November 21, 2011, NBC picked up the series for a full 22-episode season. NBC showed a special Thursday showing on December 8 at 10pm to see if the network's overall ratings could improve.
On March 16, 2012, NBC announced that the series had been renewed for a second season; according to writers/producers David Greenwalt and Jim Kouf, they will continue to film the show in Portland, saying "Rain or shine, Portland has been the ideal setting for fairy tales with its enchanting layout. It is its own character in our show with the perfect mix of urban and rural settings."
Casting.
David Giuntoli, who plays Nick, was the first to be cast. Silas Weir Mitchell was then cast as Monroe, the now-reformed "big bad wolf". Following this, Russell Hornsby and Bitsie Tulloch were cast as Nick's partner Hank and his girlfriend Juliette, respectively. Sasha Roiz was cast in the final regular role as Captain Renard.
Bree Turner, who guest starred in four episodes in season one, became a series regular for season two, continuing her role as Rosalee Calvert. Claire Coffee, who has been recurring as Adalind Schade since the pilot, has also been upgraded to series regular during season two.
Reception.
Critical reception.
The series's premiere received mixed reviews, based on Metacritic's index score of 55 out of 100.
Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" felt "It has chills and humor and the ability to take a procedural story and twist it." Mike Hale of "The New York Times" said "Some of the jokes work, and some of the frights are actually scary, and on a repeat viewing the craftsmanship and attention to detail made more of an impression." 
Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote in a mixed review, that she preferred other fairy-tale themed dramas, such as ABC's "Once Upon a Time", stating that despite a good cast and setting, "Grimm" puts an "entertaining crime spin on fairy-tale monsters that's a little too pat... adds up to a nice, moody, entertaining-enough hour and the troublesome question of how interesting this will be by the third episode."
Daynah Burnett, who reviewed the show for Pop Matters, felt "As Grimm grasps for compelling analogues between fairy tales’ villains and ours, its stories turn exceedingly literal: wolves urinate in the corners of their lawns to mark their territory, rather than lurk (and mark) in ways less obvious and more culturally meaningful. There’s certainly room here for these archetypes to be explored as the series develops, but when Nick’s prime suspect for the red-hoodie crimes turns out to live in an actual cottage in the woods, it doesn’t bode well for how these stories might reflect the lives of viewers", before giving it a score of 4 out of 10.
Ratings.
A press release put out by NBC on November 11, 2011, states ""Grimm" and "Up All Night" Are the #1 New Drama and #1 New Comedy Among Top % Gainers Going from Live+Same Day to Live+7. "Grimm" is the #1 new drama on ABC, CBS, NBC or Fox in terms of percentage increase from L+SD to L+7 so far this season and also the #1 new series and the #2 show overall behind only Fox's "Fringe" (+57%), growing by +49% in adults 18–49 (to a 2.98 rating from a 2.00)" The series, which has been averaging about 6.4 million U.S. viewers during its first season, has been renewed for a second season. 
Friday September, 28th, 2012, “Grimm” has increased its adult 18-49 rating by 1.14 points going from “live plus same day” ratings to “live plus three day” results from Nielsen Media Research (from a 1.58 to a 2.72). The 1.14 increase is “Grimm’s” biggest gain ever going from L+SD to L+3. The 2.72 is “Grimm’s” highest L+3 rating since the show’s second season premiere on Monday, Aug. 13. 
International broadcasting.
The following table lists the countries in which "Grimm" airs outside the USA.
