Jennifer "Jenni" Farley (born February 27, 1986), also known as JWoww, is an American television personality. She first came to prominence as one of the eight main cast members in the MTV reality series "Jersey Shore". She has also made several appearances on other shows, such as "TNA Impact!" and "Disaster Date". She also has a line of tanning products with Australian Gold.
Early life.
Farley attended Columbia High School, in East Greenbush, New York. She is of Spanish-Irish descent. Before starting her career, she spent time as a nanny.
Career.
Prior to "Jersey Shore", Farley owned a graphic design business, Jenni Farley Designs, Inc. In December 2009, 23-year-old Farley began appearing on "Jersey Shore" as she and seven other housemates spent the summer in the Seaside Heights, New Jersey. The second season was filmed in Miami, Florida, while the third season returned to New Jersey. A fourth season of the series was filmed in Florence, Italy. Despite reports that the cast would not sign their contracts until their pay was increased, all eight members eventually signed a deal to film for the upcoming season.
Farley launched a line, "Filthy Couture," in a Las Vegas, Nevada runway show in July 2010. After four months of operation, the line ceased sales in October 2010 due to a threatened trademark lawsuit. Farley stated that the brand was not over and a new line would be released. In April 2011, MTV announced that it ordered two "Jersey Shore" spin-off series, one of which will feature Farley and castmate Nicole Polizzi. Twelve episodes were ordered for the first season. In 2010 she released a book titled "The Rules According to JWOWW: Shore-Tested Secrets On Landing A Mint Guy, Staying Fresh To Death, and Kicking the Competition to the Curb". Currently, she is being sued for allegedly filming several episodes of her reality show without proper authorization from her landlord.
In 2012 Farley and her "Jersey Shore" costar, Nicole Polizzi, starred in a 12-episode spin off show, "Snooki & JWoww", which premiered on MTV on June 21, 2012. The show, which was filmed over the course of six weeks at a former two-story firehouse located near Grove and Mercer Streets in Jersey City, New Jersey, follows Polizzi and Farley moving in together, and is described as a modern-day "Laverne & Shirley". JWoww also hosted "MTV's Club New Year's Eve 2013" with Polizzi and Jeff Dye to ring in 2013. The duo did star again in the second season of "Snooki & JWoww", which premiered on January 8, 2013.
In October 2011, JWOWW launched her personal venting space JWOWW.com, to share all the things she is currently obsessed with and offer tips to her fans for all their smushing, makeup and fitness problems. 
Public Image.
On January, 2013 Farley had rankend in CQ magazine's Sexiest 100 Ladies Of The 21st Century.
Farley is an admitted bisexual. 
Activism.
Jennifer "Jwoww" Farley is a strong supporter of gay rights and has come out strongly in defense of the LGBT community in two separate Twitter wars. The first was a result of Bristol Palin speaking out against Barack Obama's support of gay marriage. Farley stated, "Bristol should keep her uneducated, ignorant mouth shut. If you're living in the past you wouldn't have a kid without marriage. Hypocrite. It's 2012!" Farley wrote "My best friend will get married one day and not just have civil union with his man. Stop hating people." In October of 2012, her former Jersey Shore co-star Angelina Pivarnick spoke out against gay marriage and suggested that if gay people wanted to, they could change their sexual orientation. After hearing about this, a furious Farley fired back at her former co-star and reiterated her strong support for gay rights. 
