L (named "el" or "ell" ) is the twelfth letter of the ISO basic Latin alphabet. In Roman numerals it represents 50.
History.
Lamedh may have come from a pictogram of an ox goad or cattle prod. Some have suggested a shepherd's staff.
Pronunciation.
In English, "L" can have several sound values, depending on whether it occurs before or after a vowel. The alveolar lateral approximant (the sound represented in IPA by lowercase ) occurs before a vowel, as in 'lip' or 'please', while the velarized alveolar lateral approximant (IPA ) occurs in 'bell' and 'milk'. This velarization does not occur in many European languages that use "L"; it is also a factor making the pronunciation of "L" difficult for users of languages that lack "L" or have different values for it, such as Japanese or some southern dialects of Chinese.
"L" can occur before almost any obstruent (stop, fricative, or affricate) in English. Common digraphs include "LL", which has a value identical to "L" in English, but has the separate value voiceless alveolar lateral fricative (IPA ) in Welsh, where it can appear in an initial position.
A palatal lateral approximant or palatal 'L' (IPA ) occurs in many languages, and is represented by 'GL' in Italian, 'LL' in Spanish and Catalan, 'LH' in Portuguese, and 'Ļ' in Latvian.
In English writing, "L" is often silent in such words as 'walk' or 'could' (its presence can modify the preceding vowel letter's sound; e.g. 'wak' might be pronounced to rhyme with 'back').
Currency signs.
The capital letter 'L' is used as the currency sign for the Albanian lek and the Honduran lempira. It was often used, especially in handwriting, as the currency sign for the Italian lira. It is also infrequently used as a substitute for the pound sign (£), which is based on it.
Form.
In some fonts, the lowercase letter L, 'l' may be difficult to distinguish from the digit one, '1' or an uppercase letter I, 'I'. In recent times, many new fonts have curved the lowercase form to the right, and it is increasingly common, especially on European road signs and advertisements. A more stylized version based on the handwritten letterlike 'ℓ' is sometimes used in mathematics and elsewhere. Its LaTeX command is \ell, its codepoint is U+2113, and its numeric character reference is "&#8467;".
