Austin & Ally is an American sitcom which first aired on the Disney Channel on December 2, 2011. The series was created by Kevin Kopelow and Heath Seifert, the writers and producers of the Disney Channel sitcoms "Sonny with a Chance" and "Jonas". Production for the pilot episode began in mid-February 2011, and on May 24, 2011, the Disney Channel announced that "Austin & Ally" had been picked up as a series. They initially ordered 13 episodes, though that number was later increased to 21. The first promo for the series was released on October 2011, during the Disney Channel's "Make Your Mark: The Ultimate Dance-Off" event. A series preview followed the premiere of the Disney Channel Original Movie, "Good Luck Charlie, It's Christmas!", and the series officially premiered on December 4, 2011. The show has been renewed for a second season, and has resumed production as of the summer of 2012.
Plot.
Set in Miami, "Austin & Ally" is a multi-camera comedy about the relationship between two very different musicians: extroverted singer and instrumentalist Austin Moon, who is fun-loving and outgoing; and introverted and awkward songwriter Ally Dawson, who can sing but has an extreme case of stage fright. 
Austin becomes famous after he secretly records one of Ally's songs with the help of his best friend Dez, and posts it on the internet. However, he did so without Ally's knowledge, and once Ally, convinced by her best friend Trish, takes credit for her song, Austin convinces her to become partners. The two agree to work together, and become close friends, while struggling to keep Austin's newfound fame and profit from it, with the help of Trish and Dez. They face adventures while in Austin's music career. At the end of the 1st season, Austin gets signed to Jimmy Starr's record label.
In Season 2, Austin's music career begins to take off, and Ally's stage fright becomes less horrible. Trish start's dating a guy named Trent, but breaks up with him after the gang finds out he is a cheater. There is also a 10 year old reporter from Cheetah beat named Megan who starts to follow the gang around. In, Ferris Wheels & Funky Breath, Austin meets a girl named Kira, Jimmy Starr's daughter, who has terrible breath. In Girlfriends & Girl Friends, Kira's breath becomes better, and Austin and Kira begin to date. When Austin & Ally plan the date, Ally begins to like Austin. In, Campers & Complications, Austin begins to like Ally too, and thinks she likes her friend Elliot. When Elliot leaves, Austin and Ally both like each other, but don't tell each other, making it really hard to work together.
The series has been described as a "pint-sized" version of HBO's comedy-drama "Entourage".
Episodes.
"Jessie" crossover.
In November 2012, Disney Channel announced that the show will crossover with "Jessie" as a 49 minute special episode titled "Austin & JESSIE & Ally All Star New Year". The special episode aired December 7, 2012.
In this episode Austin makes his dream come true when he plays Times Square on New Year's Eve.
Development, production and reception.
The series was created by Kevin Kopelow and Heath Seifert, the writers and producers of the Disney Channel sitcoms "Sonny with a Chance" and "Jonas". Production for the pilot episode began in mid-February 2011. The pilot was directed by Shelley Jensen. Casting for the series regulars were held nationally around the United States and shooting for the pilot began in early March 2011. On May 24, 2011, Disney Channel announced that "Austin & Ally" had been picked up as a series. On September 29, 2011, it was announced that Disney Channel had extended the show's episode order from 13 episodes to 21. Shooting for the first season completed on January 27, 2012. It was announced on March 11, 2012, that the show had been renewed for a second season and production would resume that summer, though the cast's first day back for the second season was earlier than that, on June 4, 2012.
 The season ended production on February 1, 2013.
The series preview attracted 5.7 million viewers and the official premiere garnered 4.0 million viewers. Austin & Ally was ranked the No.1 Telecast on Sunday
premieres among pre-teens 9-12 and teens 13-18.
Songs.
Songs with an * are not on the soundtrack
