The viscosity of a fluid is a measure of its resistance to gradual deformation by shear stress or tensile stress. For liquids, it corresponds to the informal notion of "thickness". For example, honey has a higher viscosity than water.
Viscosity is due to friction between neighboring parcels of the fluid that are moving at different velocities. When fluid is forced through a tube, the fluid generally moves faster near the axis and very little near the walls, therefore some stress (such as a pressure difference between the two ends of the tube) is needed to overcome the friction between layers and keep the fluid moving. For the same velocity pattern, the stress is proportional to the fluid's viscosity.
A fluid that has no resistance to shear stress is known as an ideal fluid or inviscid fluid. In the real world, zero viscosity is observed only at very low temperatures, in superfluids. Otherwise all fluids have positive viscosity. If the viscosity is very high, such as in pitch, the fluid will seem to be a solid in the short term. In common usage, a liquid whose viscosity is less than that of water is known as a mobile liquid, while a substance with a viscosity substantially greater than water is simply called a viscous liquid.
Etymology.
The word "viscosity" is derived from the Latin "", meaning mistletoe. A viscous glue called birdlime was made from mistletoe berries and was used for lime-twigs to catch birds.
Definition.
Shear viscosity.
The shear viscosity of a fluid expresses its resistance to shearing flows, where adjacent layers move parallel to each other with different speeds. It can be defined through the idealized situation known as a Couette flow, where a layer of fluid is trapped between two horizontal plates, one fixed and one moving horizontally at constant speed formula_1. (The plates are assumed to be very large, so that one need not consider what happens near their edges.) 
If the speed of the top plate is small enough, the fluid particles will move parallel to it, and their speed will vary linearly from zero at the the bottom to formula_1 at the top. Each layer of fluid will move faster than the one just below it, and friction between them will give rise to a force resisting their relative motion. In particular, the fluid will apply on the top plate a force in the direction opposite to its motion, and an equal but opposite to the bottom plate. An external force is therefore required in order to keep the top plate moving at constant speed.
The magnitude formula_3 of this force is found to be proportional to the speed formula_1 and the area formula_5 of each plate, and inversely proportional to their separation formula_6. That is,
The proportionality factor "μ" in this formula is the viscosity (specifically, the dynamic viscosity) of the fluid.
The ratio formula_8 is called the "rate of shear deformation" or "shear velocity", and is the derivative of the fluid speed in the direction perpendicular to the plates. Isaac Newton expressed the viscous forces by the differential equation
where formula_10 and formula_11 is the local shear velocity. This formula assumes that the flow is moving along parallel lines and the formula_6 axis, perpendicular to the flow, points in the direction of maximum shear velocity. This equation can be used where the velocity does not vary linearly with formula_6, such as in fluid flowing through a pipe.
Use of the Greek letter mu ("μ") for the dynamic stress viscosity is common among mechanical and chemical engineers, as well as physicists. However, the Greek letter eta ("η") is also used by chemists, physicists, and the IUPAC.
Bulk viscosity.
When a compressible fluid is compressed or expanded evenly, without shear, it may still exhibit 
a form of internal friction that resists its flow. These forces are related to the rate of compression or expansion by a factor "σ", called the volume viscosity, bulk viscosity or second viscosity
The bulk viscosity is important only when the fluid is being rapidly compressed or expanded, such as in sound and shock waves. Bulk viscosity explains the loss of energy in those waves, as described by Stokes' law of sound attenuation.
Viscosity tensor.
In general, the stresses within a flow can be attributed partly to the deformation of the material from some rest state (elastic stress), and partly to the rate of change of the deformation over time (viscous stress). In a fluid, by definition, the elastic stress includes only the hydrostatic pressure. 
In very general terms, the fluid's viscosity is the relation between the strain rate and the viscous stress. In the Newtonian fluid model, the relationship is by definition a linear map, described by a viscosity tensor that, multiplied by the strain rate tensor (which is the gradient of the flow's velocity), gives the viscous stress tensor.
The viscosity tensor has nine independent degrees of freedom in general. For isotropic Newtonian fluids, these can be reduced to two independent parameters. The most usual decomposition yields the stress viscosity "μ" and the bulk viscosity "σ".
Newtonian and non-Newtonian fluids.
Newton's law of viscosity is a constitutive equation (like Hooke's law, Fick's law, Ohm's law): it is not a fundamental law of nature but an approximation that holds in some materials and fails in others.
Shear thinning liquids are very commonly, but misleadingly, described as thixotropic.
Even for a Newtonian fluid, the viscosity usually depends on its composition and temperature. For gases and other compressible fluids, it usually depends on pressure.
The viscosity of some fluids may depend on other factors. A magnetorheological fluid, for example, becomes thicker when subjected to a magnetic field, possibly to the point of behaving like a solid.
Viscosity in solids.
The viscous forces thar arise during fluid flow must not be confused with the elastic forces that arise in a solid in response shear, compression or extension stresses. While in the latter the stress is proportional to the "amount" of shear deformation, in a fluid it is proportional to the "rate" of deformation over time. (For this reason, Maxwell used the term fugitive elasticity for fluid viscosity.)
However, many liquids (including water) will briefly react like elastic solids when subjected to sudden stress. Conversely, many "solids" (even granite) will flow like liquids, albeit very slowly, even under arbitrarily small stress. Such materials are therefore best described as posessing both elasticity (reaction to deformation) and viscosity (reaction to rate of deformation); that is, being viscoelastic.
Indeed, some authors have claimed that amorphous solids, such as glass and many polymers, are actually liquids with a very high viscosity (e.~g.~greater than 1012 Pa·s).
 However, other authors dispute this hypothesis, claiming instead that there is some threshold for the stress, below which most solids will not flow at all, and that alleged instances of glass flow in window panes of old buildings are due to the crude manufacturing process of older eras rather than to the viscosity of glass.
Viscoelastic solids may exhibit both stress viscosity and bulk viscosity. The extensional viscosity is a linear combination of the shear and bulk viscosities that describes the reaction of a solid elastic material to elongation. It is widely used for characterizing polymers.
In geology, earth materials that exhibit viscous deformation at least three times greater than their elastic deformation are sometimes called rheids.
Viscosity measurement.
Viscosity is measured with various types of viscometers and rheometers. A rheometer is used for those fluids that cannot be defined by a single value of viscosity and therefore require more parameters to be set and measured than is the case for a viscometer. Close temperature control of the fluid is essential to acquire accurate measurements, particularly in materials like lubricants, whose viscosity can double with a change of only 5 °C. 
For some fluids, viscosity is a constant over a wide range of shear rates (Newtonian fluids). The fluids without a constant viscosity (non-Newtonian fluids) cannot be described by a single number. Non-Newtonian fluids exhibit a variety of different correlations between shear stress and shear rate. 
One of the most common instruments for measuring kinematic viscosity is the glass capillary viscometer.
In paint industries, viscosity is commonly measured with a Zahn cup, in which the efflux time is determined and given to customers. The efflux time can also be converted to kinematic viscosities (centistokes, cSt) through the conversion equations.
Also used in paint, a Stormer viscometer uses load-based rotation in order to determine viscosity. The viscosity is reported in Krebs units (KU), which are unique to Stormer viscometers.
A Ford viscosity cup measures the rate of flow of a liquid. This, under ideal conditions, is proportional to the kinematic viscosity.
Vibrating viscometers can also be used to measure viscosity. These models such as the "Dynatrol" use vibration rather than rotation to measure viscosity. 
"Extensional viscosity" can be measured with various rheometers that apply extensional stress. 
Volume viscosity can be measured with an acoustic rheometer.
Apparent viscosity is a calculation derived from tests performed on drilling fluid used in oil or gas well development. These calculations and tests help engineers develop and maintain the properties of the drilling fluid to the specifications required.
Units.
Dynamic viscosity.
The SI physical unit of dynamic viscosity is the pascal-second (Pa·s), (equivalent to N·s/m2, or kg/(m·s)). If a fluid with a viscosity of one Pa·s is placed between two plates, and one plate is pushed sideways with a shear stress of one pascal, it moves a distance equal to the thickness of the layer between the plates in one second. Water at 20 °C has a viscosity of 0.001002 Pa·s, and motor oil of about 0.250 Pa·s.
The cgs physical unit for dynamic viscosity is the "poise" (P), named after Jean Louis Marie Poiseuille. It is more commonly expressed, particularly in ASTM standards, as "centipoise" (cP). Water at 20 °C has a viscosity of 1.0020 cP.
Kinematic viscosity.
The SI unit of kinematic viscosity is m2/s.
The cgs physical unit for kinematic viscosity is the "stokes" (St), named after George Gabriel Stokes. It is sometimes expressed in terms of "centistokes" (cSt). In U.S. usage, "stoke" is sometimes used as the singular form.
Water at 20 °C has a kinematic viscosity of about 1 cSt.
The kinematic viscosity is sometimes referred to as diffusivity of momentum, because it is analogous to diffusivity of heat and diffusivity of mass. It is therefore used in dimensionless numbers, which compare the ratio of the diffusivities.
Fluidity.
The reciprocal of viscosity is "fluidity", usually symbolized by "φ" = 1 / "μ" or "F" = 1 / "μ", depending on the convention used, measured in "reciprocal poise" (cm·s·g−1), sometimes called the "rhe". "Fluidity" is seldom used in engineering practice.
The concept of fluidity can be used to determine the viscosity of an ideal solution. For two components formula_15 and formula_16, the fluidity when "a" and "b" are mixed is 
where "χa" and "χb" is the mole fraction of component "a" and "b" respectively, and "μa" and "μb" are the components' pure viscosities.
Non-standard units.
The Reyn is a British unit of dynamic viscosity.
Viscosity index is a measure for the change of kinematic viscosity with temperature. It is used to characterise lubricating oil in the automotive industry.
At one time the petroleum industry relied on measuring kinematic viscosity by means of the Saybolt viscometer, and expressing kinematic viscosity in units of "Saybolt Universal Seconds" (SUS). Other abbreviations such as SSU ("Saybolt Seconds Universal") or SUV ("Saybolt Universal Viscosity") are sometimes used. Kinematic viscosity in centistoke can be converted from SUS according to the arithmetic and the reference table provided in ASTM D 2161.
Molecular origins.
The viscosity of a system is determined by how molecules constituting the system interact. There are no simple but correct expressions for the viscosity of a fluid. The simplest exact expressions are the Green–Kubo relations for the linear shear viscosity or the Transient Time Correlation Function expressions derived by Evans and Morriss in 1985. Although these expressions are each exact in order to calculate the viscosity of a dense fluid, using these relations requires the use of molecular dynamics computer simulations.
Gases.
Viscosity in gases arises principally from the molecular diffusion that transports momentum between layers of flow. The kinetic theory of gases allows accurate prediction of the behavior of gaseous viscosity.
James Clerk Maxwell published a famous paper in 1866 using the kinetic theory of gases to study gaseous viscosity. To understand why the viscosity is independent of pressure, consider two adjacent boundary layers (A and B) moving with respect to each other. The internal friction (the viscosity) of the gas is determined by the probability a particle of layer A enters layer B with a corresponding transfer of momentum. Maxwell's calculations show that the viscosity coefficient is proportional to the density, the mean free path, and the mean velocity of the atoms. On the other hand, the "mean free path" is inversely proportional to the density. So an increase in density due to an increase in pressure doesn't result in any change in viscosity.
Relation to mean free path of diffusing particles.
In relation to diffusion, the kinematic viscosity provides a better understanding of the behavior of mass transport of a dilute species. Viscosity is related to shear stress and the rate of shear in a fluid, which illustrates its dependence on the mean free path, "λ", of the diffusing particles.
for a unit area parallel to the x-z plane, moving along the x axis.
We will derive this formula and show how "μ" is related to "λ".
Interpreting shear stress as the time rate of change of momentum, "p", per unit area "A" (rate of momentum flux) of an arbitrary control surface gives
where formula_21 is the average velocity, along the x axis, of fluid molecules hitting the unit area, with respect to the unit area.
Further manipulation will show
where
Effect of temperature on the viscosity of a gas.
This in turn is equal to
Valid for temperatures between 0 < "T" < 555 K with an error due to pressure less than 10% below 3.45 MPa.
Viscosity of a dilute gas.
The Chapman-Enskog equation may be used to estimate viscosity for a dilute gas. This equation is based on a semi-theoretical assumption by Chapman and Enskog. The equation requires three empirically determined parameters: the collision diameter ("σ"), the maximum energy of attraction divided by the Boltzmann constant ("є"/"к") and the collision integral ("ω"("T*")).
with
Liquids.
The dynamic viscosities of liquids are typically several orders of magnitude higher than dynamic viscosities of gases.
Viscosity of blends of liquids.
The viscosity of the blend of two or more liquids can be estimated using the Refutas equation. The calculation is carried out in three steps.
The first step is to calculate the Viscosity Blending Number (VBN) (also called the Viscosity Blending Index) of each component of the blend: 
where "v" is the kinematic viscosity in centistokes (cSt). It is important that the kinematic viscosity of each component of the blend be obtained at the same temperature.
where "xX" is the mass fraction of each component of the blend. 
where "VBNBlend" is the viscosity blending number of the blend.
Viscosity of selected substances.
Air.
The viscosity of air depends mostly on the temperature.
At 15.0 °C, the viscosity of air is 1.81 kg/(m·s), 18.1 μPa.s or 1.81 Pa.s. One can get the viscosity of air as a function of temperature from the Gas Viscosity Calculator
Water.
The dynamic viscosity of water is 8.90 × 10−4 Pa·s or 8.90 × 10−3 dyn·s/cm2 or 0.890 cP at about 25 °C."B"/("T"−"C")−5 Pa·s ; "B" = 247.8 K ; and "C" = 140 K.
Viscosity of liquid water at different temperatures up to the normal boiling point is listed below. 
Viscosity of slurry.
where "μs" and "μl" are respectively the dynamic viscosity of the slurry and liquid (Pa·s), and "μr" is the relative viscosity (dimensionless).
Depending on the size and concentration of the solid particles, several models exist that describe the relative viscosity as a function of volume fraction "ɸ" of solid particles.
where "A = 0.00273" and "B = 16.6".
where "A = 0.68" for smooth spherical particles.
Viscosity of amorphous materials.
Viscous flow in amorphous materials (e.g. in glasses and melts) is a thermally activated process: 
where "Q" is activation energy, "T" is temperature, "R" is the molar gas constant and "A" is approximately a constant. 
The viscous flow in amorphous materials is characterized by a deviation from the Arrhenius-type behavior: "Q" changes from a high value "QH" at low temperatures (in the glassy state) to a low value "QL" at high temperatures (in the liquid state). Depending on this change, amorphous materials are classified as either
and strong material have "RD" < 2 whereas fragile materials have "RD" ≥ 2.
The viscosity of amorphous materials is quite exactly described by a two-exponential equation: 
with constants "A1", "A2", "B", "C" and "D" related to thermodynamic parameters of joining bonds of an amorphous material. 
Not very far from the glass transition temperature, "Tg", this equation can be approximated by a Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann (VFT) equation.
If the temperature is significantly lower than the glass transition temperature, "T"  "Tg", then the two-exponential equation simplifies to an Arrhenius type equation: 
where "Hd" is the enthalpy of formation of broken bonds (termed configuron s) and "Hm" is the enthalpy of their motion. When the temperature is less than the glass transition temperature, "T" < "Tg", the activation energy of viscosity is high because the amorphous materials are in the glassy state and most of their joining bonds are intact. 
If the temperature is highly above the glass transition temperature, "T"  "Tg", the two-exponential equation also simplifies to an Arrhenius type equation: 
When the temperature is higher than the glass transition temperature, "T" > "Tg", the activation energy of viscosity is low because amorphous materials are melted and have most of their joining bonds broken, which facilitates flow.
Eddy viscosity.
In the study of turbulence in fluids, a common practical strategy for calculation is to ignore the small-scale "vortices" (or "eddies") in the motion and to calculate a large-scale motion with an "eddy viscosity" that characterizes the transport and dissipation of energy in the smaller-scale flow (see "large eddy simulation"). Values of eddy viscosity used in modeling ocean circulation may be from 5x104 to 106 Pa·s depending upon the resolution of the numerical grid.
References.
ASTM D 2161, Standard Practice for Conversion of Kinematic Viscosity to Saybolt Universal Viscosity or to Saybolt Furol Viscosity
