Bitcoin (sign: BTC) is a decentralized digital currency based on an open-source, peer-to-peer internet protocol. It was created by a pseudonymous developer named Satoshi Nakamoto in 2009. 
One bitcoin is subdivided into 100-million smaller units called satoshis. There is a hard limit of 21-million bitcoins in total, which are released at a scheduled rate until the year 2140. Internationally, bitcoins can be exchanged by personal computer directly through a wallet file or a website without an intermediate financial institution. They can also be exchanged through physical banknotes and coins. 
Unlike most currencies, bitcoin does not rely on a central issuer, like a central bank or government. Instead, bitcoin uses a transaction log across a peer-to-peer computer network to record transactions, verify them and prevent double spending. The verification process awards effective bitcoin nodes or "bitcoin miners" with a limited release of bitcoins and transaction fees (if any). This process requires intense computing power, electricity and significant investment as it solves SHA256 hashes through bruteforce to verify transactions and add them to the network's transaction log.
Currently, bitcoin is the most widely used alternative currency: As of February 2013, the monetary base of bitcoin is valued at over 275 million US dollars.
Transactions.
Bitcoins are sent and received through software systems called wallets; a wallet sends and confirms transactions through the network using bitcoin addresses, the identifiers for users' bitcoin wallets within the network.
Addresses.
Based on public-key cryptography, payments are made to bitcoin "addresses" or "public keys": human-readable strings of numbers and letters around 33 characters in length, always beginning with the digit 1 or 3, as in the example of "175tWpb8K1S7NmH4Zx6rewF9WQrcZv245W".
Users obtain new bitcoin addresses as necessary; these are stored in a wallet file with links to cryptographic passwords or "private keys" that enable access to and transfer of bitcoins. A file or "wallet" containing bitcoin addresses is usually encrypted with an additional password.
Verification.
The network's software confirms a transaction when it records it in the peer-to-peer network. Further verification of transaction records make the transaction increasingly permanent in the network's log. After six records (or "blocks"), a transaction is considered confirmed beyond reasonable doubt. 
The network must store the whole transaction history inside a log called the blockchain, which grows constantly as new records are added and never removed. Nakamoto conceived that as the database became larger, users would desire wallet software that didn't store the entire database on their computers. To enable this, the network uses Merkle trees to organize the transaction records in such a way that client software can locally delete portions of its own database it knows it will never need, such as earlier transaction records of bitcoins that have changed ownership multiple times.
Due to this, transaction fees may be included with any transfer of bitcoins. , many transactions are processed in a way which makes no charge for the transaction. For transactions which draw coins from many bitcoin addresses and therefore have a large data size, a small transaction fee is usually expected.
The verification process awards effective bitcoin nodes (or "bitcoin miners") with a limited release of bitcoins and the transaction fees (if any). This process requires intense computing power, electricity, and significant investment as it solves hashes through bruteforce to verify transactions and add them to the network's transaction log. The bitcoin issuance will gradually decrease and fees will increase through the year 2140 when all 21 million bitcoins are issued. 
Banknotes and coins.
Various vendors offer banknotes and coins denominated in bitcoins; a bitcoin private key is sold as part of a coin or banknote. Usually, a seal has to be broken to access the key, while the receiving address remains visible on the outside so that the balance can be verified.
A 1-BTC Casascius Coin was shown in the British Museum in London to represent bitcoin.
History.
Concept.
Bitcoin is one of the first implementations of the crypto-currency concept, which was first described in 1998 by Wei Dai on the cypherpunks mailing list. 
In the introduction paragraph of his original whitepaper, Nakamoto writes about his ambition to free Internet commerce from the intermediation of financial institutions. He argues their involvement and the related costs and uncertainties can be avoided by relying on an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof. As such, bitcoin attempts to build upon the notion that money is any object, or any sort of record, accepted as payment for goods and services and repayment of debts in a given country or socio-economic context.
Satoshi Nakamoto.
Satoshi Nakamoto was the pseudonymous person or group of people who designed and created the original bitcoin protocol and launched the bitcoin network. Beyond bitcoin, no other links to this identity have been found. His involvement in the original bitcoin protocol does not appear to extend past mid-2010.
Nakamoto was active in making modifications to the bitcoin network and posting technical information on the BitcoinTalk Forum until his contact with the general community began to fade in mid-2010. Until a few months before he left, he was responsible for almost all modifications of the core protocol, only rarely accepting contributions.
In April 2011, Satoshi had communicated to a developer saying he “moved on to other things.”
Identity.
Investigations into the real identity of Satoshi Nakamoto have been attempted by The New Yorker and Fast Company. Fast Company's investigation brought up circumstantial evidence that indicated a link between an encryption patent filed by Neal King, Vladimir Oksman and Charles Bry on August 15, 2008 and the bitcoin.org domain name which was registered 72 hours later. The patent (#20100042841) contained networking and encryption technologies similar to bitcoin's. After textual analysis, the phrase "…computationally impractical to reverse" was found in both the patent application and bitcoin's whitepaper. All three inventors explicitly denied being Satoshi Nakamoto.
Economy.
Gambling.
Various services have begun to offer grey market and legal gambling services that deal exclusively in the bitcoin currency. The online dice game, SatoshiDice, reported profits exceeding ฿33,310 ($596,231) during 2012.
Distribution.
Unlike fiat currency, Bitcoin has no centralized issuing authority. The network is programmed to increase the money supply as a geometric series until the total number of bitcoins reaches 21 million BTC, by issuing them to nodes that verify transaction records through intense bruteforce hashing with computing power. slightly over 10.5 million of the total 21 million BTC had been created; the current total number created is available online. At November 2012 half of the total supply was generated, and by end of 2016, three-quarters will have been generated. By 2140, all bitcoins will have been generated with the last one consisting of fractional parts. To ensure this granularity of the money supply, clients can divide each BTC unit down to eight decimal places (a total of 2.1 × 1015 or 2.1 quadrillion units).
Exchange.
Through various exchanges, bitcoins are sold and their price fluctuates relative to goods, services and other currencies. 
In February 2013, 1 BTC traded as high as $30.00 USD. Taking into account the total number of bitcoins mined, the monetary base of the bitcoin network stands at over 275 million USD.
According to Reuters, undisclosed documents indicate that financial firms such as Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs have visited bitcoin exchanges as often as 30 times a day. Additionally, employees of other international banks and major financial organizations have shown interest in bitcoin.
Protocol specification.
Summary.
Bitcoin is a solution to the double-spending problem using a peer-to-peer network.
The network timestamps transactions by hashing them into an ongoing chain of
hash-based proof-of-work, forming a record or chain that cannot be changed without redoing
the proof-of-work. The longest chain of records (called blocks) not only serves as proof of the sequence of
events witnessed, but proof that it came from the largest pool of computing power. As
long as a majority of computing power is controlled by nodes that are not cooperating to
attack the network, they'll generate the longest chain of records and outpace attackers. 
The network itself requires minimal structure. Messages are broadcast on a best effort
basis, and nodes can leave and rejoin the network at will, accepting the longest
proof-of-work chain as proof of what happened while they were gone.
Bitcoins.
A bitcoin is defined by its chain of digital signatures. Each owner transfers the coin to the next by digitally signing a hash of the previous transaction and the public key of the next owner and adding these to the end of the coin. A payee can verify the signatures to verify the chain of ownership.
Although it would be possible to handle coins individually, it would be unwieldy to make a separate transaction for every cent in a transfer. To allow value to be split and combined, transactions contain multiple inputs and outputs. Normally there will be either a single input from a larger previous transaction or multiple inputs combining smaller amounts, and at most two outputs: one for the payment, and one returning the change, if any, back to the sender. 
It should be noted that fan-out, where a transaction depends on several transactions, and those transactions depend on many more, is not a problem here. There is never the need to extract a complete standalone copy of a transaction's history.
Timestamps.
The bitcoin specification starts with a timestamp. A timestamp server works by taking a hash of a block of items to be timestamped and widely publishing the hash, such as in a newspaper or Usenet post. The timestamp proves that the data must have existed at the time, obviously, in order to get into the hash. Each timestamp includes the previous timestamp in its hash, forming a chain, with each additional timestamp reinforcing the ones before it.
Bitcoin mining.
To implement a distributed timestamp server on a peer-to-peer basis, bitcoin uses a proof-of-work system similar to Adam Back's Hashcash, rather than newspaper or Usenet posts. This often called bitcoin mining.
The mining process or proof-of-work process involves scanning for a value that when hashed, such as with SHA-256, the hash begins with a number of zero bits. The average work required is exponential in the number of zero bits required and can be verified by executing a single hash.
For the bitcoin timestamp network, it implements the mining process or "proof-of-work" by incrementing a nonce in the record or "block" until a value is found that gives the block's hash the required zero bits. Once the hashing effort has been expended to make it satisfy the proof-of-work, the block cannot be changed without redoing the work. As later records or "blocks" are chained after it, the work to change the block would include redoing all the blocks after it.
The mining process solves the problem of determining representation in majority decision making. If the majority were based on one-IP-address-one-vote, it could be subverted by anyone able to allocate many IPs. Mining is essentially one-CPU-one-vote. 
The majority decision is represented by the longest chain, which has the greatest proof-of-work effort invested
in it. If a majority of computing power is controlled by honest nodes, the honest chain will grow the fastest and outpace any competing chains. To modify a past block, an attacker would have to redo the proof-of-work of the block and all blocks after it and then catch up with and surpass the work of the honest nodes. The probability of a slower attacker catching up diminishes exponentially as subsequent blocks are added.
To compensate for increasing hardware speed and varying interest in running nodes over time, the proof-of-work difficulty is determined by a moving average targeting an average number of blocks per hour. If they're generated too fast, the difficulty increases.
Process.
Nodes always consider the longest chain to be the correct one and will keep working on extending it. If two nodes broadcast different versions of the next block simultaneously, some nodes may receive one or the other first. In that case, they work on the first one they received, but save the other branch in case it becomes longer. The tie will be broken when the next proof-of-work is found and one branch becomes longer; the nodes that were working on the other branch will then switch to the longer one.
New transaction broadcasts do not necessarily need to reach all nodes. As long as they reach many nodes, they will get into a block before long. Block broadcasts are also tolerant of dropped messages. If a node does not receive a block, it will request it when it receives the next block and realizes it missed one.
Mined bitcoins.
By convention, the first transaction in a block is a special transaction that starts a new coin owned by the creator of the block. This adds an incentive for nodes to support the network, and provides a way to initially distribute coins into circulation, since there is no central authority to issue them.
The steady addition of a constant of amount of new coins is analogous to gold miners expending resources to add gold to circulation. In our case, it is computing power and electricity that is expended.
The incentive can also be funded with transaction fees. If the output value of a transaction is less than its input value, the difference is a transaction fee that is added to the incentive value of the block containing the transaction. Once a predetermined number of coins have entered circulation, the incentive can transition entirely to transaction fees and be completely inflation
free.
The incentive may help encourage nodes to stay honest. If a greedy attacker is able to assemble more computing power than all the honest nodes, he would have to choose between using it to defraud people by stealing back his payments, or using it to generate new coins. It is thought it would be more likely for one to find it more profitable to play by the rules, such rules that favour him with more new coins than everyone else combined, than to undermine the system and the validity of his own wealth.
Local system resources.
Once the latest transaction of a coin is buried under enough blocks, the spent transactions which preceded it can be discarded in order to save disk space. To facilitate this without breaking the block's hash, transactions are hashed in a Merkle tree, with only the root included in the block's hash. Old blocks can then be compacted by stubbing off branches of the tree. The interior hashes need not be stored.
A block header with no transactions would be about 80 bytes. Supposing that blocks are generated every 10 minutes, 80 bytes × 6 × 24 × 365 = 4.2MB per year. With computer systems typically selling with 2GB of RAM as of 2008, and Moore's Law predicting current growth of 1.2GB per year, storage should not be a problem even if the block headers need to be kept in memory.
Payment verification.
It is possible to verify bitcoin payments without running a full network node. A user only needs to keep a copy of the block headers of the longest proof-of-work chain, which he can get by querying network nodes until he's convinced he has the longest chain, and obtain the Merkle branch linking the transaction to the block it's timestamped in. He can't check the transaction for himself, but by linking it to a place in the chain, he can see that a network node has accepted it, and blocks added after it further confirm the network has accepted it.
As such, the verification is reliable as long as honest nodes control the network, but is more vulnerable if the network is overpowered by an attacker. While network nodes can verify transactions for themselves, the simplified method can be fooled by an attacker's fabricated
transactions for as long as the attacker can continue to overpower the network. One strategy to protect against this would be to accept alerts from network nodes when they detect an invalid block, prompting the user's software to download the full block and alerted transactions to confirm the inconsistency. Businesses that receive frequent payments will probably still want to run their own nodes for more independent security and quicker verification.
Attacks.
The scenario of an attacker trying to generate an alternate chain faster than the honest chain has been considered. Even if this is accomplished, it does not throw the system open to arbitrary changes, such as creating value out of thin air or taking money that never belonged to the attacker. Nodes are not going to accept an invalid transaction as payment, and honest nodes will never accept a block containing them. An attacker can only try to change one of his own transactions to take back money he recently spent.
The race between the honest chain and an attacker chain can be characterized as a binomial random walk. The success event is the honest chain being extended by one block, increasing its lead by +1, and the failure event is the attacker's chain being extended by one block, reducing the gap by −1.
The probability of an attacker catching up from a given deficit is analogous to a Gambler's ruin problem. Given the assumption that the probability of an honest node finding the next block is greater than the probability that the attacker find the next block, the probability drops exponentially as the number of blocks which the attacker has to catch up with, increases. With the odds against him, if he doesn't make a lucky lunge forward early on, his chances become vanishingly small as he falls further behind.
Applications.
The bitcoin protocol introduces various technologies and economic properties that have numerous applications.
Namecoin DNS.
Namecoin is an alternative Domain Name System that is based on the open-source bitcoin protocol. 
Like bitcoin, the Namecoin network reaches consensus every few minutes as to which names/values have been reserved or updated. Each user has its own copy of the full database, which attempts to reduce censorship on the DNS level. The use of public-key cryptography also means that only the owner is allowed to modify a name in the distributed database. For name resolution Namecoin uses .bit as pseudo-top-level domain.
The internet activist Aaron Swartz described a similar concept. It tries to square Zooko's triangle which states that a naming system cannot be secure, distributed and have human-meaningful names at the same time.
Concerns.
As an investment.
The Bitcoin Project describes bitcoin as an "experimental digital currency." Reuben Grinberg has noted that bitcoin's supporters have argued that bitcoin is neither a security nor an investment because it fails to meet the criteria for either category. Although it is considered a digital currency, virtual currency, or "payment scheme", some people see it as an investment or accuse it of being a form of investment fraud known as a Ponzi scheme. A report by the European Central Bank, using the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission's definition of a Ponzi scheme, found that the use of bitcoins shares some characteristics with Ponzi schemes, but also has characteristics of its own which contradict several common aspects of Ponzi schemes.
Privacy.
Because transactions are broadcast to the entire network, they are inherently public. Unlike regular banking, which preserves customer privacy by keeping transaction records private, loose transactional privacy is accomplished in bitcoin by using many unique addresses for every wallet, while at the same time publishing all transactions. As an example, if Alice sends 123.45 BTC to Bob, the network creates a public record that allows anyone to see that 123.45 has been sent from one address to another. However, unless Alice or Bob make their ownership of these addresses known, it is difficult for anyone else to connect the transaction with them. However, if someone connects an address to a user at any point they could follow back a series of transactions as each participant likely knows who paid them and may disclose that information on request or under duress.
Despite this, it can still be difficult to associate bitcoin identities with real-life identities. This property makes bitcoin transactions attractive to sellers of illegal products. Bitcoin is the medium of exchange on the Silk Road for this reason, although many bitcoin hobbyists criticize such usage.
Botnet mining.
In June 2011, Symantec warned about the possibility of botnets engaging in covert "mining" of bitcoins, consuming computing cycles, using extra electricity and possibly increasing the temperature of the computer. Later that month, the Australian Broadcasting Corporation caught an employee using the company's servers to generate Bitcoins without permission. Some malware also uses the parallel processing capabilities of the GPUs built into many modern-day video cards. In mid August 2011, Bitcoin miner botnets were found; less than three months later bitcoin-mining trojans infecting Mac OS X were discovered.
Taxation.
In September 2012, the Intra-European Organisation of Tax Administrations (IOTA), in Tbilisi, Georgia, held a workshop titled "Auditing Individuals and Legal Entities in the Use of e-Money." The workshop was attended by representatives from 23 countries. Jerry Taylor, IOTA's technical taxation expert, said, "There's an awful lot happening on the Internet environment which is fascinating at the moment and introducing new challenges for auditors when it comes to virtual currency." Bitcoin was mentioned during the workshop. 
Matthew Elias, founder of the Cryptocurrency Legal Advocacy Group (CLAG) published "Staying Between the Lines: A Survey of U.S. Income Taxation and its Ramifications on Cryptocurrencies", which discusses "the taxability of cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin." CLAG "stressed the importance for taxpayers to determine on their own whether taxes are due on a bitcoin-related transaction based on whether one has "experienced a realization event." Such examples are "when a taxpayer has provided a service in exchange for bitcoins, a realization event has probably occurred, and any gain or loss would likely be calculated using fair market values for the service provided."
Peter Vessenes, Bitcoin Foundation's executive director, said, since the foundation is trying to pay for everything in bitcoin, including salaries, "How do we W-2 someone for their bitcoins? Do we mark-to-market every time a transfer happens? Payroll companies cringe." The Bitcoin Foundation hopes "to push for solid guidance about its legal and tax treatment." Patrick Murck, legal counsel for the Bitcoin Foundation, said he would like "to help regulators understand the technology better so they can make better decisions." Murck said, "Bitcoin has the potential to become much more than a niche currency, but it needs the guidance and understanding of regulators." and "The full potential of bitcoin could be realized through clearer guidelines and a better understanding by financial and tax regulators." and "Part of making that happen is to talk to regulators, the IRS, and tax professionals and helping them understand that bitcoin is not this nefarious thing, it's just software, it's a community, and there's nothing inherently nefarious about either of those things."
Popular culture.
The Good Wife.
Bitcoin was a featured subject in "The Good Wife" television series, in an episode titled ""Bitcoin for Dummies"". The CNBC host of "Mad Money", Jim Cramer, was shown in a courtroom scene in which he claims he doesn’t consider bitcoin a true currency: “There’s no central bank to regulate it; it’s digital and functions completely peer to peer.”
