Joaquin Rafael Phoenix (; born October 28, 1974), formerly credited as Leaf Phoenix, is an American actor, music video director, producer, musician, and social activist. Phoenix started his career as a child actor and came to wide attention for his portrayal of Commodus in the 2000 historical epic film "Gladiator", directed by Ridley Scott, which earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor as well as nominations for the Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild, Satellite Award, and BAFTA Award. He received wider recognition for his portrayal of musician Johnny Cash in the 2005 biographical film "Walk the Line". His performance earned him several accolades and nominations, including the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Actor. He received his third Academy Award nomination for his critically acclaimed performance in the 2012 film "The Master".
Aside from his acting career, Phoenix has also ventured behind the camera, directing music videos as well as producing movies and television shows, and has recorded an album, the soundtrack to "Walk the Line" for which he won a Grammy Award. 
Early life.
Phoenix was born Joaquín Rafael Bottom in Río Piedras, a sector of the city of San Juan, Puerto Rico, where he lived until he was six. He is the third of five children, including River (1970–1993), Rain (1972), Liberty (1976), and Summer (1978). He also has a half-sister named Jodean (1964) from a previous relationship of his father's.
His father, John Lee Bottom, was a lapsed Catholic from Fontana, California. His mother, Arlyn (née Dunetz), was born in The Bronx, New York, to Jewish parents whose families emigrated from Russia and Hungary. In 1968, Arlyn left her family and moved to California, later meeting Phoenix's father while hitchhiking. They married in 1969, then later joined the religious cult the Children of God and began travelling throughout South America.
His parents eventually became disenchanted with the Children of God; they made the decision to leave the cult and returned to the U.S. in 1978. They changed their last name to "Phoenix" to symbolize a new beginning. This was also around the time Joaquin had begun calling himself "Leaf", desiring to have a nature-related name like his siblings and inspired by spending time outdoors raking leaves with his father. (In a "Jay Leno" interview, Joaquin said he had originally called himself Antleaf as a child; it is unclear if he was being serious). Leaf became the name he would use as a child actor; at fifteen, he changed it back to Joaquin.
In order to provide food and financial support for the family, the children performed on the streets and at various talent contests, singing and playing instruments. In Los Angeles his mother started working as a secretary for NBC, and his father worked as a landscaper. Phoenix and his siblings were eventually discovered by one of Hollywood's leading children's agents, Iris Burton, who got the five children acting work, mainly doing commercials and television show appearances. Joaquin went on to establish himself as a child actor before deciding to withdraw from acting for a while and travel to Mexico and South America with his father.
Phoenix came back into public view under tragic circumstances: on October 31, 1993, his brother, River Phoenix, suffered a drug overdose and died, outside the Hollywood nightclub The Viper Room, which was co-owned by Johnny Depp at the time. Joaquin's call to 911 to save his brother was recorded and repeatedly played over the airwaves and on television. The sudden media intrusion into his life proved to be overwhelming; once again, he retreated from the public eye. A year later, at the insistence of his friends, Phoenix reluctantly re-entered the world of acting.
Film career.
Acting.
Phoenix's first acting jobs were guest appearances on two television shows with his brother River in "Seven Brides for Seven Brothers" (1982), and "" (1984) as well as an episode in the first season of "Murder, She Wrote" ("We're Off to Kill the Wizard") with his sister Summer Phoenix. In 1985, he appeared with JoBeth Williams in the CBS television movie "Kids Don't Tell". He made his big-screen debut in "Space Camp" (1986), playing the role of Max, after starring in an "Alfred Hitchcock Presents" episode "A Very Happy Ending" the same year. His first starring role was in "Russkies" (1987). He later co-starred in Ron Howard's "Parenthood" (1989), in which he was credited as Leaf Phoenix.
During the comeback portion of his career, Phoenix went back to his given name "Joaquin", and was often cast in supporting roles as conflicted, insecure characters with a dark side. He has earned positive reviews for his portrayals of various individuals: a troubled teen in Gus Van Sant's "To Die For" (1995) co-starring with Nicole Kidman, a small-town troublemaker in Oliver Stone's "U Turn", "Inventing the Abbotts" (1997), the cruel Roman emperor Commodus in Ridley Scott's "Gladiator" (2000) (for which he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor), a conflicted priest in "Quills" (2000), a washed-up baseball player in M. Night Shyamalan's "Signs" (2002), the irresolute husband of a superstar-skater in the widely panned "It's All About Love" (2003), a lovestruck farmer in Shyamalan's "The Village" (2004), a disillusioned cameraman in Terry George's "Hotel Rwanda" (2004), and an heroic firefighter in "Ladder 49" (2004).
Phoenix was cast in "Walk the Line", a Johnny Cash biopic, after Cash himself approved of him. Reese Witherspoon, who portrayed June Carter Cash in the film and won a Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance, stated during an interview that when they first performed in-character before a live audience, she was so impressed with his impersonation that she knew she "had to step it up a notch". All of Cash and Carter's vocal tracks in the movie and on the accompanying soundtrack are played and sung by Phoenix and Witherspoon. In 2005, he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor, and won a Golden Globe in the same category. In 2006, Phoenix was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. 
Phoenix's film "I'm Still Here" debuted at the Venice Film Festival and the Toronto International Film Festival in 2010. He subsequently took a self-imposed break from acting and returned in Paul Thomas Anderson's film "The Master" in 2012. The film premiered at the Venice Film Festival. Phoenix won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor, shared with co-star Philip Seymour Hoffman and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor.
Directing.
He has directed music videos for the following bands: Ringside, She Wants Revenge, People in Planes, Arckid, Albert Hammond Jr., and Silversun Pickups.
Producing.
Phoenix served as one of the executive producers of a television show called "4Real", a half-hour series which showcase celebrity guests on global adventures "in order to connect with young leaders who are creating social and economic change." He is also listed as a producer on the movie "We Own the Night".
Personal life.
Phoenix dated actress Liv Tyler for three years in the 1990s. 
In early April 2005, Phoenix checked into rehab to be treated for alcoholism.
On January 26, 2006, while driving down a winding canyon road in Hollywood, Phoenix ran off the road and rolled his car. The crash reportedly was caused by brake failure. Shaken and confused, Phoenix heard a tapping on his window and a voice say, "Just relax." Unable to see the man, Phoenix replied, "I'm fine. I am relaxed." The man replied, "No, you're not," and stopped Phoenix from lighting a cigarette while gas was leaking into the car cabin. Phoenix then realized that the man was famed German film director Werner Herzog. While Herzog helped Phoenix out of the wreckage by breaking the back window of the car, bystanders phoned for an ambulance. Phoenix approached Herzog to express gratitude, but Herzog downplayed his heroism and returned to his home nearby. Herzog later referred to this event as "a frequential, obsessive dream of mandrills". 
Phoenix unexpectedly announced in late 2008 that he had retired from acting to pursue a rapping career, and that the forthcoming "Two Lovers" would be his last film. On February 11, 2009, Phoenix appeared on the "Late Show with David Letterman" to promote "Two Lovers". He seemed incoherent and was largely unresponsive towards David Letterman's questions about the film and his career plans. Phoenix appeared on "Late Show" again on September 22, 2010 and revealed that his "retirement" and eccentric behavior were for a mockumentary, "I'm Still Here" (2010), that he and Casey Affleck were filming.
In October 2012, Phoenix rattled the film industry by proclaiming the Academy Awards to be "bullshit," all but renouncing his chances at a Best Actor nod for his lauded turn in "The Master". He later gave an interview amending his earlier comments and acknowledging that the Oscars provide an important platform for many deserving filmmakers.
Phoenix is atheist.
Social activism.
Phoenix has long been a social activist, lending his support to a number of charities and humanitarian organizations, notably Amnesty International, The Art of Elysium, HEART, and the Peace Alliance (which campaigns for a United States Department of Peace). Phoenix is also on the board of directors for The Lunchbox Fund, a non-profit organization which provides daily meals to students of township schools in Soweto of South Africa.
He is a member of In Defense of Animals and PETA, both for whom he has actively campaigned. In 2013, he starred in a PETA short film that promoted veganism, showing Phoenix "drowning" as he narrates, "In water, humans drown just as fish suffocate on land. Put yourself in their place. Try to relate." ABC refused to air the film during the Academy Awards broadcast, citing the ad's controversial nature. For Nation Earth he narrated "Earthlings", a video about the investigation of animal abuse in factory farms, pet mills, in industry, and research. In 2005, he was awarded the "Humanitarian Award" at the San Diego Film Festival for his work and contribution to "Earthlings". He is a vegan.
