Robin Gayle Wright (born April 8, 1966) is an American film actress. She was also previously credited as Robin Wright Penn.
From 1984 to 1988 she starred on the television series "Santa Barbara" as Kelly Capwell which earned her Daytime Emmy nominations. She then starred in films such as "The Princess Bride" and "Forrest Gump" (earning her a Golden Globe nomination). She has appeared in films such as "Toys", "Message in a Bottle", "Unbreakable", "The Conspirator", "Moneyball" and "The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo".
From 1996 to 2010, Wright was married to actor Sean Penn, with whom she had two children.
Early life.
Wright was born Robin Gayle Wright in Dallas, Texas, the daughter of Gayle ("née" Gaston), a national director in Mary Kay cosmetics salesforce, and Freddie Gayle Wright, a pharmaceutical executive. She was raised in San Diego, California. She attended La Jolla High School in La Jolla, California. 
Career.
She was listed as one of twelve "Promising New Actors of 1986" in John Willis' Screen World, Vol. 38. . Wright first became famous on television, playing Kelly Capwell on the soap opera "Santa Barbara", which earned her three Daytime Emmy nominations. She shot to stardom after her roles as Buttercup in "The Princess Bride" and Jenny Curran in "Forrest Gump", the latter role garnering her Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild nominations for Best Supporting Actress. Wright was offered the role of Maid Marian in "", but turned it down because she was pregnant. She had to back out of the role of Abby McDeere in "The Firm" (1993), with Tom Cruise, upon discovering that she was pregnant with her second child (son Hopper Penn).
In 1996, she married Sean Penn and changed her name to Robin Wright Penn. The same year, she starred in the film adaptation of Daniel Defoe's "Moll Flanders" for which she received a Satellite Nomination for Best Actress in a Drama. She went on to co-star with her husband in the 1997 film "She's So Lovely", for which she was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. One of her most recent successes was a supporting role in the television film "Empire Falls" as Grace Roby, mother of Ed Harris's character Miles Roby. Wright received her third Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for this role.
In 2013, Wright starred in Netflix's series "House of Cards", as Claire Underwood, the spouse of Kevin Spacey's character, Congressman Francis Underwood.
Personal life.
From 1986 to 1988, Wright was married to actor Dane Witherspoon, whom she met in 1984 on the set of the soap-opera "Santa Barbara". 
In 1989, Wright became involved with actor Sean Penn following his divorce from Madonna. Their daughter Dylan Frances Penn was born on April 13, 1991. Their son Hopper Jack Penn, was born on August 6, 1993. The pair broke up during the making of Penn's "The Crossing Guard" before reconciling. After they married in 1996, their relationship went through on-again and off-again periods in the 2000s. Divorce plans and a separation were announced in December 2007. In February 2009, Wright and Penn attended the 81st Academy Awards together, at which Penn won Best Actor, but the couple announced separation again in April 2009, only to be withdrawn, and then again in May 2009. On August 12, 2009, Wright filed for divorce once more, declaring she had no plans to reconcile. She also dropped "Penn" from her professional name. The couple finalized their divorce on July 22, 2010.
"People" magazine reported in February 2012 that Wright is seeing actor Ben Foster.
Wright is the national campaign spokesperson for the Myasthenia Gravis Foundation of America. She is also the Honorary Spokesperson for the Dallas, Texas-based non-profit The Gordie Foundation.
