Ripper Street is a BBC TV series set in Whitechapel in London's East End in 1889, six months after the infamous Jack the Ripper murders. The series stars Matthew Macfadyen, Jerome Flynn and Adam Rothenberg. The first episode was broadcast on 30 December 2012 as part of BBC One's Christmas 2012 package. It began airing in the U.S. on BBC America on 19 January 2013. It was confirmed on 29 January 2013 that "Ripper Street" will return for a second 8-part series to be aired in early 2014.
Plot.
The story is set in April 1889, six months since the last Jack the Ripper killing, and in Whitechapel H Division is responsible for policing one and a quarter square miles of East London: a district with a population of 67,000 poor and dispossessed. The men of H Division had hunted the Ripper and failed to find him. When more women are murdered on the streets of Whitechapel, the police begin to wonder if the killer has returned.
Among the factories, rookeries, chop shops, brothels and pubs, Detective Inspector Edmund Reid (Matthew Macfadyen) and Detective Sergeant Bennett Drake (Jerome Flynn) team with US Army surgeon and former Pinkerton agent Captain Homer Jackson (Adam Rothenberg) to investigate the killings. 
They frequently cross paths with Tenter Street brothel madam Long Susan (MyAnna Buring), who came to London with Jackson from America and lets him reside at the brothel. Their relationship becomes strained due to Jackson's attraction to one of her most profitable girls, Rose Erskine (Charlene McKenna), and because of his close involvement with H Division and Reid.
Sensationalist newspaperman Fred Best (David Dawson) knows a dark secret about Reid's daughter's death. Although still being troubled by her daughter's death, Emily Reid (Amanda Hale) determines to make a new life by helping the fallen women of Whitechapel despite her husband's reservations.
Each episode features stand-alone crimes that serve to test Reid, Drake and Jackson, both in their working and private lives.
Production.
A joint BBC and BBC America production written by Richard Warlow, Julie Rutterford, Declan Croghan and Toby Finlay and directed by Andy Wilson (4 episodes) Colm McCarthy (2 episodes) and Tom Shankland (2 episodes). The series includes scenes of the seedier side of life during the late Victorian era, including bare-knuckle boxing, early pornography and prostitution.
Director Tom Shankland said of the series, "Whitechapel's not an area that was short of vicious murders and any woman found murdered with a knife in the consequent months was held up as a Ripper murder... So we’ll touch on Ripper in that way but not dig anybody up or change the canonical five... All the period depictions I’d seen of that particular crime story had almost been a bit too well behaved in a slightly slower way and shots have to be a bit wider to show off the nice furniture, but if you can think of something awful Victorian London, it was happening.”
Casting.
The three leads of the show, Macfadyen, Flynn and Rothenberg, have discussed how they got the roles in recent interviews. Macfadyen claims his involvement was all down to his interest in the 'fresh' script: "I had a few months of nothing, then a load of scripts all came at once, and this was by far the best. It's such terrific writing; it just barrelled along. I saw the title and thought, 'This has been done before', but it was so fresh, and it had all the qualities, interest and depth of a period drama."
Rothenberg's involvement in the show was more straightforward, as he auditioned during pilot season. In an interview with both Flynn and Rothenberg, the latter states: "I auditioned for it, got it, and then showed up. That’s as simple as it was for me." to which Flynn chimes in, claiming: "it was very funny, though, ‘cause when he did show up, he was like, “I don’t know how the f*** I got here!”. Flynn's casting experience was similar: "It was pretty basic for me. The writer, Richard Warlow, had seen me in Game of Thrones, playing Bronn, and asked about casting me."
Filming.
The series was filmed entirely in Dublin, Ireland in locations which included the former Clancy Barracks beside Clancy Quay and Trinity College, Dublin. Macfadyen discussed the sets in Dublin in an interview with "The Daily Mail" saying, "The barracks were like a big playground, big enough to recreate a huge area of Whitechapel, and we filmed in Dublin Castle and Kilmainham Jail, all as if it was the East End of London." The same article claims that "a second series commissioned even before the first episode has been publicly screened".
The Leman Street police station and "The Brown Bear" public house used in the series are still in Leman Street, and the Jews Orphan Asylum still exists renamed and relocated first to Norwood, South London then to Stanmore.
The BBC's promotional television trailers for the show use Jay-Z and Kanye West's song titled "No Church in the Wild".
Episode guide.
Series 2 (2014).
It was confirmed by BBC commisoner Ben Stephenson, on 29 January 2013, that "Ripper Street" will return for a second 8-part series.
Speaking about the show's renewal, creator and writer Richard Warlow told the BBC: "I am enormously grateful to have been given the opportunity to return to 'H' Division once more and will be working tirelessly to ensure that those who have joined us each week will find ever more compelling crime-fighting thrills down on "Ripper Street" the second time around. The series will move forward into the 1890s: the death rattle of a century coming to a close, the labour pains of a modern world on the rise. It is this sense of climax and calamity that, week by week, our heroes will confront with conviction and heroism."
Series two of "Ripper Street" is planned to start shooting spring 2013 (potentially once again in Dublin), for its broadcast in early 2014.
Reception.
Critical reception of the first two episodes was divided, with many praising the show's gritty script and good acting performances whilst other critics felt the show was an unoriginal mix of ITV's "Whitechapel" and Guy Ritchie's "Sherlock Holmes". Many agreed following episodes improved each time, due to its development of the three main characters and their back stories, setting up the rest of the series for a big climax. In his weekly review of the show, Jamie-Lee Nardone wrote of its continued improvements, "more of this please, just perhaps not before dinner", referencing the show's gory nature. Sam Wollaston of "The Guardian" discussed the pros and cons of the show, claiming "It would be easy to be negative about Ripper Street. Do we really need more on a story that's been not just done to death, but then carved up, and had its insides torn out?" but he concludes his review stating "[ the] script is real, alive and human. It's beautifully performed, and beautiful to look at – stylish, and stylised. The bare-knuckle fight scenes are brutal and memorable. It's proper, character-based crime drama, gripping, and yes – I'm afraid – ripping as well". Benji Wilson of "The Daily Telegraph" reviewed the first episode positively, praising the performances of the three leads, which he said compensated for the "dull grind of all the exposition" and "tedious" historical references.
J.C. Maçek III of "PopMatters" reviewed the debut episode, remarking "writer/creator Richard Warlow and episode director Tom Shankland’s attention to the period details: streets are sooty, gaslight creates flickering shadows, and stone floors make footsteps seem chilling. These details help make Ripper Street a compelling procedural, its long form narrative and deliberate pace different from the CSI and Law & Order clones. But the show also bears traces of contemporary influences: an underground boxing club sequence in the first episode resembles similar scenes in Sherlock Holmes (2009) so much that a coincidence is hard to imagine. Equally derivative, some overt efforts to shock viewers deliver graphic violence and some nudity, courtesy of the evolving technology of photography, as it’s inspiring an evolving “smut” industry."
Ahead of its debut in the US, IGN's Roth Cornet reviewed the first episode, discussing how "the setting is handled with absolute care and a razor-sharp attention to detail, from costume and production design to the varied vocal cadences of the players, the texture and flavor of London's East End are brought to vivid life." The review continues to discuss the show's depiction of London's streets in the Victorian era: "Ripper Street provides a gritty look at the evolving streets of London and the advent of technology at the time; be it the "moving-picture-machine" that is featured in "I Need Light" or the introduction of early forensics that follows through the series. More interesting still is that it is the dirt and bones look at the uses of said technology that is in play here. This is no wink-wink "look at how charming early cameras were" depiction, but rather a portrayal of the underbelly of what those cameras would have been used for. Additionally, there is engaging interplay between those who would usher in necessary change and those who are, as Jackson says, "the barriers to progress."" Hollywood Reporter gave it significant praise “Ripper Street is a well-acted, well-written and compelling mystery series. And even better, there’s no waiting around, wishing it would improve. It’s alluring from the start.” Los Angeles Times called it “Well-written and acted.” 
Some female critics have not been so positive about the show, disappointed by its two-dimensional portrayal of women as either repressed wives and mothers or prostitutes. Jan Moir of MailOnline wrote that "the torture and murder of women" is "enthusiastically depicted", claiming "there is terrible violence meted out to men and children, too, but the focus of the viciousness is always on the knicker-dropping molls and the ‘tarts’". Grace Dent of "The Independent" was more satirical about the show, but was still unamused by the portrayal of women, stating "centuries may shift and fashions may change, yet raping and murdering women has really never been as popular."
Historical references and accuracy.
"Ripper Street" is set firmly in the Victorian period. Although the show provides generally accurate portrayals of historical events, the chronology of these events may occasionally be shifted for dramatic effect by some decades. For example, there is almost a century between Dr John Snow's epidemiology of cholera in water pumps and the development of transorbital leucotomy. Also, the term 'molly house' would be distinctly archaic by this time.
In her blog, hosted by the Guardian Online, Vanessa Heggie explored the science of "Ripper Street" and its historical accuracy. Heggie looked at poisoning by antimony-contaminated flour; Abortion by pennyroyal; Robbery by chloroform (or ether); Lobotomy by icepick; Intoxication by amphetamine and explosions using picric acid. The type of lobotomy was unusual in Victorian England (but not impossible) and only the intoxication by amphetamine was found by Heggie to be totally incorrect, with the others being historically accurate.
DVD.
A region 2 (Europe), 3-disc set and 3-disc Blu-ray set will be issued on 18 March 2013. The same DVDs in region 1 (U.S. and Canada) will be released on 12 March 2013.
