John Joseph "Jack" Nicholson (born April 22, 1937) is an American actor, film director, producer, and writer. He is known for his often dark portrayals of neurotic characters. His twelve Oscar nominations make him the most nominated male actor of all time.
Nicholson has twice won the Academy Award for Best Actor, for "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest" and for "As Good as It Gets". He also won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for the 1983 film "Terms of Endearment". He is tied with Walter Brennan and Daniel Day-Lewis for most acting wins by a male actor (three). Nicholson is well known for playing villainous roles, such as Frank Costello in "The Departed", Jack Torrance in "The Shining" and the Joker in 1989's "Batman".
Nicholson was one of only two actors to be nominated for an Academy Award for acting in every decade from the 1960s to 2000s; the other being Michael Caine. He has won seven Golden Globe Awards, and received the Kennedy Center Honor in 2001. In 1994, he became one of the youngest actors to be awarded the American Film Institute's Life Achievement Award. Notable films in which he has starred include "Easy Rider", "Five Easy Pieces", "The Last Detail", "Chinatown", "The Passenger", "Reds", "Wolf", "A Few Good Men", "The Pledge", "About Schmidt" and "The Departed".
Early life.
Nicholson was born in New Jersey, the son of a showgirl, June Frances Nicholson (stage name June Nilson). June had married Italian American showman Donald Furcillo (stage name Donald Rose) six months earlier in Elkton, Maryland, on October 16, 1936. Furcillo was already married. Although he reportedly offered to take care of the child, June's mother Ethel insisted that she bring up the baby, partly so that June could pursue her dancing career. Although Furcillo claimed to be Nicholson's father and to have committed bigamy by marrying June, biographer Patrick McGilligan asserted in "Jack's Life" that Latvian-born Eddie King (originally Edgar A. Kirschfeld), June's manager, may have been Nicholson's biological father. Other sources suggest June Nicholson was unsure of who the father was. Nicholson's mother was of Irish, English, and Pennsylvania Dutch descent, though he and his family reportedly self-identified as Irish.
Nicholson was brought up believing that his grandparents, John Joseph Nicholson (a department store window dresser in Manasquan, New Jersey) and Ethel May (née Rhoads, a hairdresser, beautician and amateur artist in Manasquan), were his parents. Nicholson only discovered that his "parents" were actually his grandparents and his sister was in fact his mother in 1974, after a journalist for "TIME" magazine who was doing a feature on Nicholson informed him of the fact. By this time, both his mother and grandmother had died (in 1963 and 1970, respectively). Nicholson has stated he does not know who his biological father is, saying "Only Ethel and June knew and they never told anybody", and has chosen not to have a DNA test or to pursue the matter.
Nicholson grew up in Neptune City, New Jersey. He was raised in his mother's Roman Catholic religion. Before starting high school, his family moved to an apartment in Spring Lake, New Jersey. "Nick", as he was known to his high school friends, attended nearby Manasquan High School, where he was voted "class clown" by the Class of 1954. He was in detention every day for a whole school year. A theatre and a drama award at the school are named in his honor. In 2004, Nicholson attended his 50-year high school reunion accompanied by his aunt Lorraine.
Career.
Early work.
When Nicholson first came to Hollywood, he worked as a gofer for animation legends William Hanna and Joseph Barbera at the MGM cartoon studio. Seeing his talent as an artist, they offered Nicholson a starting level position as an animation artist. However, citing his desire to become an actor, he declined.
He made his film debut in a low-budget teen drama "The Cry Baby Killer", in 1958, playing the title role. For the following decade, Nicholson was a frequent collaborator with the film's producer, Roger Corman. Corman directed Nicholson on several occasions, most notably in "The Little Shop of Horrors", as masochistic dental patient Wilbur Force, and also in "The Raven", "The Terror", and "The St. Valentine's Day Massacre". He worked frequently with director Monte Hellman as well on low-budget westerns, though two in particular, "Ride in the Whirlwind" and "The Shooting", initially failed to find interest from any US film distributors but gained cult success on the art house circuit in France and were later sold to television.
Rise to fame.
With his acting career heading nowhere, Nicholson seemed resigned to a career behind the camera as a writer/director. His first real taste of writing success was the LSD-fueled screenplay for the 1967 film, "The Trip" (directed by Corman), which starred Peter Fonda and Dennis Hopper. Nicholson also co-wrote, with Bob Rafelson, the movie "Head", which starred The Monkees. In addition, he also arranged the movie's soundtrack. However, after a spot opened up in Fonda and Hopper's "Easy Rider", it led to his first big acting break. Nicholson played hard-drinking lawyer George Hanson, for which he received his first Oscar nomination. The part of Hanson was a lucky break for Nicholson—the role had in fact been written for actor Rip Torn, who was a close friend of screen writer Terry Southern, but Torn withdrew from the project after a bitter argument with the film's director and co-star Dennis Hopper, during which the two men almost came to blows. In interview, Nicholson later acknowledged the importance of being cast in "Easy Rider": "All I could see in the early films, before Easy Rider, was this desperate young actor trying to vault out of the screen and create a movie career."
A Best Actor nomination came the following year for his persona-defining role in "Five Easy Pieces" (1970). Also that year, he appeared in the movie adaptation of "On A Clear Day You Can See Forever", although most of his performance was left on the cutting room floor. He was the first choice to play the role of Father Damien Karras in "The Exorcist", but the role was turned over to Jason Miller.
Other Nicholson roles included Hal Ashby's "The Last Detail" (1973), for which he was awarded Best Actor at the Cannes Film Festival, and the Roman Polanski noir thriller, "Chinatown" (1974). Nicholson was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for both films. Nicholson was friends with the director long before the death of Polanski's wife, Sharon Tate, at the hands of the Manson Family, and supported him in the days following the deaths. After Tate's death, Nicholson began sleeping with a hammer under his pillow, and took breaks from work to attend the Manson trial. It was at Nicholson's home where the rape case for which Polanski was arrested occurred. Nicholson would go on to star in The Who's "Tommy" (1975), directed by Ken Russell, and Michelangelo Antonioni's "The Passenger" (1975).
Nicholson earned his first Best Actor Oscar for portraying Randle P. McMurphy in the movie adaptation of Ken Kesey's novel "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest", directed by Miloš Forman in 1975. His Oscar was matched when Louise Fletcher received the Best Actress Award for her portrayal of Nurse Ratched. After this, he began to take more unusual roles. He took a small role in "The Last Tycoon", opposite Robert De Niro. He took a less sympathetic role in Arthur Penn's western "The Missouri Breaks", specifically to work with Marlon Brando. He followed this by making his second directorial effort with the western comedy "Goin' South". His first movie as a director was a 1971 quirky release called "Drive, He Said". 
Although he garnered no Academy Award for Stanley Kubrick's adaptation of Stephen King's "The Shining" (1980), it remains one of his more significant roles. His second Oscar, the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, came for his role of retired astronaut Garrett Breedlove in "Terms of Endearment" (1983), directed by James L. Brooks. Nicholson continued to work prolifically in the 1980s, starring in such films as "The Postman Always Rings Twice" (1981), "Reds" (1981), "Prizzi's Honor" (1985), "The Witches of Eastwick" (1987), "Broadcast News" (1987), and "Ironweed" (1987). Three Oscar nominations also followed ("Reds", "Prizzi's Honor", and "Ironweed").
Nicholson introduced several acts at Live Aid at the JFK Stadium in July 1985. He turned down the role of John Book in "Witness". The 1989 "Batman" movie, wherein Nicholson played the psychotic murderer and villain, The Joker, was an international smash hit, and a lucrative percentage deal earned Nicholson $60 million cumulatively. For his role as hot-headed Col. Nathan R. Jessup in "A Few Good Men" (1992), a movie about a murder in a U.S. Marine Corps unit, Nicholson received yet another Academy nomination. 
In 1996, Nicholson collaborated once more with "Batman" director Tim Burton on "Mars Attacks!", pulling double duty as two contrasting characters, President James Dale and Las Vegas property developer Art Land. At first studio executives at Warner Bros. disliked the idea of killing off Nicholson's character, so Burton created two characters and killed them both off. Not all of Nicholson's performances have been well received. He was nominated for Razzie Awards as worst actor for "Man Trouble" (1992) and "Hoffa" (1992). However, Nicholson's performance in "Hoffa" also earned him a Golden Globe nomination. 
Nicholson went on to win his next Academy Award for Best Actor for his role as Melvin Udall, a mean-spirited, compulsive obsessive neurotic author in "As Good as It Gets" (1997), again directed by Brooks. His Oscar was matched with the Academy Award for Best Actress for Helen Hunt as a Manhattan waitress drawn into a love/hate friendship with Udall, a frequent diner in the restaurant in which she worked. In 2001, Nicholson was the first actor to receive the Stanislavsky Award at the Moscow International Film Festival for "conquering the heights of acting and faithfulness". 
2002–present.
In "About Schmidt" (2002), Nicholson portrayed a retired Omaha, Nebraska actuary who questions his own life following his wife's death. His quietly restrained performance earned him an Academy Award Nomination for Best Actor. In "Anger Management" (2003), he plays an aggressive therapist assigned to help overly pacifist Adam Sandler. In 2003, Nicholson also starred in "Something's Gotta Give", as an aging playboy who falls for the mother (Diane Keaton) of his young girlfriend. In late 2006, Nicholson marked his return to the "dark side" as Frank Costello, a sadistic Boston Irish Mob boss presiding over Matt Damon and Leonardo DiCaprio in Martin Scorsese's Oscar-winning "The Departed", a remake of Andrew Lau's "Infernal Affairs".
In November 2006, Nicholson began filming his next project, Rob Reiner's "The Bucket List", a role for which he shaved his head. The film starred Nicholson and Morgan Freeman as dying men who fulfill their list of goals. The film was released on December 25, 2007 (limited), and January 11, 2008 (wide). In researching the role, Nicholson visited a Los Angeles hospital to see how cancer patients coped with their illnesses. His last film role to date saw him reunite with "Terms of Endearment" and "As Good as It Gets" director James L. Brooks for a small supporting role as Paul Rudd's father in "How Do You Know".
Personal life.
Family and relationships.
Nicholson's only marriage was to Sandra Knight from 1962 to 1968. They had one daughter together, Jennifer (born 1963). Actress Susan Anspach contends that her son, Caleb Goddard (born 1970), was fathered by Nicholson, though he is not convinced he is the father. Nicholson has a daughter, Honey Hollman (born 1981) from his relationship with actress Winnie Hollman and two children from his relationship with actress Rebecca Broussard: Lorraine (born 1990) and Raymond Nicholson (born 1992).
Jack's daughter, Lorraine Nicholson, graduated from Brown University on May 28, 2012. Jack attended this important event, and stayed in a hotel in Providence. He has been romantically linked to numerous actresses and models, including Michelle Phillips, Bebe Buell, Janice Dickinson, Rachel Ward, and Lara Flynn Boyle. Nicholson also had a long-term relationship with actress Anjelica Huston.
Vandalism charge.
In a criminal lawsuit filed on February 8, 1994, Robert Blank stated that Nicholson, then 56, approached Blank's Mercedes-Benz while he was stopped at a red light in North Hollywood. After accusing the other man of cutting him off in traffic, Nicholson used a golf club to bash the roof and windshield of Blank's car. A witness confirmed Blank's account of the incident, and misdemeanor charges of assault and vandalism were filed against Nicholson. Charges were dropped after Nicholson apologized to Blank and the two reached an undisclosed settlement, which included a reported $500,000 check from Nicholson.
Nicholson later expressed regret about the incident in an interview with Us Magazine, calling it "a shameful incident in my life." He explained that a close friend had recently died, and that he had also been under a good deal of stress during the shooting of his most recent movie, "The Crossing Guard". In that film, directed by Sean Penn, Nicholson played Freddie Gale, a man who vows to wreak vengeance on the drunk driver who killed his daughter. According to Nicholson, he went "out of my mind" after being cut off and snatched one of his golf clubs from the trunk of his car. Though press reports of the incident variously reported that the club in question had been a three- or a five-iron, Nicholson (who started golfing seriously after learning the game for the filming of 1990's The Two Jakes) cleared up the issue in a 2007 interview with Golf Digest. "I was on my way to the course, and in the midst of this madness I somehow knew what I was doing," he says, "because I reached into my trunk and specifically selected a club I never used on the course: my two-iron."
The road rage incident wasn't the last time Nicholson's volatile temper made news. A legendary fan of the Los Angeles Lakers professional basketball team, Nicholson has more than once been threatened with ejection from his courtside seats because he argued with or shouted at the game's referees. As BBC News reported, Nicholson was almost ejected from a Lakers playoff game against the San Antonio Spurs in May 2003 after he yelled at the game's referee for calling a third foul on Lakers star Shaquille O'Neal. The incident occurred shortly after the release of his latest movie at the time, "Anger Management".
Celebrity friendships.
Nicholson lived next door to Marlon Brando for a number of years on Mulholland Drive in Beverly Hills. Warren Beatty also lived nearby, earning the road the nickname "Bad Boy Drive". After Brando's death in 2004, Nicholson purchased his neighbor's bungalow for $6.1 million, with the purpose of having it demolished. Nicholson stated that it was done out of respect to Brando's legacy, as it had become too expensive to renovate the "derelict" building which was plagued by mold. 
Nicholson shared a friendship with author-journalist Hunter S. Thompson, described in Thompson's autobiography "Kingdom of Fear" where, according to Thompson, they would exchange "bizarre" presents which resulted in a perceived assassination attempt against the actor. Thompson appeared outside Nicholson's home on the night of Nicholson's birthday, having set off a high-powered spotlight and gunfire, playing a tape of animal cries through an amplifier to awaken him. Thompson then left a freshly-cut elk's heart on Nicholson's door as a joke before leaving when it appeared that nobody would exit the house. Following the death of Thompson in 2005, Nicholson and fellow actors Johnny Depp, John Cusack, and Sean Penn attended the private memorial service in Colorado.
Hobbies.
Nicholson is a fan of the New York Yankees and Los Angeles Lakers. He has been a Laker season ticket holder since 1970 and has held courtside season tickets for the past 25 years at both The Forum and the Staples Center, missing very few games. In a few instances, Nicholson has engaged in arguments with game officials and opposing players, and even walked onto the court. Studios were rumored to schedule filming around the Lakers home schedule although he disputed this claim in an interview with BBC radio in 2008.
Nicholson is a collector of 20th century and contemporary art, including the work of Henri Matisse, Tamara de Lempicka, Andy Warhol, and Jack Vettriano. In 1995, artist Ed Ruscha was quoted saying that "Jack Nicholson has one of the best collections out here". The collection is estimated to be worth over $100 million.
Honors.
Former California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and First Lady Maria Shriver announced on May 28, 2008, that Nicholson would be inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts. The induction ceremony took place on December 15, 2008, where he was inducted alongside 11 other legendary Californians.
In 2010, Nicholson was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame. 
In 2011, Nicholson received an honorary Doctor of Fine Arts degree from Brown University at its two hundred and forty-third commencement. At the ceremony Ruth Simmons, Brown University's president, called him, "the most skilled actor of our lifetime."
Academy Awards history.
With twelve nominations (eight for Best Actor and four for Best Supporting Actor), Jack Nicholson is the most nominated male actor in Academy Awards history. Only Nicholson and Michael Caine have been nominated for an acting (lead or supporting) Academy Award in five different decades: 1960's, 1970's, 1980's, 1990's and 2000's (decade). With three Oscar wins, he also ties with Walter Brennan, Ingrid Bergman, and Meryl Streep (who has the most acting nominations of anyone) for the second-most Oscar wins in acting categories. Only Katharine Hepburn, with four Oscars, has won more.
At the 79th Academy Awards, Nicholson had fully shaved his hair for his role in "The Bucket List". Those ceremonies represented the seventh time he has presented the Academy Award for Best Picture (1972, 1977, 1978, 1990, 1993, 2006, and 2007). Nicholson is an active and voting member of the Academy. During the last decade he has attended almost every ceremony, whether nominated or not, sitting in the front row with his trademark sunglasses.
