Hinduism is the predominant religion of the Indian subcontinent. Hinduism includes Shaivism, Vaishnavism and Śrauta among numerous other traditions. Among other practices and philosophies, Hinduism includes a wide spectrum of laws and prescriptions of "daily morality" based on karma, dharma, and societal norms. Hinduism is a conglomeration of distinct intellectual or philosophical points of view, rather than a rigid common set of beliefs.
Hinduism is formed of diverse traditions and has no single founder.
Among its direct roots is the historical Vedic religion of Iron Age India and, as such, Hinduism is often called the "oldest living religion" or the "oldest living major religion" in the world. 
One orthodox classification of Hindu texts is to divide into Śruti ("revealed") and Smriti ("remembered") texts. These texts discuss theology, philosophy, mythology, rituals and temple building among other topics. Major scriptures include the "Vedas", "Upanishads", "Puranas", "Mahabharata", "Ramayana", "Bhagavad Gita" and "Āgamas".
Hinduism, with about one billion followers, is the world's third largest religion, after Christianity and Islam. 
Etymology.
The word "Hindu" is derived (through Persian) from the Sanskrit word "Sindhu", the historic local appellation for the Indus River in the northwestern part of the Indian subcontinent, which is first mentioned in the Rig Veda.
The word "Hindu" was borrowed into European languages from the Arabic term "al-Hind", referring to the land of the people who live across the River Indus, itself from the Persian term "Hindū", which refers to all Indians. By the 13th century, "Hindustān" emerged as a popular alternative name of India, meaning the "land of "Hindus"".
The term Hinduism also occurs sporadically in Sanskrit texts such as the later Rajataranginis of Kashmir (Hinduka, c. 1450), some 16th-18th century Bengali Gaudiya Vaishnava texts, including "Chaitanya Charitamrita" and "Chaitanya Bhagavata", usually to contrast Hindus with Yavanas or Mlecchas. It was only towards the end of the 18th century that European merchants and colonists began to refer to the followers of Indian religions collectively as "Hindus". The term "Hinduism" was introduced into the English language in the 19th century to denote the religious, philosophical, and cultural traditions native to India.
History.
The earliest evidence for prehistoric religion in India date back to the late Neolithic in the early Harappan period (5500–2600 BCE). The beliefs and practices of the pre-classical era (1500–500 BCE) are called the "historical Vedic religion". The Vedic religion shows influence from Proto-Indo-European religion. The oldest Veda is the Rigveda, dated to 1700–1100 BCE. The Vedas center on worship of deities such as "Indra", "Varuna" and "Agni", and on the "Soma" ritual. Fire-sacrifices, called "yagna" are performed by chanting Vedic mantras chanted but no temples or idols are known.
The 9th and 8th centuries BCE witnessed the composition of the earliest Upanishads. Upanishads form the theoretical basis of classical Hinduism and are known as Vedanta (conclusion of the Veda). The older Upanishads launched attacks of increasing intensity on the rituals. The diverse monistic speculations of the Upanishads were synthesized into a theistic framework by the sacred Hindu scripture "Bhagavad Gita".
The major Sanskrit epics, "Ramayana" and "Mahabharata", were compiled over a protracted period during the late centuries BCE and the early centuries CE. They contain mythological stories about the rulers and wars of ancient India, and are interspersed with religious and philosophical treatises. The later Puranas recount tales about devas and devis, their interactions with humans and their battles against rakshasa.
Increasing urbanization of India in 7th and 6th centuries BCE led to the rise of new ascetic or shramana movements which challenged the orthodoxy of rituals. Mahavira (c. 549–477 BCE), proponent of Jainism, and Buddha (c. 563-483), founder of Buddhism were the most prominent icons of this movement. Shramana gave rise to the concept of the cycle of birth and death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation. Radhakrishnan, Oldenberg and Neumann believed that the Buddhist canon had been influenced by Upanishads. 
In early centuries CE several schools of Hindu philosophy were formally codified, including Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Purva-Mimamsa and Vedanta. The period between 5th and 9th century CE was a brilliant era in the development of Indian philosophy as Hindu and Buddhist philosophies flourished side by side. Of these various schools of thought the non-dualistic Advaita Vedanta emerged as the most influential and most dominant school of philosophy. Charvaka, the atheistic materialist school, came to the fore in North India before the eighth century CE.
Sanskritic culture went into decline after the end of the Gupta period. The early medieval Puranas helped establish a religious mainstream among the pre-literate tribal societies undergoing acculturation. The tenets of Brahmanic Hinduism and of the Dharmashastras underwent a radical transformation at the hands of the Purana composers, resulting in the rise of a mainstream "Hinduism" that overshadowed all earlier traditions. In eighth century royal circles, the Buddha started to be replaced by Hindu gods in pujas. This also was the same period of time the Buddha was made into an avatar of Vishnu.
Though Islam came to India in the early 7th century with the advent of Arab traders and the conquest of Sindh, it started to become a major religion during the later Muslim conquest in the Indian subcontinent. During this period Buddhism declined rapidly and many Hindus were forcibly converted to Islam. Numerous Muslim rulers or their army generals such as Aurangzeb and Malik Kafur destroyed Hindu temples and persecuted non-Muslims; however some, such as Akbar, were more tolerant. The 17th century Hindu Maratha Empire of India is credited for ending the Islamic Mughal rule in India. and furthermore the Marathas are considered as champions of Hinduism. Hinduism underwent profound changes, in large part due to the influence of the prominent teachers Ramanuja, Madhva, and Chaitanya. Followers of the Bhakti movement moved away from the abstract concept of Brahman, which the philosopher Adi Shankara consolidated a few centuries before, with emotional, passionate devotion towards the more accessible Avatars, especially Krishna and Rama.
Indology as an academic discipline of studying Indian culture from a European perspective was established in the 19th century, led by scholars such as Max Müller and John Woodroffe. They brought Vedic, Puranic and Tantric literature and philosophy to Europe and the United States. At the same time, societies such as the Brahmo Samaj and the Theosophical Society attempted to reconcile and fuse Abrahamic and Dharmic philosophies, endeavouring to institute societal reform. This period saw the emergence of movements which, while highly innovative, were rooted in indigenous tradition. They were based on the personalities and teachings of individuals, as with Ramakrishna and Ramana Maharshi. Prominent Hindu philosophers, including Aurobindo and Prabhupada (founder of ISKCON), translated, reformulated and presented Hinduism's foundational texts for contemporary audiences in new iterations, attracting followers and attention in India and abroad. Others such as Vivekananda, Paramahansa Yogananda, Sri Chinmoy, B.K.S. Iyengar and Swami Rama have also been instrumental in raising the profiles of Yoga and Vedanta in the West.
Typology.
Hinduism as it is commonly known can be subdivided into a number of major currents. Of the historical division into six darsanas, only two schools, Vedanta and Yoga, survive. The main divisions of Hinduism today are Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Smartism and Shaktism. Hinduism also recognizes numerous divine beings subordinate to the Supreme Being or regards them as lower manifestations of it. Other notable characteristics include a belief in reincarnation and karma, as well as in personal duty, or dharma.
Definitions.
Hinduism does not have a "unified system of belief encoded in declaration of faith or a creed", but is rather an umbrella term comprising the plurality of religious phenomena originating and based on the Vedic traditions.
The characteristic of comprehensive tolerance to differences in belief, and Hinduism's openness, makes it difficult to define as a religion according to traditional Western conceptions. To its adherents, Hinduism is the traditional way of life, and because of the wide range of traditions and ideas incorporated within or covered by it, arriving at a comprehensive definition of the term is problematic. While sometimes referred to as a religion, Hinduism is more often defined as a religious tradition. It is therefore described as both the oldest of the world's religions, and the most diverse.
Most Hindu traditions revere a body of religious or sacred literature, the Vedas, although there are exceptions. Some Hindu religious traditions regard particular rituals as essential for salvation, but a variety of views on this co-exist. Some Hindu philosophies postulate a theistic ontology of creation, of sustenance, and of destruction of the universe, yet some Hindus are atheists. Hinduism is sometimes characterized by the belief in reincarnation ("samsara"), determined by the law of karma, and the idea that salvation is freedom from this cycle of repeated birth and death. However, other religions of the region, such as Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism, also believe in karma, outside the scope of Hinduism. Hinduism is therefore viewed as the most complex of all of the living, historical world religions. Despite its complexity, Hinduism is not only one of the numerically largest faiths, but is also the oldest living major tradition on earth, with roots reaching back into prehistory.
A definition of Hinduism, given by the first Vice President of India, who was also a prominent theologian, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan, states that Hinduism is not "just a faith", but in itself is related to the union of reason and intuition. Radhakrishnan explicitly states that Hinduism cannot be defined, but is only to be experienced. Similarly some academics suggest that Hinduism can be seen as a category with "fuzzy edges", rather than as a well-defined and rigid entity. Some forms of religious expression are central to Hinduism, while others are not as central but still remain within the category. Based on this, Ferro-Luzzi has developed a 'Prototype Theory approach' to the definition of Hinduism.
Problems with the single definition of what is actually meant by the term 'Hinduism' are often attributed to the fact that Hinduism does not have a single or common historical founder. Hinduism, or as some say 'Hinduisms,' does not have a single system of salvation and has different goals according to each sect or denomination. The forms of Vedic religion are seen not as an alternative to Hinduism, but as its earliest form, and there is little justification for the divisions found in much western scholarly writing between Vedism, Brahmanism, and Hinduism. According to Supreme court of India "unlike other religions in the World, the Hindu religion does not claim any one Prophet, it does not worship any one God, it does not believe in any one philosophic concept, it does not follow any one act of religious rites or performances, in fact, it does not satisfy the traditional features of a religion or creed. It is a way of life and nothing more".
A definition of Hinduism is further complicated by the frequent use of the term "faith" as a synonym for "religion". Some academics and many practitioners refer to Hinduism using a native definition, as "", a Sanskrit phrase meaning "the eternal law", or the "eternal way".
Beliefs.
Hinduism refers to a religious mainstream which evolved organically and spread over a large territory marked by significant ethnic and cultural diversity. This mainstream evolved both by innovation from within, and by assimilation of external traditions or cults into the Hindu fold. The result is an enormous variety of religious traditions, ranging from innumerable small, unsophisticated cults to major religious movements with millions of adherents spread over the entire subcontinent. The identification of Hinduism as an independent religion separate from Buddhism or Jainism consequently hinges on the affirmation of its adherents that it is such.
Hinduism grants absolute and complete freedom of belief and worship. Hinduism conceives the whole world as a single family that deifies the one truth, and therefore it accepts all forms of beliefs and dismisses labels of distinct religions which would imply a division of identity. Hence, Hinduism is devoid of the concepts of apostasy, heresy and blasphemy.
Prominent themes in Hindu beliefs include (but are not restricted to), "Dharma" (ethics/duties), "Samsara" (the continuing cycle of birth, life, death and rebirth), "Karma" (action and subsequent reaction), "Moksha" (liberation from "samsara"), and the various Yogas (paths or practices).
Concept of God.
Hinduism is a diverse system of thought with beliefs spanning monotheism, polytheism, panentheism, pantheism, monism, and atheism among others; and its concept of God is complex and depends upon each individual and the tradition and philosophy followed. It is sometimes referred to as henotheistic (i.e., involving devotion to a single god while accepting the existence of others), but any such term is an overgeneralization.
Most Hindus believe that the spirit or soul — the true "self" of every person, called the "ātman" — is eternal. According to the monistic/pantheistic theologies of Hinduism (such as Advaita Vedanta school), this "Atman" is ultimately indistinct from Brahman, the supreme spirit. Hence, these schools are called non-dualist. The goal of life, according to the Advaita school, is to realize that one's "ātman" is identical to Brahman, the supreme soul. The Upanishads state that whoever becomes fully aware of the "ātman" as the innermost core of one's own self realizes an identity with Brahman and thereby reaches "moksha" (liberation or freedom).
The schools of Vedanta and Nyaya states that karma itself proves the existence of God. Nyaya being the school of logic, makes the "logical" inference that the universe is an effect and it ought to have a creator.
Dualistic schools (see Dvaita and Bhakti) understand Brahman as a Supreme Being who possesses personality, and they worship him or her thus, as Vishnu, Brahma, Shiva, or Shakti, depending upon the sect. The "ātman" is dependent on God, while "moksha" depends on love towards God and on God's grace. When God is viewed as the supreme personal being (rather than as the infinite principle), God is called "Ishvara" ("The Lord"), "Bhagavan" ("The Auspicious One") or "Parameshwara" ("The Supreme Lord"). However interpretations of "Ishvara" vary, ranging from non-belief in "Ishvara" by followers of Mimamsakas, to identifying "Brahman" and "Ishvara" as one, as in Advaita. In the majority of traditions of Vaishnavism he is Vishnu, God, and the text of Vaishnava scriptures identify this Being as Krishna, sometimes referred to as "svayam bhagavan". However, under Shaktism, Devi or Adi parashakti is considered as the Supreme Being and in Shaivism Shiva is considered Supreme.
The multitude of "devas" are viewed as "avatars" of the Brahman. In discussing the Trimurti, Sir William Jones states that Hindus "worship the Supreme Being under three forms — Vishnu, Siva, Brahma...The fundamental idea of the Hindu religion, that of metamorphoses, or transformations, is exemplified in the Avatars."
In Bhagavad Gita, for example, God is the sole repository of Gunas (attributes) also, as
Atheistic doctrines dominate Hindu schools like Samkhya and Mimamsa. The "Samkhyapravachana Sutra" of Samkhya argues that the existence of God ("Ishvara") cannot be proved and hence cannot be admitted to exist. Samkhya argue that an unchanging God cannot be the source of an ever changing world. It says God was a necessary metaphysical assumption demanded by circumstances. Proponents of the school of Mimamsa, which is based on rituals and orthopraxy states that the evidence allegedly proving the existence of God was insufficient. They argue that there is no need to postulate a maker for the world, just as there is no need for an author to compose the Vedas or a God to validate the rituals. Mimamsa considers the Gods named in the Vedas have no existence apart from the "mantras" that speak their names. To that regard, the power of the mantras is what is seen as the power of Gods.
Devas and avatars.
The Hindu scriptures refer to celestial entities called "Devas" (or "Devi" in feminine form; ' used synonymously for Deva in Hindi), "the shining ones", which may be translated into English as "gods" or "heavenly beings". The "devas" are an integral part of Hindu culture and are depicted in art, architecture and through icons, and mythological stories about them are related in the scriptures, particularly in Indian epic poetry and the Puranas. They are, however, often distinguished from Ishvara, a supreme personal god, with many Hindus worshiping Ishvara in one of its particular manifestations (ostensibly separate deities) as their "", or chosen ideal. The choice is a matter of individual preference, and of regional and family traditions.
Hindu epics and the Puranas relate several episodes of the descent of God to Earth in corporeal form to restore "dharma" to society and to guide humans to "moksha." Such an incarnation is called an "Avatar." The most prominent avatars are of Vishnu and include Rama (the protagonist in Ramayana) and Krishna (a central figure in the epic Mahabharata).
Karma and samsara.
"Karma" translates literally as action, work, or deed, and can be described as the "moral law of cause and effect". According to the Upanishads an individual, known as the "jiva-atma", develops "sanskaras" (impressions) from actions, whether physical or mental. The "linga sharira", a body more subtle than the physical one but less subtle than the soul, retains impressions, carrying them over into the next life, establishing a unique trajectory for the individual. Thus, the concept of a universal, neutral, and never-failing karma intrinsically relates to reincarnation as well as to one's personality, characteristics, and family. Karma binds together the notions of free will and destiny.
"Samsara" provides ephemeral pleasures, which lead people to desire rebirth so as to enjoy the pleasures of a perishable body. However, escaping the world of "samsara" through "moksha" is believed to ensure lasting happiness and peace. It is thought that after several reincarnations, an "atman" eventually seeks unity with the cosmic spirit (Brahman/Paramatman).
The ultimate goal of life, referred to as "moksha", "nirvana" or "samadhi", is understood in several different ways: as the realization of one's union with God; as the realization of one's eternal relationship with God; realization of the unity of all existence; perfect unselfishness and knowledge of the Self; as the attainment of perfect mental peace; and as detachment from worldly desires. Such realization liberates one from "samsara" and ends the cycle of rebirth. Due to belief in the indestructibility of the soul, death is deemed insignificant with respect to the cosmic self. Thence, a person who has no desire or ambition left and no responsibilities remaining in life or one affected by a terminal disease may embrace death by "Prayopavesa".
The exact conceptualization of "moksha" differs among the various Hindu schools of thought. For example, Advaita Vedanta holds that after attaining "moksha" an "atman" no longer identifies itself with an individual but as identical with Brahman in all respects. The followers of Dvaita (dualistic) schools identify themselves as part of Brahman, and after attaining "moksha" expect to spend eternity in a "loka" (heaven), in the company of their chosen form of "Ishvara". Thus, it is said that the followers of "dvaita" wish to "taste sugar", while the followers of Advaita wish to "become sugar".
Objectives of human life.
Dharma (righteousness, ethikos).
In the Mahabharata, Krishna defines dharma as upholding both this-worldly and other-worldly affairs. (Mbh 12.110.11). The word "Sanātana" means 'eternal', 'perennial', or 'forever'; thus, 'Sanātana Dharma' signifies that it is the dharma that has neither beginning nor end.
Artha (livelihood, wealth).
Artha is objective & virtuous pursuit of wealth for livelihood, obligations and economic prosperity. It is inclusive of political life, diplomacy and material well-being. The doctrine of Artha is called Arthashastra, amongst the most famous of which is Kautilya Arthashastra.
Kāma (sensual pleasure).
Kāma (Sanskrit, Pali; Devanagari: काम) means desire, wish, passion, longing, pleasure of the senses, the aesthetic enjoyment of life, affection, or love.
Mokṣa (liberation, freedom from samsara).
Moksha (Sanskrit: ') or mukti (Sanskrit: ), literally "release" (both from a root ' "to let loose, let go"), is the last goal of life. It is liberation from "samsara" and the concomitant suffering involved in being subject to the cycle of repeated death and reincarnation.
Yoga.
An individual may prefer one or some yogas over others, according to his or her inclination and understanding. Some devotional schools teach that "bhakti" is the only practical path to achieve spiritual perfection for most people, based on their belief that the world is currently in the "Kali Yuga" (one of four epochs which are part of the Yuga cycle). Practice of one yoga does not exclude others. Many schools believe that the different yogas naturally blend into and aid other yogas. For example, the practice of "jnana yoga", is thought to inevitably lead to pure love (the goal of "bhakti yoga"), and vice versa. Someone practicing deep meditation (such as in "raja yoga") must embody the core principles of "karma yoga", "jnana yoga" and "bhakti yoga", whether directly or indirectly.
Practices.
Hindu practices generally involve seeking awareness of God and sometimes also seeking blessings from Devas. Therefore, Hinduism has developed numerous practices meant to help one think of divinity in the midst of everyday life. Hindus can engage in (worship or veneration), either at home or at a temple. At home, Hindus often create a shrine with icons dedicated to their chosen form(s) of God. Temples are usually dedicated to a primary deity along with associated subordinate deities though some commemorate multiple deities. Visiting temples is not obligatory, and many visit temples only during religious festivals. Hindus perform their worship through icons (murtis). The icon serves as a tangible link between the worshiper and God. The image is often considered a manifestation of God, since God is immanent. The Padma Purana states that the "" is not to be thought of as mere stone or wood but as a manifest form of the Divinity. A few Hindu sects, such as the Arya Samaj, do not believe in worshiping God through icons.
Hinduism has a developed system of symbolism and iconography to represent the sacred in art, architecture, literature and worship. These symbols gain their meaning from the scriptures, mythology, or cultural traditions. The syllable "Om" (which represents the "Parabrahman") and the Swastika sign (which symbolizes auspiciousness) have grown to represent Hinduism itself, while other markings such as "tilaka" identify a follower of the faith. Hinduism associates many symbols, which include the lotus, "chakra" and "veena", with particular deities.
Mantras are invocations, praise and prayers that through their meaning, sound, and chanting style help a devotee focus the mind on holy thoughts or express devotion to God/the deities. Many devotees perform morning ablutions at the bank of a sacred river while chanting the "Gayatri Mantra" or "Mahamrityunjaya" mantras. The epic Mahabharata extols "Japa" (ritualistic chanting) as the greatest duty in the Kali Yuga (what Hindus believe to be the current age). Many adopt "Japa" as their primary spiritual practice. Yoga is a Hindu discipline which trains the consciousness for tranquility, health and spiritual insight. This is done through a system of postures and exercises to practise control of the body and mind.
Rituals.
The vast majority of Hindus engage in religious rituals on a daily basis. Most Hindus observe religious rituals at home. but observation of rituals greatly vary among regions, villages, and individuals. Devout Hindus perform daily chores such as worshiping at dawn after bathing (usually at a family shrine, and typically includes lighting a lamp and offering foodstuffs before the images of deities), recitation from religious scripts, singing devotional hymns, meditation, chanting mantras, reciting scriptures etc. A notable feature in religious ritual is the division between purity and pollution. Religious acts presuppose some degree of impurity or defilement for the practitioner, which must be overcome or neutralised before or during ritual procedures. Purification, usually with water, is thus a typical feature of most religious action. Other characteristics include a belief in the efficacy of sacrifice and concept of merit, gained through the performance of charity or good works, that will accumulate over time and reduce sufferings in the next world. Vedic rites of fire-oblation ("yajna") are now only occasional practices, although they are highly revered in theory. In Hindu wedding and burial ceremonies, however, the "yajña" and chanting of Vedic mantras are still the norm. The rituals, "upacharas", change with time. For instance, in the past few hundred years some rituals, such as sacred dance and music offerings in the standard Sodasa Upacharas set prescribed by the Agama Shastra, were replaced by the offerings of rice and sweets.
Occasions like birth, marriage, and death involve what are often elaborate sets of religious customs. In Hinduism, life-cycle rituals include "Annaprashan" (a baby's first intake of solid food), "Upanayanam" ("sacred thread ceremony" undergone by upper-caste children at their initiation into formal education) and "Śrāddha" (ritual of treating people to a meal in return for prayers to 'God' to give peace to the soul of the deceased). For most people in India, the betrothal of the young couple and the exact date and time of the wedding are matters decided by the parents in consultation with astrologers. On death, cremation is considered obligatory for all except "sanyasis", "hijra", and children under five. Cremation is typically performed by wrapping the corpse in cloth and burning it on a pyre.
Pilgrimage.
Char Dham (Famous Four Pilgrimage sites): The four holy sites Puri, Rameswaram, Dwarka, and Badrinath (or alternatively the Himalayan towns of Badrinath, Kedarnath, Gangotri, and Yamunotri) compose the "Char Dham" ("four abodes") pilgrimage circuit. 
Kumbh Mela: The "Kumbh Mela" (the "pitcher festival") is one of the holiest of Hindu pilgrimages that is held every 12 years; the location is rotated among Allahabad, Haridwar, Nashik, and Ujjain. 
Old Holy cities as per Puranic Texts: Varanasi formerly known as Kashi, Allahabad formerly known as Prayag, Haridwar-Rishikesh, Mathura-Vrindavan, and Ayodhya. 
Major Temple cities: Puri, which hosts a major Vaishnava Jagannath temple and Rath Yatra celebration; Katra, home to the Vaishno Devi temple; Three comparatively recent temples of fame and huge pilgrimage are Shirdi, home to Sai Baba of Shirdi, Tirumala - Tirupati, home to the Tirumala Venkateswara Temple; and Sabarimala,where Swami Ayyappan is worshipped. 
Shakti Peethas: Another important set of pilgrimages are the "Shakti Peethas", where the Mother Goddess is worshipped, the two principal ones being "Kalighat" and "Kamakhya".
While there are different yet similar pilgrimage routes in different parts of India, all are respected equally well, according to the universality of Hinduism.
Pilgrimage is not mandatory in Hinduism, though many adherents undertake them.
Festivals.
Hindu festivals (Sanskrit: "Utsava"; literally: "to lift higher") are considered as symbolic rituals that beautifully weave individual and social life to dharma. Hinduism has many festivals throughout the year. The Hindu calendar usually prescribe their dates. 
The festivals typically celebrate events from Hindu mythology, often coinciding with seasonal changes. There are festivals which are primarily celebrated by specific sects or in certain regions of the Indian subcontinent.
Scriptures.
Hinduism is based on "the accumulated treasury of spiritual laws discovered by different persons in different times". The scriptures were transmitted orally in verse form to aid memorization, for many centuries before they were written down. Over many centuries, sages refined the teachings and expanded the canon. In post-Vedic and current Hindu belief, most Hindu scriptures are not typically interpreted literally. More importance is attached to the ethics and metaphorical meanings derived from them. Most sacred texts are in Sanskrit. The texts are classified into two classes: "Shruti" and "Smriti".
Shruti.
"Shruti" (lit: that which is heard) primarily refers to the "Vedas", which form the earliest record of the Hindu scriptures. While many Hindus revere the Vedas as eternal truths revealed to ancient sages ("rishis"), some devotees do not associate the creation of the Vedas with a god or person. They are thought of as the laws of the spiritual world, which would still exist even if they were not revealed to the sages. Hindus believe that because the spiritual truths of the Vedas are eternal, they continue to be expressed in new ways.
There are four "Vedas" (called "-, Sāma-, Yajus- "and "Atharva-"). The "Rigveda" is the first and most important Veda. Each Veda is divided into four parts: the primary one, the "Veda proper", being the "Samhitapatha", which contains sacred "mantras". The other three parts form a three-tier ensemble of commentaries, usually in prose and are believed to be slightly later in age than the '. These are: the "Brahmana", "Aranyaka", and the "Upanishads". The first two parts were subsequently called the ' (ritualistic portion), while the last two form the "" (knowledge portion). While the "Vedas" focus on rituals, the "Upanishads" focus on spiritual insight and philosophical teachings, and discuss Brahman and reincarnation.
– बृहदारण्यक उपनिषद् 1.3.28.
</poem>
– bṛhadāraṇyaka upaniṣada 1.3.28
</poem>
– Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.3.28.
</poem>
Smritis.
Hindu texts other than the "Shrutis" are collectively called the "Smritis" (memory). The most notable of the smritis are the epics, which consist of the "Mahabharata" and the "Ramayana". The ' is an integral part of the "Mahabharata" and one of the most popular sacred texts of Hinduism. It contains philosophical teachings from "Krishna", an incarnation of "Vishnu", told to the prince Arjuna on the eve of a great war. The ', spoken by Krishna, is described as the essence of the "Vedas." However Gita, sometimes called "Gitopanishad", is more often placed in the Shruti, category, being Upanishadic in content. "Puranas", which illustrate Hindu ideas through vivid narratives come under smritis. Other texts include "Devi Mahatmya", the "Tantras", the "Yoga Sutras", "Tirumantiram", "Shiva Sutras" and the "Hindu ". A more controversial text, the "Manusmriti", is a prescriptive lawbook which lays the societal codes of social stratification which later evolved into the Indian caste system.
A well known verse from Bhagavad Gita describing a concept in Karma Yoga is explained as follows
Order of precedence of authority.
The order of precedence regarding authority of Vedic Scriptures is as follows,
That means, if anyone of them contradicts the preceding one then it disqualified as an authority. There is a well known Indian saying that "Smṛti follows Śruti". So it was considered that in order to establish any theistic philosophical theory (Astika Siddhanta) one ought not contradict Śruti (Vedas).
Adi Sankara has chosen three standards and named as "Prasthānatrayī", literally, "three points of departure (three standards)". Later these were referred to as the three canonical texts of reference of Hindu philosophy by other Vedanta schools. 
The Upanishads consist of twelve or thirteen major texts, with many minor texts. The is part of the .The (also known as the ""), systematise the doctrines taught in the Upanishads and the .
Demographics.
Hinduism is a major religion in India and, according to a 2001 census, Hinduism was followed by around 80.5% of the country's population of 1.21 billion (2012 estimate) (960 million adherents). Other significant populations are found in Nepal (23 million), Bangladesh (15 million) and the Indonesian island of Bali (3.3 million).
Demographically, Hinduism is the world's third largest religion, after Christianity and Islam.
Society.
Denominations.
Hinduism has no central doctrinal authority and many practising Hindus do not claim to belong to any particular denomination. However, academics categorize contemporary Hinduism into four major denominations: Vaishnavism, Shaivism, Shaktism and Smartism. The denominations differ primarily in the god worshipped as the Supreme One and in the traditions that accompany worship of that god.
Vaishnavas worship "Vishnu" as the supreme God; Shaivites worship "Shiva" as the supreme; Shaktas worship "Shakti" (power) personified through a female divinity or Mother Goddess, "Devi"; while Smartas believe in the essential oneness of five (panchadeva) or six (Shanmata, as Tamil Hindus add Skanda) deities as personifications of the Supreme.
The Western conception of what Hinduism is has been defined by the Smarta view; many Hindus, who may not understand or follow Advaita philosophy, in contemporary Hinduism, invariably follow the Shanmata belief worshiping many forms of God. One commentator, noting the influence of the Smarta tradition, remarked that although many Hindus may not strictly identify themselves as Smartas but, by adhering to Advaita Vedanta as a foundation for non-sectarianism, are indirect followers.
Other denominations like Ganapatya (the cult of "Ganesha") and Saura (Sun worship) are not so widespread.
There are movements that are not easily placed in any of the above categories, such as Swami Dayananda Saraswati's "Arya Samaj", which rejects image worship and veneration of multiple deities. It focuses on the "Vedas" and the Vedic fire sacrifices ("yajna").
Varnas.
Hindu society has been categorized into four classes, called "varnas".They are,
The "Bhagavad Gītā" links the "varna" to an individual's duty ("svadharma"), inborn nature ("svabhāva"), and natural tendencies ("guṇa"). Gita's conception of "varna" allowed Aurobindo to derive his doctrine that "functions of a man ought to be determined by his natural turn, gift and capacities." The "Manusmriti" categorizes the different castes. 
Some mobility and flexibility within the varnas challenge allegations of social discrimination in the caste system, as has been pointed out by several sociologists, although some other scholars disagree. Hindus and scholars debate whether the so-called "caste system" is an integral part of Hinduism sanctioned by the scriptures or an outdated social custom. 
The religious teacher Sri Ramakrishna (1836–1886) taught that
Ashramas.
Traditionally the life of a Hindu is divided into four "s" (phases or stages; unrelated meanings include monastery). The first part of one's life, "Brahmacharya," the stage as a student, is spent in celibate, controlled, sober and pure contemplation under the guidance of a Guru, building up the mind for spiritual knowledge. "Grihastha" is the householder's stage, in which one marries and satisfies "Kama (Purusharthas)" and "artha" in one's married and professional life respectively (see the goals of life). The moral obligations of a Hindu householder include supporting one's parents, children, guests and holy figures. "Vanaprastha," the retirement stage, is gradual detachment from the material world. This may involve giving over duties to one's children, spending more time in religious practices and embarking on holy pilgrimages. Finally, in "Sannyasa", the stage of asceticism, one renounces all worldly attachments to secludedly find the Divine through detachment from worldly life and peacefully shed the body for Moksha.
Monasticism.
Some Hindus choose to live a monastic life (Sannyāsa) in pursuit of liberation or another form of spiritual perfection. Monastics commit themselves to a life of simplicity, celibacy, detachment from worldly pursuits, and the contemplation of God. A Hindu monk is called a "sanyāsī, sādhu", or "swāmi". A female renunciate is called a "sanyāsini". Renunciates receive high respect in Hindu society because their outward renunciation of selfishness and worldliness serves as an inspiration to householders who strive for "mental" renunciation. Some monastics live in monasteries, while others wander from place to place, trusting in God alone to provide for their needs. It is considered a highly meritorious act for a householder to provide sādhus with food or other necessaries. Sādhus strive to treat all with respect and compassion, whether a person may be poor or rich, good or wicked, and to be indifferent to praise, blame, pleasure, and pain.
Ahimsa, vegetarianism and other food customs.
Hindus advocate the practice of ' (non-violence) and respect for all life because divinity is believed to permeate all beings, including plants and non-human animals. The term ' appears in the Upanishads, the epic Mahabharata and ' is the first of the five "Yamas" (vows of self-restraint) in Patanjali's Yoga Sutras. and the first principle for "all" member of Varnashrama Dharma (brahmin, kshatriya, vaishya and shudra) in Law of Manu (book 10, sutra 63 : "Ahimsa, satya, asteya, shaucam" and "indrayanigraha", almost similar to main principles of jainism). 
In accordance with "", many Hindus embrace vegetarianism to respect higher forms of life. Estimates of the number of lacto vegetarians in India (includes adherents of all religions) vary between 20% and 42%. The food habits vary with the community and region, for example some castes having fewer vegetarians and coastal populations relying on seafood. Some avoid meat only on specific holy days. Observant Hindus who do eat meat almost always abstain from beef. The cow in Hindu society is traditionally identified as a caretaker and a maternal figure, and Hindu society honours the cow as a symbol of unselfish giving. Cow-slaughter is legally banned in almost all states of India.
There are many Hindu groups that have continued to abide by a strict vegetarian diet in modern times. One example is the movement known as ISKCON (International Society for Krishna Consciousness), whose followers “not only abstain from meat, fish, and fowl, but also avoid certain vegetables that are thought to have negative properties, such as onion and garlic.” A second example is the Swaminarayan Movement. The followers of this Hindu group also staunchly adhere to a diet that is devoid of meat, eggs, and seafood.
Vegetarianism is propagated by the Yajur Veda and it is recommended for a "satvic" (purifying) lifestyle. Thus, another reason that dietary purity is so eminent within Hinduism is because “the idea that food reflects the general qualities of nature: purity, energy, inertia” It follows, then, that a healthy diet should be one that promotes purity within an individual.
Based on this reasoning, Hindus should avoid or minimize the intake of foods that do not promote purity. These foods include onion and garlic, which are regarded as rajasic (a state which is characterized by “tension and overbearing demeanor”) foods, and meat, which is regarded as tamasic (a state which is characterized by “anger, greed, and jealousy”).
Some Hindus from certain sects - generally Shakta, certain Shudra and Kshatriya castes and certain Eastern Indian and East Asian regions; practise animal sacrifice ("bali"), although most Hindus, including the majority of Vaishnava and Shaivite Hindus abhor it.
