Table No. 21 is a Bollywood action thriller film based on article no. 21 directed by Aditya Datt, featuring Rajeev Khandelwal, Tena Desae, and Paresh Rawal. It is produced by Eros International.
The movie touches upon a pertinent question that is a bane on Indian Higher Education - ragging.
The promotional poster was released online on 8 November 2012. The official theatrical trailer was unveiled on 23 November 2012.The film has released on 4th January 2013. Made on a low budget, it received average response at box office and declared as an average grosser at the box office by Box Office India.
Plot.
The unemployed Vivaan (Rajeev Khandelwal) and Siya Agasthi (Tena Desae), like any other ordinary couple, are working their way to make ends meet. They win a chance to make a trip to the beautiful islands of Fiji in a lucky draw contest. Not only is this holiday fully paid for, with their stay at one of the finest hotels, but they also get invited to dine at Suva, Fiji’s finest resorts on occasion of their wedding anniversary. At the resort they encounter the charming Mr. Khan (Paresh Rawal). Mr Khan invites the couple to take part in a live game show named 'Table 21' which offers a staggering amount of FJ$10 million (approximately 210 million) as the prize. The rules are simple - 8 questions will be asked regarding their personal life for which they have to answer truthfully and have to do the task assigned to each question. The questions first seem very easy to answer, but as the game goes on, the tasks become horrid, making Vivaan remember his past in college. His last task is to kill someone. They arrive in a room. When he sees his target, he recognizes him from his past. In a flashback, it is shown how Vivaan and his friends ragged a boy (the target) named Akram (Dhruv Ganesh) so severely that he lost all semblance of sanity. Back in the present, it is revealed that Akram is the son of Mr. Khan and that Mr. Khan's intention was to show Vivaan and Siya the extent of the damage inflicted by their actions. The movie ends with Mr. Khan telling them that they are free to go but the sin of what they did will shadow them forever.
Box Office.
Upon release Table No. 21 achieved a slow start the at Box Office in its first week. The film collected 5.75 crore nett over the weekend.The collections after four days are 6.75 crore nett approx.
The film made a decent business of about 9.50 Crores in its 1st Week and after a 2 week long run, 2013′s first release Table No.21 stands at 11.50 crores total at the Domestic Box Office.
Critics have praised the handling of the story but also have criticized the way the concept of Ragging, the movie is trying to expose being kept under wraps. Shivesh Kumar of "IndiaWeekly" awarded the movie 2.5 out of 5 stars.
