Star Trek is an American science fiction entertainment franchise created by Gene Roddenberry and currently under the ownership of CBS. The franchise began in 1966 with the television series "Star Trek" later referred to as '. This series, its spin-off shows: ', ', ', ', and ', as well as the film series make up the core of the franchise's mythos. While the critical response to much of the franchise varies, many individual "Star Trek" episodes and films have won awards and honors including Emmy Awards, Hugo Awards, and an Academy Award.
Westerns such as "Wagon Train" along with the novel "Gulliver's Travels" inspired Roddenberry when he created the first "Star Trek". It followed the interstellar adventures of James T. Kirk and the crew of an exploration vessel of a 23rd century galactic "United Federation of Planets"—the Starship "Enterprise". This first series, now referred to as "The Original Series", debuted in 1966 and ran for three seasons on NBC. These adventures continued in the short-lived "Star Trek: The Animated Series" and six feature films. Four spin-off television series were eventually produced; "Star Trek: The Next Generation", followed the crew of a new Starship "Enterprise" set a century after the original series; "Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" and "Star Trek: Voyager", set contemporaneously with "The Next Generation"; and "Star Trek: Enterprise", set before the original series, in the early days of human interstellar travel. Four additional "The Next Generation" feature films were produced. In 2009, the prequel of the original series (set in an alternate timeline) "Star Trek" featuring a new cast portraying younger versions of the crew from the original "Enterprise" appeared. A sequel to this film, "Star Trek Into Darkness", is scheduled for release on May 17, 2013.
"Star Trek" has been a cult phenomenon since its beginning. Fans of the franchise are called Trekkies or Trekkers. The franchise spans a wide range of spin-offs including games, novels, toy lines and replicas. "Star Trek" had a in Las Vegas which opened in 1998 and closed in September 2008. At least two museum exhibits of props travel the world. The series even has its own full-fledged constructed language, Klingon. Several parodies have been made of "Star Trek" and its fans, despite the end of "Star Trek" episodes on TV, and several fan productions have been produced in that void.
"Star Trek" is noted for its influence on the world outside of science fiction. It has been cited as an inspiration for several technological inventions such as the cell phone. Moreover, the show is noted for its progressive civil rights stances. The original series included one of television's first multiracial casts, and the first televised inter-racial kiss. "Star Trek" references can be found throughout popular culture from movies such as the submarine thriller "Crimson Tide" and the cartoon series "South Park".
Conception and setting.
As early as 1964, Gene Roddenberry drafted a proposal for the science fiction series that would become "Star Trek". Although he publicly marketed it as a Western in outer space—a so-called ""Wagon Train" to the Stars" (like the popular Western TV series)—he privately told friends that he was modeling it on Jonathan Swift's "Gulliver's Travels", intending each episode to act on two levels: as a suspenseful adventure story and as a morality tale.
Most "Star Trek" stories depict the adventures of humans and aliens who serve in Starfleet, the space-borne humanitarian and peacekeeping armada of the United Federation of Planets. The protagonists have altruistic values, and must apply these ideals to difficult dilemmas. Many of the conflicts and political dimensions of "Star Trek" represent allegories of contemporary cultural realities. "Star Trek: The Original Series" addressed issues of the 1960s, just as later spin-offs have reflected issues of their respective decades. Issues depicted in the various series include war and peace, the value of personal loyalty, authoritarianism, imperialism, class warfare, economics, racism, religion, human rights, sexism, feminism, and the role of technology. Roddenberry stated: "creating a new world with new rules, I could make statements about sex, religion, Vietnam, politics, and intercontinental missiles. Indeed, we did make them on "Star Trek": we were sending messages and fortunately they all got by the network."
Roddenberry intended the show to have a highly progressive political agenda reflective of the emerging counter-culture of the youth movement, though he was not fully forthcoming to the networks about this. He wanted "Star Trek" to show humanity what it might develop into, if only it would learn from the lessons of the past, most specifically by ending violence. An extreme example is the alien species, the Vulcans, who had a very violent past but learned to control their emotions. Roddenberry also gave "Star Trek" an anti-war message and depicted the United Federation of Planets as an ideal, optimistic version of the United Nations. His efforts were opposed by the network because of concerns over marketability, e.g., they opposed Roddenberry's insistence that the "Enterprise" have a racially diverse crew.
Production history.
Beginnings.
In 1964, Roddenberry proposed the original "Star Trek" TV series, to Desilu Studios as "like "Wagon Train", a "Wagon Train" to the stars." The network rejected the show's first pilot, "", starring Jeffrey Hunter as "Enterprise" Captain Christopher Pike; however, NBC executives, still impressed with the concept, made the unusual decision to commission a second pilot: "Where No Man Has Gone Before". The first regular episode of "Star Trek" aired on Thursday, September 8, 1966. While the show initially enjoyed high ratings, the average rating of the show at the end of its first season dropped to 52nd (out of 94 programs).
Unhappy with the show's ratings, NBC threatened to cancel the show during its second season. The show's fan base, led by Bjo Trimble, conducted an unprecedented letter-writing campaign, petitioning the network to keep the show on the air. NBC renewed the show, but moved it from primetime to the "Friday night death slot", and substantially reduced its budget. In protest Roddenberry resigned from his role as producer and reducing his direct involvement in the process of molding "Star Trek" and Fred Freiberger became producer of the show's third season. Roddenberry did, however, co-author two scripts of the final third season. Despite the protests of a renewed letter-writing campaign, NBC canceled the series.
Rebirth.
After "Star Trek's" cancellation, Paramount Studios, the company that bought Desilu, sold the syndication rights to "Star Trek" to help recoup the original series' production losses. Reruns began in the fall of 1969 and by the late 1970s the series aired in over 150 domestic and 60 international markets. This helped "Star Trek" develop a cult following greater than its popularity during its original run. The series' newfound success led to rumors of reviving the franchise.
Filmation with Paramount Television produced the first post original series show, '. It ran on NBC for twenty-two half-hour episodes over two seasons on Saturday mornings from 1973 to 1974. Although short lived, typical for animated productions in that timeslot during that period, the series garnered the franchise's only "Best Series" Emmy Award as opposed to the franchise's later technical ones. Paramount Pictures and Roddenberry began developing a new series, ', in May 1975 in response to the franchise's newfound popularity. However, work on the series ended when the proposed Paramount Television Service folded.
Following the success of the science fiction movies ' and "Close Encounters of the Third Kind", Paramount adapted the planned pilot episode of "Phase II" into the feature film, '. The film opened in North America on December 7, 1979, with mixed reviews from critics. The film earned $139 million worldwide, below expectations but enough for Paramount to create a sequel. The studio forced Roddenberry to relinquish creative control of future sequels.
The success of the critically acclaimed sequel, ', reversed the fortunes of the franchise. While the sequel grossed less than the first movie, "The Wrath of Khan's" lower production costs made it net more profit. Paramount produced six "Star Trek" feature films between 1979 and 1991. In response to the popularity of "Star Trek's" feature films, the franchise returned to television with ' ("TNG") in 1987. Paramount chose to distribute it as a first-run syndication show rather than a network show.
After Roddenberry.
Roddenberry died on October 24, 1991, giving executive producer Rick Berman control of the franchise. "Star Trek" had become to those within Paramount as "the franchise", because of its great success and recurring role as a tent pole for the studio when other projects failed. "TNG" had the highest ratings of any "Star Trek" series and became the #1 syndicated show during the last years of its original seven-season run. In response to "TNG's" success, Paramount released a spin-off series "" in 1993. While never as popular as "TNG", the series had sufficient ratings for it to last seven seasons.
In January 1995, a few months after "TNG" ended, Paramount released a fourth TV series, "". "Star Trek" saturation reached a peak in the mid-1990s with "DS9" and "Voyager" airing concurrently and three of the four "TNG"-based feature films released in 1994, 1996, and 1998. By 1998, "Star Trek" was Paramount's most important property; the enormous profits of "the franchise" funded much of the rest of the studio's operations. "Voyager" became the flagship show of the new United Paramount Network (UPN) and thus the first major network "Star Trek" series since the original. The show also ran for seven seasons until 2001, making it the longest-running show in UPN's history.
After "Voyager" ended, UPN produced ', a prequel TV series to the original show. "Enterprise" did not enjoy the high ratings of its predecessors and UPN threatened to cancel it after the series' third season. Fans launched a campaign reminiscent of the one that saved the third season of the "Original Series". Paramount renewed "Enterprise" for a fourth season, but moved it to the Friday night death slot. Like the "Original Series", "Enterprise" ratings dropped during this time slot, and UPN cancelled "Enterprise" at the end of its fourth season. "Enterprise" aired its final episode on May 13, 2005. Fan groups, such as "Save Enterprise", attempted to save the series and tried to raise $30 million to privately finance a fifth season of "Enterprise". Though the effort garnered considerable press, the fan drive failed to save the series. The cancellation of "Enterprise" ended an eighteen-year continuous production run of "Star Trek" programming on television. The poor box office performance in 2002 of the film ', cast an uncertain light upon the future of the franchise. Paramount relieved Berman, the franchise producer, of control of "Star Trek".
Reboot.
Paramount turned down several proposals in the mid-2000s to restart the franchise. These included pitches from film director Bryan Singer, Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski, and "Trek" actors Jonathan Frakes and William Shatner. The studio also turned down an animated web series. Instead Paramount hired a new creative team to "reboot" the franchise in 2007. Writers Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman and "Lost" producer, J. J. Abrams, had the freedom to reinvent the feel of "Trek".
The team created the franchise's eleventh film, titled simply "Star Trek", releasing it in May 2009. The film featured a new cast portraying the crew of the original "Enterprise". "Star Trek" was a prequel of the original series set in an alternate timeline. This gave the film and future sequels to it freedom from the need to conform to the franchise's canonical timeline. The eleventh "Star Trek" film's marketing campaign targeted non-fans, even stating in the film's advertisements that "this is not your father's "Star Trek"".
The film earned considerable critical and financial success, grossing in inflation-adjusted dollars more box office sales than any previous "Star Trek" film. The plaudits include the franchise's first Academy Award (for makeup). The film's major cast members are contracted for two sequels. Paramount plans to release the sequel to the reboot, "Star Trek Into Darkness", on May 17, 2013.
Television series.
Six television series make up the bulk of the "Star Trek" mythos: "The Original Series", "The Animated Series", "The Next Generation", "Deep Space Nine", "Voyager", and "Enterprise". All the different versions in total amount to 716 "Star Trek" episodes across the 30 seasons of the TV series.
"The Original Series" (1966–1969).
"Star Trek", also known as ""TOS"" or The Original Series, debuted in the United States on NBC on September 8, 1966. The show tells the tale of the crew of the starship "Enterprise" and its five-year mission "to boldly go where no man has gone before." The original 1966–1969 television series featured William Shatner as Captain James T. Kirk, Leonard Nimoy as Spock, DeForest Kelley as Dr. Leonard "Bones" McCoy, James Doohan as Montgomery "Scotty" Scott, Nichelle Nichols as Uhura, George Takei as Hikaru Sulu, and Walter Koenig as Pavel Chekov. During the series' original run, it earned several nominations for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and won twice: for the two-parter "The Menagerie" and the Harlan Ellison-written episode "The City on the Edge of Forever". The show's creator, Gene Roddenberry, was not involved in the show during its third and final year of production due to a dispute with NBC, with the exception of having co-authored two episodes produced that year.
After three seasons, NBC canceled the show, and the last original episode aired on June 3, 1969. However, the petition near the end of the second season to save the show signed by many Caltech students and its multiple Hugo nominations would indicate that despite low Nielsen ratings, it was highly popular with science fiction fans and engineering students. The series later became popular in reruns and found a cult following.
Originally presented under the title "Star Trek", it has in recent years become known as "Star Trek: The Original Series" or as "Classic Star Trek"—retronyms that distinguish it from its sequels and the franchise as a whole.
"The Animated Series" (1973–1974).
"Star Trek: The Animated Series", produced by Filmation, ran for two seasons from 1973 to 1974. Most of the original cast performed the voices of their characters from "The Original Series", and many of the original series' writers, such as D. C. Fontana, David Gerrold and Paul Schneider, wrote for the series. While the animated format allowed the producers to create more exotic alien landscapes and life forms, animation errors and liberal reuse of shots and musical cues have tarnished the series' reputation. Although it was originally sanctioned by Paramount, which owned the "Star Trek" franchise following its acquisition of Desilu in 1967, Gene Roddenberry often spoke of TAS as non canon. "Star Trek" writers have used elements of the animated series in later live-action series and movies, and as of June 2007, the Animated Series has references in the library section of the official Startrek.com web site.
"TAS" won "Star Trek's" first Emmy Award on May 15, 1975. "Star Trek TAS" briefly returned to television in the mid-1980s on the children's cable network Nickelodeon. Nickelodeon's Evan McGuire greatly admired the show and used its various creative components as inspiration for his short series called "Piggly Wiggly Hears A Sound" which never aired. Nickelodeon parent Viacom would purchase Paramount in 1994. In the early 1990s, the Sci-Fi Channel also began rerunning TAS. The complete TAS was also released on Laserdisc format during the 1980s. The complete series was first released in the USA on eleven volumes of VHS tapes in 1989. All 22 episodes were released on DVD in 2006.
"The Next Generation" (1987–1994).
"Star Trek: The Next Generation", also known as ""TNG"", takes place about a century after The Original Series (2266-2269). It features a new starship, the "Enterprise"-D, and a new crew led by Captain Jean-Luc Picard (Patrick Stewart) and Commander William Riker (Jonathan Frakes). The series introduced alien races new to the Federation as crewmembers, including Deanna Troi, a half-Betazoid counselor played by Marina Sirtis and Worf as the first Klingon officer in Starfleet, played by Michael Dorn. It also featured Gates McFadden as Dr. Beverly Crusher, LeVar Burton as chief engineer Geordi La Forge, the android Data portrayed by Brent Spiner, and Dr. Crusher's son Wesley Crusher played by Wil Wheaton. The show premiered on September 28, 1987, and ran for seven seasons, ending on May 23, 1994. It had the highest ratings of any of the "Star Trek" series and became the #1 syndicated show during the last few years of its original run, allowing it to act as a springboard for ideas in other series. Many relationships and races introduced in "TNG" became the basis of episodes in "Deep Space 9" and "Voyager". It earned an Emmy nomination for Best Dramatic Series during its final season. It also received a Peabody Award for Outstanding Television Programming for the episode "The Big Goodbye".
The first two seasons were largely produced by the original creator of "Star Trek", Gene Roddenberry. Beginning in Season 3, the primary overseer of the show was Rick Berman who also largely responsible for the remaining "Trek" television series as well as the films involving the cast of "The Next Generation".
Drama shows in that era, as opposed to a talk show or game shows, rarely went into syndication in first run rather than airing on the same network throughout America. "Next Generation" became one of the most popular syndicated shows of its era and inaugurated a market for syndicated science fiction series.
"Deep Space Nine" (1993–1999).
"Star Trek: Deep Space Nine", also known as ""DS9"", takes place during the last years and the immediate post-years of "The Next Generation" (2369–2375) and aired for seven seasons, debuting the week of January 3, 1993. Like "Star Trek: The Next Generation", it aired in syndication in the United States and Canada. Unlike the other "Star Trek" series, "DS9" takes place primarily on a space station rather than aboard a starship.
The show begins after the brutal Cardassian occupation of the planet Bajor. The liberated Bajoran people ask the United Federation of Planets to help run a Cardassian built space station, Deep Space Nine, outside of Bajor. After the Federation takes control of the station, the protagonists of the show discover a uniquely stable wormhole that provides immediate access to the distant Gamma Quadrant making Bajor and the station one of the most strategically important locations in the galaxy. The show chronicles the events of the station's crew, led by Commander (later Captain) Benjamin Sisko, played by Avery Brooks, and Major (later Colonel) Kira Nerys, played by Nana Visitor. Recurring plot elements include the repercussions of the Cardassian occupation of Bajor, Sisko's spiritual role for the Bajorans as the Emissary of the Prophets, and in later seasons a war with the Dominion.
"Deep Space Nine" stands apart from earlier Trek series for its lengthy serialized storytelling, conflict within the crew, and religious themes—all elements that critics and audiences praised but Roddenberry forbade in the original series and "The Next Generation". Nevertheless, he was informed before his death of "DS9", making this the last "Star Trek" series connected to Gene Roddenberry.
"Voyager" (1995–2001).
"Star Trek: Voyager" ran for seven seasons, airing from January 16, 1995, to May 23, 2001, launching a new Paramount-owned television network UPN. It features Kate Mulgrew as Captain Kathryn Janeway, the first female commanding officer in a leading role of a "Star Trek" series, and Commander Chakotay, played by Robert Beltran. "Voyager" takes place at about the same time period as "Deep Space Nine" and the years following that show's end (2371–2378). The premiere episode has the USS "Voyager" and its crew pursue a Maquis (Federation rebels) ship. Both ships become stranded in the Delta Quadrant about 70,000 light years from Earth. Faced with a 75-year voyage to Earth, the crew must learn to work together to overcome challenges on their long and perilous journey home while also seeking ways to shorten the voyage. Like "Deep Space Nine", early seasons of "Voyager" feature more conflict between its crewmembers than seen in later episodes. Such conflict often arises from friction between "by-the-book" Starfleet crew and rebellious Maquis fugitives forced by circumstance to work together on the same ship. Eventually, though, they settle their differences, after which the overall tone becomes more reminiscent of "The Original Series". The starship "Voyager", isolated from its home, faces new cultures and dilemmas not possible in shows based in the Alpha Quadrant. Later seasons, however, brought an influx of characters and cultures from prior shows, such as the Borg, Q, the Ferengi, Romulans, Klingons, Cardassians and cast members of "The Next Generation".
"Enterprise" (2001–2005).
"Star Trek: Enterprise", originally titled "Enterprise", is a prequel to the original "Star Trek" series. It aired from September 26, 2001 to May 13, 2005. "Enterprise" takes place in the 2150s, some 90 years after the events of Zefram Cochrane's first warp flight and about a decade before the founding of the Federation. The show centers on the voyages of Earth's first warp-five capable starship, the "Enterprise", commanded by Captain Jonathan Archer (played by Scott Bakula), and the Vulcan Sub-Commander T'Pol (played by Jolene Blalock).
During the show's first two seasons, "Enterprise" had an episodic structure, like "The Original Series", "The Next Generation" and "Voyager". The third season consisted of one arc, "Xindi mission", which had the darker tone and serialized nature of "Deep Space 9". Season 4 consisted of several two to three episode mini-arcs. The final season showed the origins of elements seen in earlier series, and it rectified and resolved some core continuity problems between the various Star Trek series. Ratings for "Enterprise" started strong but declined rapidly. Although critics received the fourth season very well, both fans and the cast reviled the series finale, partly because of the episode's focus on the guest appearance of members of "The Next Generation" cast. The cancellation of "Enterprise" ended an 18-year run of back-to-back new "Star Trek" shows beginning with "The Next Generation" in 1987.
Feature films.
Paramount Pictures has produced eleven "Star Trek" feature films, the most recent released in May 2009 with a twelfth in development, scheduled to be released in 2013. The first six films continue the adventures of the cast of "The Original Series"; the seventh film, "Generations" was designed as a transition from that cast to "The Next Generation" television series; the next three films, 8–10, focused completely on the "Next Generation" cast. The eleventh film, titled "Star Trek", is a prequel/reboot of "TOS" set in an alternate timeline before James T. Kirk's graduation from Starfleet Academy and promotion to the rank of Captain. A twelfth film, "Star Trek Into Darkness", is currently in post-production.
Spin-off media.
The "Star Trek" franchise has a large number of novels, comic books, video games, and other materials, which are generally considered non-canon.
Books.
Since 1967, hundreds of original novels, short stories, and television and movie adaptations have been published. The very first original "Star Trek" novel to be published was "Mission to Horatius" by Mack Reynolds, which was published in hardcover by Whitman Books in 1968.
The first publisher of "Star Trek" fiction aimed at adult readers was Bantam Books. In 1970, James Blish wrote the first original "Star Trek" novel published by Bantam, "Spock Must Die!". Pocket Books is currently the publisher of "Star Trek" novels.
Prolific "Star Trek" novelists include Peter David, Diane Carey, Keith R. A. DeCandido, J. M. Dillard, Diane Duane, Michael Jan Friedman, and Judith and Garfield Reeves-Stevens. Several actors and writers from the television series have written books: William Shatner, and John de Lancie, Andrew J. Robinson, J. G. Hertzler, and Armin Shimerman have written or co-written books featuring their respective characters. "Voyager" producer Jeri Taylor wrote two novels featuring back story for "Voyager" characters, and screen authors David Gerrold, D. C. Fontana, and Melinda Snodgrass have also penned books.
Comics.
"Star Trek"-based comics have been published almost continuously since 1967 by several companies including: Marvel, DC, Malibu, Wildstorm, and Gold Key. Tokyopop currently is publishing an anthology of "Next Generation"-based stories presented in the style of Japanese manga. As of 2006, IDW Publishing secured publishing rights to "Star Trek" comics and published a prequel to the 2009 film, "". In 2012 they published Volume I of Star Trek - The Newspaper Comics featuring the work of Thomas Warkentin.
Games.
The "Star Trek" franchise also has numerous games in many different formats. Beginning in 1967 with a board game based on the original series and continuing through 2009 with online and DVD games, "Star Trek" games continue to be popular among fans. The most recent video games of the series are ' and '. An MMORPG based on "Star Trek" called "Star Trek Online" is developed by Cryptic Studios and published by Perfect World. It is set in the TNG universe approximately 30 years after the events of "", and not the re-imagined Universe portrayed in JJ Abrams' "Star Trek", although it will take into account the events portrayed at the start of the film and in the prequel comics. Star Trek Online was released on February 2, 2010. On June 8, 2010, NECA owned Wiz Kids Games announced that they are developing a Star Trek collectible miniatures game using the HeroClix game system.
Cultural impact.
The "Star Trek" media franchise is a multi-billion dollar industry, currently owned by CBS. Gene Roddenberry sold "Star Trek" to NBC as a classic adventure drama; he pitched the show as ""Wagon Train" to the Stars" and as Horatio Hornblower in Space. The opening line, "to boldly go where no man has gone before," was taken almost verbatim from a US White House booklet on space produced after the "Sputnik" flight in 1957. The central trio of Kirk, Spock, and McCoy was modeled on classical mythological storytelling.
"Star Trek" and its spin-offs have proven highly popular in syndication and are currently shown on TV stations worldwide. The show's cultural impact goes far beyond its longevity and profitability. "Star Trek" conventions have become popular among its fans, who call themselves "trekkies" or "trekkers". An entire subculture has grown up around the show which was documented in the film "Trekkies". "Star Trek" was the highest-ranked cult show by "TV Guide". The franchise has also garnered many comparisons of the "Star Wars" franchise being rivals in the science fiction genre with many fans and scholars.
The "Star Trek" franchise inspired some designers of technologies, such as the Palm PDA and the handheld mobile phone. Michael Jones, Chief technologist of Google Earth, has cited the tricorder's mapping capability as one inspiration in the development of Keyhole/Google Earth. It also brought teleportation to popular attention with its depiction of "matter-energy transport", with phrases such as famous misquoted "Beam me up, Scotty" entering the vernacular. In 1976, following a letter-writing campaign, NASA named its prototype space shuttle "Enterprise", after the fictional starship. Later, the introductory sequence to "Star Trek: Enterprise" included footage of this shuttle which, along with images of a naval sailing vessel called the "Enterprise", depicted the advancement of human transportation technology.
Beyond "Star Trek's" fictional innovations, one of its greatest and most significant contributions to TV history is its multicultural and multiracial cast. While common in television shows from the 1970s onward, this was controversial and daring in the 1960s. The Enterprise crew included a Japanese helmsman, a Russian navigator, a black female communications officer, and a Vulcan-Terran first officer. Also, controversial at its time, in the episode "Plato's Stepchildren", was Captain Kirk's kiss with Lt. Uhura which became a defining moment in television history as it was believed to be American TV's first scripted interracial kiss.
Parodies.
Early TV comedy sketch parodies of "Star Trek" included a famous sketch on "Saturday Night Live" titled "The Last Voyage of the Starship Enterprise", with John Belushi as Kirk, Chevy Chase as Spock and Dan Aykroyd as McCoy. In the 1980s Saturday Night Live did a sketch with William Shatner reprising his Captain Kirk role in "The Restaurant Enterprise", preceded by a sketch in which he played himself at a "Trek" convention angrily telling fans to "Get a Life", a phrase that has become part of Trek folklore. "In Living Color" continued the tradition in a sketch where Captain Kirk is played by a fellow Canadian Jim Carrey.
A feature length film which indirectly parodies "Star Trek" is "Galaxy Quest". This film is based on the premise that aliens monitoring the broadcast of an Earth-based TV series called "Galaxy Quest", modeled heavily on "Star Trek", believe that what they are seeing is real. Many "Star Trek" actors have been quoted saying that "Galaxy Quest" was a brilliant parody.
"Star Trek" has been blended with Gilbert and Sullivan at least twice. The North Toronto Players presented a Star Trek adaptation of Gilbert & Sullivan titled "H.M.S. Starship Pinafore: The Next Generation" in 1991 and an adaptation by Jon Mullich of Gilbert & Sullivan's "H.M.S. Pinafore" that sets the operetta in the world of "Star Trek" has played in Los Angeles and was attended by series luminaries Nichelle Nichols, D.C. Fontana and David Gerrold. A similar blend of Gilbert and Sullivan and "Star Trek" was presented as a benefit concert in San Francisco by the Lamplighters in 2009. The show was titled "Star Drek: The Generation After That". It presented an original story with Gilbert and Sullivan melodies.
The new "Doctor Who" series has had several references to "Star Trek". In "The Empty Child" and "The Doctor Dances" Rose introduces the Doctor to Captain Jack as Doctor Spock and uses the phrase "Give me some Spock" when she wants an explanation. In "The Impossible Astronaut" a woman meets an alien and asks if it's some sort of "Star Trek" mask.
Both "The Simpsons" and "Futurama" television series and others have had many individual episodes parodying "Star Trek" or with "Trek" allusions. An entire series of films and novels from Finland titled "Star Wreck" also parodies "Star Trek".
"Star Trek" has been parodied in several non-English movies, including the German "Traumschiff Surprise - Periode 1" which features a gay version of The Original Series bridge crew and a Turkish film that spoofs that same series' episode "The Man Trap" in one of the series of films based on the character Turist Ömer.
Notable fan fiction.
The online fan-produced "" series is permitted by CBS and Paramount Pictures since no profit is being made from it. The son of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry, Eugene Roddenberry Jr., has served as consulting producer, and several members the original series cast have given it their support. Both actors and writers involved with official "Star Trek" have contributed. Actress Denise Crosby has played the grandmother of her "Next Generation" character, and both George Takei and Walter Koenig have played older versions of the same characters they played on "Star Trek". The second episode, entitled "To Serve All My Days", was written by original series writer D.C. Fontana and other former Trek writers have contributed their talent.
The episode "World Enough and Time" was nominated for the prestigious Hugo award, competing against episodes of "Doctor Who", "Torchwood", and "Battlestar Galactica".
As with other material available only online in the form of "webisodes", the Internet Movie Database lists this as a television series.
Awards and honors.
Of the various science fiction awards for drama, only the Hugo Award dates back as far as the original series. In 1968, all five nominees for a Hugo Award were individual episodes of "Star Trek", as were three of the five nominees in 1967. The only "Star Trek" series to not get even a Hugo nomination are the animated series and "Voyager", though only the original series and "Next Generation" ever won the award. No Star Trek featured film has ever won a Hugo, though a few were nominated. In 2008, the fan made episode of "" entitled "World Enough and Time" was nominated for the Hugo for Best Short Drama.
The two "Star Trek" series to win multiple Saturn awards during their run were "The Next Generation" (twice winning for best television series) and "Voyager" (twice winning for best actress - Kate Mulgrew and Jeri Ryan). The original series retroactively won a Saturn Award for best DVD release. Several "Star Trek" films have won Saturns including categories such as best actor, actress, director, costume design, and special effects. However, "Star Trek" has never won a Saturn for best make-up.
As for non science fiction specific awards, the "Star Trek" series has won 31 Emmy Awards. The eleventh "Star Trek" film won the 2009 Academy Award for Best Makeup, the franchise's first Academy Award.
Corporate ownership.
At "Star Trek"s creation, Norway Productions, Roddenberry's production company, shared ownership with Desilu Productions and, after Gulf+Western acquired Desilu in 1967, with Paramount Pictures, the conglomerate's film studio. Paramount did not want to own the unsuccessful show; net profit was to be shared between Norway, Desilu/Paramount, Shatner, and NBC but "Star Trek" lost money, and the studio did not expect to syndicate it. In 1970 Paramount offered to sell all rights to "Star Trek" to Roddenberry, but he could not afford the $150,000 ($ today) price.
In 1989 Gulf+Western renamed itself as Paramount Communications, and in 1994 merged with Viacom. In 2005 Viacom divided into CBS Corporation, whose CBS Television Studios subsidiary retained the "Star Trek" brand, and Viacom, whose Paramount Pictures subsidiary retained the "Star Trek" film library and rights to make additional films, along with video distribution rights to the TV series on behalf of CBS.
