Ranbir Kapoor (born 28 September 1982) is an Indian actor who appears in Bollywood films. Born to actors Rishi Kapoor and Neetu Singh, Kapoor began his career by assisting director Sanjay Leela Bhansali, and later made his acting debut with the director's 2007 film "Saawariya" for which he won the Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut. Kapoor later earned critical praise for his performances in "Wake Up Sid", "Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani", and "" in 2009. These performances earned him the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor, and he was later recognized for his role as an aspiring politician in the political thriller "Raajneeti" (2010). In 2012, Kapoor received his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor for his performance in the Imtiaz Ali-directed drama "Rockstar", and his second award for his portrayal of a deaf-mute man in "Barfi!" (2012), which emerged as his biggest commercial success till date. Having done so, Kapoor has established himself as one of the leading contemporary actors of Hindi cinema.
Life and career.
1982–2006: Early life.
Ranbir's parents are Rishi Kapoor and Neetu Kapoor, His father is a Hindu Punjabi and his mother is a Sikh. His sister is Riddhima Kapoor Sahnai. He is the grandson of actor and filmmaker Raj Kapoor and nephew of actor Randhir Kapoor. Kapoor studied at Bombay Scottish School in Mahim, MumbaiHe had always been weak in academics and passed his tenth standard with 53.4%,for which his mother called him up and cried with joy over the phone for having passed his entire school life without failing a year,as no one in the Kapoor family had done so until then.
He went on to pursue method acting at The Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute in New York.
Before starting off his career as an actor, Kapoor appeared in two short films: "Passion to Love" (2002), which was also directed by him, and "India 1964" (2004). He later began working as an assistant with director Sanjay Leela Bhansali, where he was involved in the making of the film "Black" (2005).
2007–10: Debut and breakthrough.
Kapoor who initially had plans of becoming an actor was later cast by Bhansali in his next directional venture, "Saawariya" opposite newcomer Sonam Kapoor. The film failed to do well at the box office, though his performance was largely appreciated and he earned his first Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut and all other Best Male Debut on all Indian Film Awards that year. In 2008, Kapoor starred on his only release of the year "Bachna Ae Haseeno" (2008) alongside Bipasha Basu, Minissha Lamba and Deepika Padukone. The film was a semi-hit at the box-office., Among the cast members Kapoor was highly praised. This went on to win him critical praise.
In the year 2009 Kapoor appeared in three movies. His first release was Ayan Mukerji's "Wake Up Sid", in which he portrayed the character of Siddharth Mehra, a spoiled and self-centered college student from Mumbai. Featured opposite Konkona Sen Sharma, the film was a critical and commercial success. Shrey Patnaik wrote, "Ranbir's Sid is a near-perfect portrait of the aimless young man searching for a direction in life. Ranbir handles the character's inner life with the effortlessness of a Sitar maestro twiddling with his instrument's strings to create a music that takes the audience to a world where the sounds suggest a harmony between art and life. In Wake Up Sid, Ranbir proves once and for all that he's the future of Hindi cinema." Kapoor earned several nominations for Best Actor. He next starred alongside Katrina Kaif in "Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani", He portrayed the role of Prem Shankar Sharma where he went to fall in love with Kaif in the film, The film surfaced as one of the biggest hits of the year. 
Following this, Kapoor appeared in Shimit Amin's drama "", directed by Shimit Amin and produced by Aditya Chopra under the Yash Raj Films banner. Screenplay of the film is by Jaideep Sahni, who collaborated with Shimit Amin for "Chak De! India", The story tells about Harpeet Singh who graduated with 39% and became a Salesman, Though it was produced by a big banner like Yash Raj Films,the promotional campaign of was kept a low profile, Upon release, the film received positive reviews by critics but declared 'below average'. Kapoor's performance was critically acclaimed, with one critic writing, "Ranbir brings to his part a whole lot of earnestness and heart. His natural and utterly contagious exuberance so much on display in his last two films "Wake Up Sid" and "Ajab Prem Ki Ghazab Kahani" is effortlessly curbed here."
In 2010, he featured in Prakash Jha's multi-starrer political thriller "Rajneeti", "Raajneeti" was released in theaters worldwide on 4 June 2010, after some controversies regarding similarities between real-life people and the characters in the film, as well as issues about the national anthem.
A sequel of Rajneeti has been confirmed by Prakash Jha. The movie will cast Katrina Kaif as a powerful politician., Made on budget of was released on June 2010, The film opened to positive reviews and was declared a "blockbuster". His performance was well received with critic Nikhat Kazmi concluding, "The film finally belongs to Ranbir Kapoor who perfects the art of minimalism – and literally grows before your eyes – as the simmering volcano that cannot be held back, once it erupts. He's as grey and soot-filled, as volcanoes go." In the same year, Kapoor appeared alongside Priyanka Chopra in Siddharth Anand's "Anjaana Anjaani", Filming began on 12 December 2008 and was completed early July 2010. The film was scheduled to be released on September 24, 2010, but the release date was postponed to 1 October 2010 due to its clash with the Babri Masjid verdict., which was a moderate box office success.
2011–present: Success and recent work.
2011 saw Kapoor feature opposite newcomer Nargis Fakhri in Imtiaz Ali's "Rockstar", The film was produced by Eros International Ltd. along with Shree Ashtavinayak Cine Vision Ltd. It follows Janardhan Jakhar a.k.a. Jay Z and Jordan, who dreams of becoming a big Rockstar. He undergoes an emotional change to do so and during the process, a love story follows with a girl named Heer, which takes him from India to Prague, The shooting for "Rockstar" began in May 2010, and was released on 11 November 2011, Upon release, "Rockstar" had a very good opening. The film opened to a good response, On the day of release, Tibetans in Chennai and Dharmasala protested against the Central Board of Film Certification for asking the film-makers to censor scenes featuring the Chutni flag. Upon release, the film received positive to mixed reviews and grossed over Rs.1 billion worldwide In a review published by CNN-IBN, Rajeev Masand wrote: ""Rockstar" belongs to Ranbir Kapoor over everyone else. It is a riveting performance [...] and Ranbir roots it in the real. Watch how he seizes the stage in the "Sadda Haq" number and virtually makes the track his own, He also gave an excellent performance on the song "Naadan Parindey". For Ranbir alone, this film deserves a watch." The film earned Kapoor a Best Actor and Best Actor (Critics) award at the 57th Filmfare Awards.
In 2012, Kapoor appeared in Anurag Basu's romantic comedy "Barfi!" alongside Priyanka Chopra and Ileana D'Cruz. Cast as Murphy "Barfi" Johnson, a deaf-mute boy, Kapoor received rave reviews for his performance, earning him his second Filmfare Award for Best Actor. Taran Adarsh notes that "Ranbir's facial expressions and body language is the hallmark of the enterprise. The critical complement I can award to Ranbir's act is that it is truly convincing, heartrending and intelligent, all rolled into one dazzling result." Rajeev Masand adds "the film...belongs to our silent hero, and Ranbir Kapoor owns the part completely. Never turning Barfi into a caricature or a stereotype, Ranbir adds wonderful layers to this seemingly simple fellow, and once again proves why he is his only competition." The film opened to critical acclaim, and was a major commercial success, earning worldwide. The film was screened at the Busan International Film Festival, Marrakech International Film Festival and was chosen as India’s official entry to the Oscars for the 85th Academy Awards.
As of February 2013, Kapoor is scheduled to appear in Ayan Mukerji's "Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani" alongside Deepika Padukone, Abhinav Kashyap's "Besharam" alongside Pallavi Sharda, Vicky Singh's "Roy" alongside Jacqueline Fernandez, Anurag Kashyap's "Bombay Velvet" opposite Anushka Sharma and Imtiaz Ali's untitled next.
In the media.
Kapoor currently lives with his parents in Pali Hill in Mumbai, Maharashtra. In 2008, Kapoor co-hosted the 54th Filmfare Awards alongside Imran Khan; he was later chosen to co-host the 56th and 57th edition of the award ceremony alongside Imran Khan and Shah Rukh Khan respectively.
