Galatasaray Spor Kulübü, commonly known as Galatasaray and founded as Galata-Serai Football Club by Ali Sami Yen in 1905, is a Turkish professional football club based in İstanbul, Turkey. It is the association football branch of the larger Galatasaray Sports Club, itself a part of the Galatasaray Community which includes the Galatasaray University and Galatasaray Lisé. 
Galatasaray is the most successful football club in Turkey, having won 44 domestic trophies including a joint-record 18 Süper Lig titles, a record 14 Turkish Cups and a record 12 Turkish Super Cups. They are one of three teams to have participated in all 55 seasons of the Turkish Süper Lig since 1959, following the dissolution of the Istanbul Football League. Internationally, Galatasaray has also won the UEFA Cup and UEFA Super Cup in 2000, becoming the first Turkish team to win a European trophy and the first team in history to become the undefeated winners of the UEFA Cup. Domestically, Galatasaray is the only football club to win the Süper Lig four times in a row (1997, 1998, 1999 and 2000). In the 1999-2000 season, the club achieved the rare feat of completing a quadruple by winning the Turkish Süper Lig, the Turkish Cup, the UEFA Cup and the TSYD Cup in a single season. It is also the only Turkish club to appear in first place on the IFFHS World Rankings in 2000.
Since 2011, the club's stadium is the 52,695 capacity Türk Telekom Arena in Seyrantepe, İstanbul which is the world record-holder for the loudest stadium roar in world football (131.76dBA), having moved from the Ali Sami Yen which had been home to the club since 1963.
The club has a long-standing rivalry with other large İstanbul teams, namely with Beşiktaş J.K and Fenerbahçe S.K., while the derby between the latter (known as the Kıtalar Arası Derbi or "Intercontintal Derby" in English) is regarded as one of the biggest in world football. 
Galatasaray is also the most-supported club in Turkey and is one of three clubs to have over 10 million followers on social media sites Facebook and Twitter. They have an estimated 25 million fans, with around 38% coming from outside Turkey. Galatasaray is also regarded as one of Turkey's strongest global brands and is placed as one of the up-and-coming clubs in the Deloitte Football Money League (2013) with an annual revenue of €95.1 million. 
History.
Galatasaray SK was founded in the fall of 1905, by Galatasaray High School "(a high school founded in 1481)" students as a football club. Galatasaray's first president was Ali Sami Yen. Their first match was against Cadi-Keuy FC and they won this match by 2–0. There were discussions about the club's name, in which some suggested "Gloria" (victory) and others "Audace" (courage), but it was decided that its name would be Galatasaray.
The name Galatasaray itself comes from that of Galatasaray High School, which in turn takes its name from Galata Sarayı Enderûn-u Hümâyûn (Galata Palace Imperial School), the name of the original school founded on the site in 1481, and which in turn took its name from the nearby medieval Genoese colony of Galata. Galatasaray translates directly as 'Galata palace'.
According to researcher Cem Atabeyoğlu, Galatasaray took its name from one of its first matches. In that match, Galatasaray won 2–0 over Rûm club and the spectators called them "Galata Sarayı efendileri" (in English: Gentlemen of City Palace), and, after this incident, they adopted that name and started to call their club "Galata Sarayı". In 1905, during the era of the Ottoman Empire, there were no laws for associations so the club could not be registered officially, but, after the 1912 Law of Association, the club registered legally.
Among with the founder Ali Sami Yen, the co-founders were the ones who were keen to do this sport, such as Asim Tevfik Sonumut, Reşat Şirvani, Cevdet Kalpakçıoğlu, Abidin Daver and Kamil.
At first, the colors of the Galatasaray Sports Club were red and white. These are the colors in the Turkish flag. However, the Turkish Republic was not founded at that time. Therefore, this inspiration caused repressive administration of the day feel uncomfortable and the administration hounded the footballers. For this reason, the colors were changed to yellow and dark blue until 1907. In 1908, new colors were chosen as red and yellow. Ali Sami Yen stated, "After we have been in and out of several shops, we saw two different elegant-looking wool materials in Fatty Yanko’s store at Bahçekapısı (between Eminönü and Sirkeci in Istanbul, now called Bahçekapı). One of them was quite dark red, resembling the cherry color, and the other a rich yellow with a touch of orange. When the sales clerk made the two fabrics fly together with a twist of his hand they became so bright that it reminded us the beauty of a goldfinch. We thought we were looking at the colors flickering in burning fire. We were picturing the yellow-red flames shining on our team and dreaming that it would take us to victories. Indeed it did."
Since there were not any Turkish teams, Galatasaray joined the Istanbul League that was consisting of English and Greek teams in the season of 1905–1906. With their first championship title they won in 1907–1908, they heralded the beginning of Turkish football history.
While the football in Turkey began to fully develop, Galatasaray won ten more "Istanbul League" titles, six "Sunday League" titles and three "Friday League" titles until 1952. Upon recognition of professional football in 1952, the first professional but non-national league of Turkey, "Istanbul Professional League" played between 1952 and 1959. Galatasaray won three of these seven titles. 
"Türkiye Profesyonel 1. Ligi" (Turkcell Super League today) formed in 1959. This is the top-flight professional league in Turkish nationwide football, and the most popular sporting competition in the country. Galatasaray joined all seasons and won 18 league titles since then.
The Turkish Football Federation starts to organize "Turkish Cup" (today it is organized with the name Fortis Turkey Cup) in the 1962–63 season for Turkish clubs to qualify for the UEFA competitions. This is the only national cup competition in Turkey. Galatasaray joined all seasons and won 14 trophies since then.
Probably the greatest record that club holds is winning national championships in 15 different sport branches in 1986–87 season.
Galatasaray's most successful era came in late 1990s, when the club become the first Turkish football club ever to win a European trophy. They were aided in this by one of Turkey's best generation of home grown footballers who went on to finish third in the 2002 FIFA World Cup and played quarter finals of UEFA Euro 2000. Besides the talented players, visiting teams also disliked traveling into Ali Sami Yen Stadium which is literally called "Hell" by the supporters of Galatasaray due to the intimidating atmosphere provided by the fans including chants and riots in the crowds.
There are many successful footballers that have played for Galatasaray and made their mark on Turkish football history. Few examples may be 1930s national hero Eşfak Aykaç, Boduri who died aged 21, Mehmet Leblebi who scored a domestic record of 14 goals in a single match, Gündüz Kılıç nicknamed "Baba" (father) who was the coach but also the player of his team in 1950s with great success on both, Bülent-Reha Eken brothers, Suat Mamat who made a hat-trick in 1954 FIFA World Cup, Coşkun Özarı a life devoted to Galatasaray, Turgay Şeren the heroic goalkeeper that called "the Panther of Berlin", Fatih Terim the team captain of Galatasaray and Turkish National Football team for years and won Uefa Cup at 2000 as the coach, Metin Oktay the legendary six time top scorer of the Turkish league, Zoran Simović another skilled goalkeeper known for his penalty saves, Cüneyt Tanman who played a record of 342 games for Galatasaray, Tanju Çolak an extraordinary goalscorer and European Golden Boot 1988 winner with Galatasaray, Cevad Prekazi an Albanian teammate of Tanju specializing in free kicks, Taffarel the world cup winner goalkeeper of Brazil, Gheorghe Hagi, the Romanian football hero who is still described as the best foreign player ever to play in Turkey, Brazilian striker Mário Jardel, who was called Super Mário by the fans and scored Galatasarays only two goals in the European Super Cup Final in 2000 against Real Madrid, and last but not least, Hakan Şükür, the player who scored most goals in the first division of Turkish football history (249 goals).
Name and Pronunciation.
The name Galatasaray itself comes from that of Galatasaray High School, which in turn takes its name from Galata Sarayı Enderûn-u Hümâyûn (Galata Palace Imperial School), the name of the original school founded on the site in 1481, and which in turn took its name from the nearby medieval Genoese colony of Galata. Galatasaray translates directly as 'Galata Palace'.
There is no diminutive form of Galatasaray. Fans refer to the club either by its full name or by its nickname "Cim Bom Bom" (pronounced 'Jim Bom Bom') or the shortened 'Cim Bom'. The shortened form 'Gala' is sometimes used in Europe/Americas.
It is important to keep in mind Galatasaray is a compound word and it is pronounced as such. The most common mistake that is done by non-Turkish speakers is to intonate as Gala-tasaray, while the correct enunciation should be Galata-Saray with a very brief pause between the two words.
Crest.
Galatasaray's first emblem was drawn by 333 Number Şevki Ege. This was the figure of a spread-winged eagle with a football in its beak. The eagle was a model emblem that Galatasaray dwelled on in the beginning. But when the name did not attract too much interest, Şevki Ege’s composition was pushed aside. It was replaced by the current design in the 1920s. This replaced in 1925 by the current “Ghayn-Sin” crest, designed by Ayetullah Emin
Team colors and kit.
Galatasaray wore red and white colors when founded, then played in dark yellow and dark blue in 1907–1908 season. For a match against the British Royal Navy cruiser HMS Barham football team played in 8 December 1908, Galatasaray finally settled on playing in red and yellow.
"“Our goalkeeper Asım Tevfik, left-forwarder Emin Bülent and right midfielder Ali Sami Yen are commissioned for the task of determining new team colors.
“After we have been in and out of several shops, we saw two different elegant-looking wool materials in Fatty Yanko’s store at Bahçekapısı (between Eminönü and Sirkeci in Istanbul, now called Bahçekapı). One of them was quite dark red, resembling the cherry color, and the other a rich yellow with a touch of orange. When the sales clerk made the two fabrics fly together with a twist of his hand they became so bright that it reminded us the beauty of a goldfinch. We thought we were looking at the colors flickering in burning fire. We were picturing the yellow-red flames shining on our team and dreaming that it would take us to victories. Indeed it did.”"
The red and yellow were inspired from the colors of the roses which Gül Baba offered to Sultan Bayezid II.
Home Kit.
The Galatasaray home kit have always been fundamentally the same since 1908. The traditional shirt of Galatasaray is the 8-piece halved design. This consists of the shirt’s front, back and sleeves being made up of two colours, resulting in the shirt being split into 8 parts. If we look at the Galatasaray shirt, we can see that two same colours are never next to each other within the 8 parts. Two of the same colours are never next to each other. The colours continue in an alternating order: yellow, red. This results in the front of the shirt being the opposite of the back. This alternating colour order of 8 parts creates a complete halved design for the shirt. In the table above we can see the colour order in more detail. (Note: The traditional 8-piece shirt does not consist of details such as collars and sleeve hems. It only consists of the main body and sleeves of the shirt.)
History of the traditional shirt.
The journey of the 8-piece halved design began in 1906. It was the second shirt design Galatasaray wore in their history, and in 1908 when the club’s colours became yellow and red, the famous shirt was born. This would become the look of Galatasaray for around 80 years, until the mid-1980s when sportswear manufacturer Adidas began to provide the shirts. Since 1906, until the arrival of Adidas, all of the halved design shirts worn by Galatasaray were the 8-piece halved design. Regardless of the changes of colour tones, collars, sleeve hems and colour order throughout this time, the 8-piece halved shirt was the main shirt of Galatasaray. Other than a period in the 1990s, the 2005-2006 centenary shirt and the 2008-2009 and 2012-2013 home shirt, it has been almost 25 years Galatasaray has not worn their traditional shirt, which was present throughout the club’s history. During this 25-year period there have been shirts that were unrelated and never seen in the club’s history. In addition to this there have also been incorrect alternative designs of the halved shirt. From the year 1906 to the mid-1980s, Galatasaray’s main shirt was always the traditional design. The most famous look of Galatasaray and longest used shirt, the 8-piece halved was renowned by Metin Oktay.
Kit combination.
One of the most important elements that add to the beauty of the kit is the combination of the shorts and socks. Created over a century ago, the true Galatasaray kit combination consists of: the 8-piece halved traditional shirt, white shorts and red socks. After Galatasaray adopted the colours yellow and red in 1908, the team wore white shorts and red socks, and until the 1980s this was the club’s first choice kit. After this point in time the club put aside this historic combination and chose to use an incorrect combination of red shorts and red socks for almost 30 years. In the season 2008-2009 the club began to wear a combination used by their arch rivals, this was white shorts and white socks. Since 2012 the club uses the classic kit combination.
Colour order.
Where the club emblem is present on the left half of the shirt, this half must be red and the other half yellow. In the past Galatasaray has worn shirts with this order reversed. In the early days of the club, when a specific design of shirt was not available, an alternative design was used. This scenario resulted in the reverse colour order Galatasaray shirt. These shirts exist in Galatasaray’s history, however they were only worn for a short period of time. 
Since the year 1910 Galatasaray worked on establishing the traditional shirt.
Away kit.
Since 1960–1961 the Galatasaray away strip has more often than not been a white shirt, white shorts and white socks with some red and yellow elements at the sleeves or collar. It is also one of the favourite kits every year, because the club won the 2000 UEFA Cup Final in an all white strip. Furthermore Galatasaray SK's first kit (1905–1906) was also white.
Grounds.
When Galatasaray were formed no Turkish teams had their own home ground, and all games in the Istanbul Football League took place at Papazın Çayırı – now the site of Fenerbahçe's Şükrü Saracoğlu Stadium. In 1921 the city's first proper football stadium was constructed, Taksim Stadium, which was used as the home ground for all of Istanbul's teams. When historic Taksim Stadium was demolished in 1940, Galatasaray decided to build a large, modern stadium. Due to difficulties stemming from World War II, construction was delayed for over two decades. In this period, they played in Şeref Stadi and Dolmabahçe Stadi
Ali Sami Yen Stadi.
On 20 December 1964, Ali Sami Yen Stadium opened. Named after the founder of Galatasaray, Ali Sami Yen, it is in the Mecidiyeköy quarter of the Şişli district at the center of the city. In 1964, the stadium had capacity over 35,000. Today, due to improvements in security and prohibition of non-seater spectators, it has an all-seater capacity of 24,990.
After 2002, when Atatürk Olympic Stadium was built for Istanbul's Olympic Games bid, Galatasaray started to play European Cup matches there. The attendance record among Turkish stadiums was broken there, in Galatasaray–Olympiacos match played in front of 79,414 spectators. Yet, Ali Sami Yen Stadium has historic importance for Galatasaray fans although it is smaller and older.
Türk Telekom Arena.
The new home ground of Galatasaray is the newly built Türk Telekom Arena in the Aslantepe quarter near Maslak financial district in Şişli. The new stadium, which was opened 15 January 2011, has a capacity of 52,695 seats, making it the largest private stadium owned by a club in Turkey.
Stadium Anthems.
Since 1998, after every goal scored by Galatasaray, the last part of the song I Will Survive by the Hermes House Band played. Although the song is in English, the part used has no lyrics except "la la la la". In addition, before every game the Florida State Warchant (Galatasaray War Chant), which is a very old chant of the native North American Indians, is played accompanied by what the fans call a "scarf show" where fans display and wave their Galatasaray scarves, banners and flags. Many people call stadium 'Cehennem' (hell) because of stadium anthems and the continuous roar of the fans.
Support.
For more details on this topic, see Popularity of Turkish teams
European matches.
Galatasaray fans attach high importance to European competitions, and Galatasaray is known as the "Conqueror of Europe" by their fans. This nickname underlines the importance of the UEFA Cup and Super Cup Galatasaray managed to win during the 1999–2000 season. Galatasaray fans also have a reputation in Europe as being one of the most fanatic in the world, along with ultrAslan. Ryan Giggs once said "I've never experienced anything like Galatasaray. Two hours before kick-off, we went out to have a look at the pitch and the stadium was packed! The chanting was brilliant: one side starts, then the other, then quiet, then all of them chanting! The players really enjoyed it. Before it was good, after it wasn't!'
Record.
Galatasaray fans broke the "loudest crowd roar at a sport stadium" record on 18 March 2011 at Galatasaray’s new stadium Türk Telekom Arena in Istanbul. A peak reading of 131.76 dBA was recorded.
Popularity of Galatasaray in Turkey.
According to media polls since 2000, Galatasaray S.K. is the most popular team among football fans in Turkey. The latest poll by June 2012 places Galatasaray S.K. in the first place with a 41.8% level of popularity while Fenerbahçe S.K. comes second with a 35.9% level, Beşiktaş J.K. third with 16.3% and Trabzonspor fourth with 4.7% .
Istanbul derbies.
"The big three" clubs of Istanbul, Beşiktaş J.K., Fenerbahçe S.K. and Galatasaray S.K. have a century-long history of rivalry. The Galatasaray-Fenerbahçe rivalry is the primary Istanbul derby and the most important rivalry in Turkish football. The rivalry poses a symbolic importance to supporters as much as the result. Supporters are often quoted as stating that winning the league without winning the derby is hollow. There is always huge interest in the derby due to its fierce nature on and off the pitch. Many documentaries have been made about the derby including an The Real Football Factories International episode. The rivalry has led to violence among supporters on numerous occasions, though this has been on the decline in recent years. The typical features of derby days include sell out stadiums, loud support throughout the match and taunting choreography displays by supporters before kick off. Other top level İstanbul derbies include the teams; İstanbul BB and Kasımpaşa although these teams pose a minor rivalry as the history and the nation-wide attention to the derbies among the big three is unmatched.
Torches, smoke, drums, flags and giant posters used to create visual grandeur and apply psychological pressure on visiting teams, which fans call "welcoming them to hell".
Players.
Reserves and Academy squad.
See Galatasaray S.K. Reserves
Former players.
"For details on former players, see :Category:Galatasaray S.K. footballers and List of Galatasaray S.K. footballers."
Recent seasons.
Last updated: 12 May 2012
1 Galatasaray SK started season in UCL but joined UC after group stage.
Div. = Division;TS = Turkcell Super League; Pos. = Position; Pl = Match played; W = Win; D = Draw; L = Lost; GS = Goal Scored; GA = Goal Against; P = Points
UCL = UEFA Champions League; UCWC = UEFA Cup Winners' Cup; UC = UEFA Cup; Cup = Fortis Turkey Cup.
Colors: Gold = winner; Silver = runner-up.
pickle Brazil
Youth Facilities.
Galatasaray has one of the most successful youth facilities in Turkey. Gündüz Kılıç Youth Facilities in Florya is the center of the department. Club has been supporting and serving Turkish Football since the Republican Period has given more than 300 footballers to the National teams.
The goal is to raise footballers who are loyal to Galatasaray traditions, who can develop creative ideas, have a high standard of capturing strategical points, fast, technical, powerful, determined, loyal to fair play principles and have respect for the arbitrager, rival and supporters.
Galatasaray Star Team became champions in Europe recently, and Galatasaray S.K. PAF were the champions for three consecutive years in Turkish Youth League between the years 2004–2007 and 2010–2011 (For the 2007–2008 season, they finished runners-up after Sivasspor).
Football Academy.
Galatasaray football academy trains children between seven and fifteen. This organization is open for the whole year and gives education on technical and strategical areas in football by giving an opportunity to kids to practice what they learn during the lessons.
Adana, Adıyaman, Ankara (3), Antalya (3), Bandırma, Bursa, Bingöl,Çorlu, Çorum, Denizli, Düzce, Edirne, Elazığ, Erzurum, Eskişehir, Diyarbakır, Gaziantep, Gebze, Gölcük, Hatay, İnegöl, İzmir, İstanbul European Side(22), Istanbul Asian Side(12) Kahramanmaraş, Karaman, Kayseri, Kocaeli, Konya, Kuşadası, Ordu, Malatya, Manisa, Mersin, Midyat, Nusaybin, Sakarya, Torbalı and Zonguldak.
Melbourne (2)
Rotterdam, The Hague, Amsterdam
London
Bremen
Sponsorship.
Companies that Galatasaray S.K. currently has sponsorship deals with include.
