Ralph Nathaniel Twisleton Wykeham Fiennes (born 22 December 1962), better known as Ralph Fiennes (), is an English theatre and film actor. A noted Shakespeare interpreter, he first achieved success onstage in the Royal National Theatre. 
Fiennes' portrayal of Nazi war criminal Amon Goeth in "Schindler's List" (1993), earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, and won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. His performance as Count Almásy in "The English Patient" (1996), garnered him a second Academy Award nomination, for Best Actor, as well as BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations.
Since then, Fiennes has starred or appeared in "The Prince of Egypt" (1998), "The End of the Affair" (1999), "Red Dragon" (2002), "The Constant Gardener" (2005), the "Harry Potter" film series (2005–2011), in which he played Lord Voldemort, "The Reader" (2008), and "Clash of the Titans" (2010). In 2012, Fiennes played Gareth Mallory in the James Bond film "Skyfall" and Magwitch in "Great Expectations". 
In 2011, Fiennes made his directorial debut with his film adaptation of Shakespeare's tragedy "Coriolanus", in which he also played the titular character. Fiennes won a Tony Award for playing Prince Hamlet on Broadway.
Early life and family.
Fiennes was born in Ipswich, on 22 December 1962. He is the eldest child of Mark Fiennes (1933–2004), a farmer and photographer whose father was industrialist Sir Maurice Fiennes (1907–1994), and Jennifer Lash (1938–1993), a writer who was of English and Irish descent. His surname is of Norman origin.
Fiennes is an eighth cousin of the Prince of Wales, and a third cousin of adventurer Ranulph Fiennes and author William Fiennes. He is the eldest of six children, his siblings being actor Joseph Fiennes; Martha Fiennes, a director (in her film "Onegin", he played the title role); Magnus Fiennes, a composer; Sophie Fiennes, a filmmaker; and Jacob Fiennes, a conservationist. His foster brother, Michael Emery, is an archaeologist. His nephew Hero Fiennes-Tiffin played Tom Riddle, young Lord Voldemort, in "Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince".
The Fiennes family moved to Ireland in 1973, living in West Cork and County Kilkenny for some years. Fiennes was educated at St Kieran's College for one year, followed by Newtown School, a Quaker independent school in County Waterford. They moved to Salisbury in England, where Fiennes finished his schooling at Bishop Wordsworth's School. He went on to pursue painting at Chelsea College of Art before deciding that acting was his true passion.
Career.
Fiennes trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art between 1983 and 85. He began his career at the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park and also at the National Theatre before achieving prominence at the Royal Shakespeare Company. Fiennes first worked on screen in 1990 and then made his film debut in 1992 as Heathcliff in "Wuthering Heights" opposite Juliette Binoche.
1993 was his "breakout year". He had a major role in the controversial Peter Greenaway film "The Baby of Mâcon" with Julia Ormond, which was poorly received. Later that year he became known internationally for portraying the amoral Nazi concentration camp commandant Amon Göth in Steven Spielberg's "Schindler's List". For this he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He did not win the Oscar, but did win the Best Supporting Actor BAFTA Award for the role. His portrayal as Göth also earned him a spot on the American Film Institute's list of Top 50 Movie Villains. To look suitable to represent Amon Göth, Fiennes gained weight, but he managed to shed it afterwards.
Fiennes later claimed that playing the role had a profoundly disturbing effect on him. In a subsequent interview, Fiennes recalled, </ref>
In 1994, he portrayed American academic Charles Van Doren in "Quiz Show". In 1996 he was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actor for the World War II epic romance "The English Patient" in which he starred with Kristin Scott-Thomas. Fiennes' film work has ranged from thrillers ("Spider") to animated Biblical epic ("The Prince of Egypt") to campy nostalgia ("The Avengers") to romantic comedy ("Maid in Manhattan") to historical drama ("Sunshine").
In 1999, Fiennes starred in the legendary role of Eugene Onegin in "Onegin", a movie which he also helped produce. His sister Martha Fiennes directed and brother Magnus composed the score.
"The Constant Gardener" was released in 2005 with Fiennes in the central role. The film is set in Kenya, dealing in part with real people in the slums of Kibera and Loiyangalani. The situation affected the cast and crew to the extent that they set up the Constant Gardener Trust to provide basic education for children of these villages. Fiennes is a patron of the charity.
He is also a patron of the Shakespeare Schools Festival, a charity that enables school children across the UK to perform Shakespeare in professional theatres.
Fiennes portrayed Lord Voldemort in the 2005 fantasy film "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire". He kept the role for "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" and both "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1" and "Part 2". 
Fiennes' 2006 performance in the play "Faith Healer" gained him a nomination for a 2007 Tony Award. In 2008, Fiennes worked with frequent collaborator director Jonathan Kent to play the title role in Sophocles's "Oedipus the King" at the National Theatre in London. In 2008, he played the Duke of Devonshire in the film "The Duchess", and played the protagonist in "The Reader".
In February 2009, Fiennes was the special guest of the Belgrade's Film Festival FEST. He filmed his version of Shakespeare's "Coriolanus" in the Serbian capital of Belgrade.
Fiennes reunited with Kathryn Bigelow for her Iraq War opus, "The Hurt Locker", released in 2009, appearing as an English mercenary. In April 2010, he played Hades, reuniting with his former co-star from "Schindler's List", Liam Neeson, who played Zeus in "Clash of the Titans", a remake of the 1981 film of the same name. In 2012, he starred in the twenty-third James Bond film, "Skyfall", directed by Sam Mendes. He will replace Dame Judi Dench as M in future Bond films.
Personal life.
Fiennes is a UNICEF UK ambassador and has done work in India, Kyrgyzstan, Uganda and Romania.
Fiennes met English actress Alex Kingston while they were both students at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art. After dating for ten years, they married in 1993. They divorced in 1997.
In 1995, Fiennes began an affair with Francesca Annis, whom he met when she played his mother Gertrude in the play "Hamlet". After 11 years together, the couple separated in February 2006.
