The American sitcom "The Big Bang Theory", created and executive produced by Chuck Lorre and Bill Prady, premiered on CBS on September 24, 2007. The show centers on five characters: roommates Sheldon Cooper and Leonard Hofstadter, two Caltech physicists; Penny, a waitress and aspiring actress who lives across the hall; and Leonard and Sheldon's friends and co-workers aerospace engineer Howard Wolowitz, and astrophysicist Rajesh Koothrappali.
Over time, several supporting characters have been promoted to starring roles: Leslie Winkle (season 1 recurring; season 2 regular; season 3 guest), a physicist colleague, and, at different times, a lover of both Leonard and Howard; Bernadette Rostenkowski-Wolowitz (season 3 recurring; season 4-present regular), a microbiologist, Howard's fiancée and subsequent wife, and former part-time waitress alongside Penny; neuroscientist Amy Farrah Fowler (season 3 guest; season 4 recurring; season 4-present regular), who joins the group after being matched to Sheldon on a dating website; and comic book store-owner, Stuart Bloom (seasons 2–5 recurring; season 6-present regular), who replaces Howard as Raj's best friend when Howard is in space. The show also features numerous supporting characters, each of whom plays a prominent role in a small group of episodes.
Main characters.
Main characters are divided into two groups, original main characters and those who have been promoted to main character status since season two.
Original main characters.
With the exception of injury to the actors, these characters have appeared in all episodes.
Leonard Hofstadter.
Dr. Leonard Leakey Hofstadter (Johnny Galecki) is an experimental physicist with an IQ of 173 originally from New Jersey who received his PhD when he was 24-years old. He shares an apartment in Pasadena with colleague and friend Dr. Sheldon Cooper. Unlike his equally geeky friends, Leonard is interested and quite adept in building interpersonal and social relationships with others, and is quite successful with women. The writers have toyed with a romance between him and next-door neighbor Penny since the pilot, with their unresolved sexual tension being a major force for drama. Leonard dated Penny for most of Season 3, although they had dated briefly at the end of Season 1. Aside from Penny, Leonard has had romantic relationships with co-worker Dr. Leslie Winkle, physician Dr. Stephanie Barnett, an unnamed French literature PhD, and North Korean spy Joyce Kim. Following his breakup with Penny, Leonard began a relationship with Raj's sister Priya in Season 4, and it is implied they had a brief sexual encounter before the start of the series on an occasion when Priya visited Raj. The two attempted a long-distance relationship after Priya moved back to India, but Leonard eventually broke up with her in Season 5 after she admitted to sleeping with her old boyfriend. In Season 5's "The Beta Test Initiation", Leonard and Penny start dating anew though their relationship is rocky. Leonard's family includes other accomplished scientists: his mother, Dr. Beverly Hofstadter, is a world-renowned psychiatrist, his sister is a biologist and his father an anthropologist. Also, his brother Michael is a Harvard law professor. It is mentioned in the season 2 episode "The Maternal Capacitance" that Leonard is the least successful member of his family. He is also known to be lactose intolerant and cannot process corn, as Sheldon states in "Pilot". Leonard also plays the cello.
Sheldon Cooper.
Dr. Sheldon Lee Cooper (Jim Parsons) is a theoretical physicist, possessing a Bachelor of Science, Master of Science, Master of Arts, a PhD, an ScD, and an IQ of 187. Originally from East Texas, he was a child prodigy, starting college at the age of 11, and receiving his PhD at age 16. He is cold and calculating, and refrains from any form of physical contact if possible. Sheldon exhibits a strict adherence to routine to the point of exhibiting obsessive–compulsive disorder, performing specific activities on specific days and specifics times, such as doing the laundry on Saturday night at 8:15. Any disruption to this routine distresses him enormously. A running gag has him always knocking on doors or other surfaces in a pattern of three knocks and one call repeated three times, which he has to complete no matter what. He has forced Leonard into signing an absurdly exhaustive "Roommate Agreement", and later enters a similar "Relationship Agreement" with Amy Fowler. Sheldon has great difficulty identifying sarcasm and irony and responding in kind, and a recurring topic is his efforts to acquire these skills. He has also enormous difficulties lying or even keeping a secret, giving himself away with wild facial tics and implausible statements. He is however fond of occasionally playing a prank, which he typically punctuates it with his trademark exclamation "Bazinga!". Sheldon has a superiority complex and makes no effort to hide his contempt for other people's intellects, often making highly inappropriate comments. A common joke is his inability to drive, although he did receive a learner's permit. Sheldon loves comic books and science fiction like his friends, but to the point of being obsessed about them, and is a fan of Spock, a fictional character of the Star Trek franchise. Unlike Leonard and Raj who come from intellectual families, Sheldon stands out from his own relatives. His father, George, whose death pre-dates the series, was described as a stereotypical Texan who liked football, skeet shooting, and heavy drinking] his mother, Mary, is a devout Evangelical Christian, who does not possess anything near Sheldon's intellect (though she displays a great deal of common sense); his twin sister, Missy, and as-yet unseen brother, George Jr., were both described by Mary as being "dumb as soup". He meets Amy Farrah Fowler in the Season 3 finale and starts a highly unusual and very slowly evolving relationship with her. Previous to this, he has also exhibited some affinities with Leonard's equally unemotional mother.
Penny.
Penny (family name currently unrevealed) (Kaley Cuoco), is Leonard and Sheldon's neighbor across the hallway. Originally from a small town outside of Omaha, Nebraska, she is a waitress and occasional bartender at the local Cheesecake Factory and also an aspiring actress. Her profession and educational qualifications (she had dropped out of community college) are a constant source of disparaging comments from Sheldon. She has dated several men during the course of the series, including Kurt, Stuart and Zack, but her recurring love interest is Leonard. Leonard pursued Penny during season 1; they dated briefly at the start of season 2 which led to some awkwardness; they began dating again and were a couple for most of season 3 but she broke up with him after he told Penny he loved her and she was not ready to reciprocate. Penny and Leonard begin to date again "slowly" during the fifth season, though he does upset her by impulsively asking her to marry him during sex. She has a tense relationship with Sheldon, whose nerdy and obstinate personality often exasperate her, but they are ultimately good friends, helping each other out in various situations. By season four, Penny also begins to socialize more with Bernadette and Amy, who frequently hang out in Penny's apartment, go out together and comfort each other. Bernadette and Amy are both shown to be simultaneously envious of and threatened by Penny's more outgoing personality. Not much is known about Penny's family, but it is mentioned in the series that her father, Wyatt, raised her like a boy, her mother smoked pot while she was pregnant with her and her brother is a meth addict.
Howard Wolowitz.
Howard Joel Wolowitz (Simon Helberg) is an aerospace engineer at Caltech's Department of Applied Physics with a Masters in Engineering who often hangs out at Leonard and Sheldon's apartment. Unlike Sheldon, Leonard, and Raj, Howard has no doctorate, and often gets disparaged as a result, especially by Sheldon. He defends this by pointing out that he has a master's degree in Engineering from MIT and that the equipment he designs is launched into space, unlike the theoretical work of his friends. In the season 5 finale, Howard goes to the International Space Station on Expedition 31. Howard lives in Altadena with his overbearing and unseen mother who treats him like a child. While he sometimes expresses irritation at this treatment, for the most part he appears to prefer it. Howard dotes on his mother and participates in many of her daily routines. A recurring gimmick in the series is Howard and his mother communicating with each other from different rooms by yelling, a habit which Bernadette also adopts in later episodes. His father left them when he was 11, and Howard gets visibly distressed when the subject comes up. Howard fancies himself a ladies' man and attempts pick-up lines whenever a female is present, which often comes off as inappropriate and disgusting, although he has dropped this habit since he started going out with Bernadette. He is Jewish, but he is not very serious about his faith, and does not keep kosher. For example, when the group's favorite Chinese restaurant raised the price of pork, Howard remarked, "It's getting tougher and tougher to be a bad Jew. However, he does observe Sabbath and the Jewish holidays. In the pilot episode, it's shown that he is a polyglot and can speak English, French, Mandarin, Russian, Arabic, and Farsi, along with fictional languages like Klingon and Sindarin. He is asthmatic, allergic to peanuts, almonds and walnuts, prone to canker sores and pink eye, succumbs to seasickness, has an incredibly high genetic risk of heart illness, and has transient idiopathic arrhythmia. In Season 5 episode 4, it's shown that he knows American Sign Language. Howard dated Bernadette Rostenkowski briefly in season 3. After some difficulties, they resumed their relationship in season 4, which culminated in their engagement. In season 5, Howard and Bernadette are married on the roof of the apartment building the day before he has to go into space.
Rajesh Koothrappali.
Dr. Rajesh Ramayan "Raj" Koothrappali (Kunal Nayyar) is Howard Wolowitz's best friend, and yet another genius of the group; his name is usually shortened to "Raj". He is originally from New Delhi, India, and he works in the Physics department at Caltech, where his area of expertise is particle astrophysics. He lives in an apartment in Pasadena. As with his friends, he is mutually involved with and obsessed with science fiction and comic books in general, and is usually the one to propose various real-life questions derived from such works, such as the functions of the tails of the Na'vi in the film "Avatar". He is also a fan of Harry Potter. Raj hates India, Indian food and Indian music, however, he does appreciate the Indian lullabies his mother sang to him and the catchiness of Hindi phrases. Raj is a Hindu and believes in karma (reincarnation), but eats beef. Raj is extremely shy around women, and finds himself unable to speak to or while in the presence of them unless he drinks alcohol, or he believes he has drunk alcohol . When Penny or Bernadette is around, Raj usually whispers what he wants to say to Howard or Leonard, who then repeats or responds to what Raj says out loud, although at times Howard will embarrass him by saying something completely different and inappropriate. Despite this, Raj has sometimes ended up in bed with women, leaving the other guys perplexed. Unlike his friends however, Raj has many quite feminine interests such as reading Archie Comics and Twilight and watching chick flicks such as "Bridget Jones's Diary". A recurring joke in the series has people, including his parents and Leonard's mother, speculating that Raj might be gay due to his feminine interests and his close friendship with Howard, with whom he has arguments similar to those of a married couple. However, Raj has always stated that he is straight, but metrosexual. He has had a crush on Penny, and secretly wrote love poems about Bernadette. Raj comes from a very wealthy family in India, and often communicates with his parents, Dr. and Mrs. Koothrappali, via webcam. He has a younger sister, Priya, who dates Leonard in Season 4, breaking up in Season 5.
Additional main characters.
The following characters have been promoted to main character status since season 2. Leslie Winkle and Stuart Bloom are only credited in episodes in which they appear. Bernadette and Amy Farrah Fowler were promoted to main character status in season 5, and their images were included in the main title sequence from the first episode of season 6.
Leslie Winkle.
Dr. (Sara Gilbert) (appeared in eight episodes total, four credited as main cast) is an experimental physicist who works in the same lab as Leonard. In appearance, she is essentially Leonard's female counterpart, equipped with the black framed glasses and sweat jackets. She is one of Sheldon's arch-enemies, due to their conflicting scientific theories. Though they both consider each other to be intellectually inferior, Leslie is much wittier than Sheldon, regularly calling him "dumbass" and besting him in their exchanges. Leslie has had casual sex relationships with Leonard and later Howard. Leslie stopped appearing in the series after the season 3 finale, when Leonard, being desperate for physical contact following sex with Penny in a drunken state, asked for casual sex with Leslie. She said "let me think about it", closed the door in his face and has not appeared again.
Bernadette.
(Dr. after "The Roommate Transmogrification") Maryann Rostenkowski (Rostenkowski-Wolowitz after marriage to Howard) (Melissa Rauch): (appeared in 54 episodes total,49 credited as main cast) is originally a waitress and co-worker of Penny's at the Cheesecake Factory, which pays the way for her graduate studies in microbiology per "The Creepy Candy Coating Corollary". A recurring joke on the series is reference to Bernadette handling infectious biological specimens before preparing food or making physical contact with people, which eventually results in her and her entire research team spending New Year's Eve 2010 in quarantine. She is of Polish origin and Catholic upbringing and admits that she cannot lie very well because, according to her, the teachers "kind of whip that out of you" – and is frequently seen wearing a cross necklace. Bernadette is introduced to Howard by Penny after he invoked the Girlfriend Pact. At first, she and Howard do not get along, as they appear to have nothing in common. When they find out that they both have overbearing mothers, they feel a connection. Subsequently, Howard realizes Bernadette presents a real opportunity to develop a lasting relationship, and, in an impulsive manner, he proposes to her. Although Bernadette rejects his offer, they remain a couple for a time after Howard sings a heartfelt song for her at the Cheesecake Factory, which Penny finds quite embarrassing, but Bernadette finds romantic. Eventually, they break up after she discovers Howard, via his World of Warcraft character, having sex with another online character. Bernadette and Howard reconcile and resume their relationship, ultimately culminating in their engagement in the season 4 episode, "The Herb Garden Germination". In "The Roommate Transmogrification", she finally obtains her Doctorate and is subsequently hired by a pharmaceutical company that promises her "a butt-load of money". This makes Howard jealous, especially after the rest of his friends taunt him about his lack of a Doctorate. It eventually leads to them having an argument after she purchases a Rolex watch for Howard, which he interprets as her "rubbing in" the fact that she now earns more than him. Howard later learns that Raj fantasizes about Bernadette and writes love poems about her. Bernadette almost broke up with Howard after hearing about his previously unknown former sexual escapades that came out during his bachelor party from the episode "The Stag Convergence". Howard and Bernadette are married (by the entire gang) on the roof of the apartment that day before he has to go into space. During season 6, the newlyweds do have some bumps including Howard readjusting to being back on earth, moving out of his mother's house. and spending too much on his collectibles hobby.
Amy Farrah Fowler.
Dr. (Mayim Bialik) (appeared in 52 episodes total, 48 credited as main cast) She is a neuroscientist (which corresponds to Bialik's real-life Ph.D.), and Sheldon's love interest in the series. She has a Ph.D. in neurobiology, with a research focus on addiction in primates and invertebrates, occasionally mentioning such experiments as getting a capuchin monkey addicted to cigarettes or starfish hooked on cocaine. Raj and Howard met Amy through an online dating site after secretly setting up an account using Sheldon's name and information. The site matches her to Sheldon, and the two share many similar traits. Once she and Sheldon meet, she becomes, as Sheldon puts it, a girl who is his friend, but not his "girlfriend". They briefly ended their friendship when they got into an argument over whose field of study was superior. The two initially communicate online and via webcam, but at the encouragement of the group, she starts hanging out with the gang in person. In Season Five, after Amy went out on a date with comic book store owner Stuart, Sheldon decided to solidify their relationship as boyfriend/girlfriend with a 31-page "Relationship Agreement". Amy began a campaign in "The Launch Acceleration" to increase Sheldon's feelings for her by becoming more involved in his interests like video games and Star Trek, and treating him as his mother had. During Howard and Bernadette's wedding ceremony, Amy is disappointed when Sheldon says that he hopes that the two of them are as happy together as he is alone. Later as Howard is launched into space, Amy is surprised when Sheldon spontaneously grabs her hand. Despite her best efforts, however, he repeatedly resists all of her attempts at persuading him to engage in physical intimacy though they are regularly holding hands at Amy's insistence at the beginning of season 6. By mid-season when Sheldon was caring for her when she had the flu, Sheldon has some intimate views of Amy pushing him further toward a normal relationship with her. Amy tried to move into his apartment when Leonard temporarily vacated it. After being prodded by Barry Kripke about his girlfriend, he lied that they were having coitus, though he admitted to Penny that it might really happen between him and Amy. At the same time, while early on she was ambivalent and often condescending towards Penny and Bernadette, she later spends more time with them even at the expense of her time with Sheldon. More recently, she has shed her strident, aloof personality for a more feminine and social one. She is also noted for her close friendship with Penny, at one point referring to her as "bestie," and, on another occasion, admitting her entire social life revolves around her. Penny herself is fond of Amy, on one occasion making an effort to salvage their friendship after she accidentally hurt her feelings. To her dismay, however, Amy often fails to grasp the concept of "girl talk," by talking about feminine hygiene and anatomy when in her presence. Also, Amy often demonstrates an infatuation towards her, and occasionally Bernadette though she still makes condescending remarks toward Bernadette. These including making inappropriate comments about Penny's body. In episode 8 of the fifth season, she shows a disturbing enthusiasm on the whim that Bernadette's bridal shower should consist of naked bridesmaids washing each other, and she proposes that the bachelorette party consist of a Native American sweat lodge and women dancing around painting fertility symbols on the bride's naked body. Her more arrogant side is shown in "The Pulled Groin Extrapolation", where she's convinced that Leonard has fallen for her after he accompanies her to a friend's wedding and gives her a chaste kiss on the cheek, even though he has no such feelings. In "The Benefactor Factor", it is revealed that she is technically engaged to Saudi Arabian Prince Faisal who resides in Riyadh, who is the source of much of her lab's funding. Amy can also play the harp. The actress portraying Amy Farrah Fowler, Mayim Bialik, was mentioned by Raj ("the girl who played TV's Blossom") in "The Bat Jar Conjecture", as a possible substitute for Sheldon on their Physics Bowl team.
Stuart Bloom.
 Bloom (Kevin Sussman) (appeared in 21 episodes total, six credited as main cast) Stuart runs the comic book store that the guys patronize. He is a talented portraiture artist who attended the Rhode Island School of Design. During Stuart's first appearance, the guys brought Penny to the store and he managed to ask her on a date. The date went fine until Stuart was dragged into discussing comic books by Sheldon, leaving Penny bored. On a second date with Penny, Stuart asked for Leonard's advice, but feeling threatened, Leonard ultimately gave him bad advice. The date went fine, but when Penny was getting romantic with Stuart she mistakenly called him "Leonard", leaving him devastated. Stuart was the partner of Wil Wheaton in a trading card game tournament in which they defeated the team of Raj and Sheldon. As Stuart runs a comic book store, he has an almost encyclopedic knowledge of comic books and superheroes. In the Season 4 episode "The Toast Derivation", he mentions that he is in financial trouble and that the comic book store is now also his home. In "The Justice League Recombination", he states that he works 70 hours and clears an average of $1.65 per hour after expenses, so his income per week would be $115.50. At Howard's bachelor party during the "The Stag Convergence" episode, Stuart uses his toasting turn to tell Howard how lucky he is by contrast to Stuart's own existence. In the Season 6 episode "The Bakersfield Expedition," Penny asks Stuart for advice about comics, and he sullenly answers, "Don't own a store that sells them." During "The Decoupling Fluctuation", Stuart becomes close friends with Raj and starts hanging out with the gang as a replacement for Howard while Howard is in space. Before accepting this, Sheldon quizzed Stuart as to where he went to school (Stuart has an art degree). Sheldon concedes to allow Stuart to be in the group, calling him "fake-Wolowitz" and equating his past career choice in art to Howard's as an aerospace engineer as "equally ridiculous". When Howard returns from space Sheldon wants to dismiss Stuart from the group but Raj objects. Leonard tie-breaks on the basis that they are receiving a 20% discount in Stuart's store. Sheldon relents after Stuart offers to go as high as 30%. Initially, Sheldon had stipulated that Stuart must act like Howard while in the gang's presence.
Recurring characters.
These characters appear in several episodes. The list is sorted by chronological order of appearance, considering their first appearance in the show.
Minor characters.
These characters appear in fewer episodes, most in just one. The list is sorted by chronological order of appearance, considering their first appearance in the show.
Characters that appeared in only a single scene.
These characters appear in a single scene. The list is sorted by chronological order of appearance, considering their first appearance in the show.
