Sally Margaret Field (born November 6, 1946) is an American actress, singer, producer, director, and screenwriter. In each decade of her career, she has been known for major roles in American TV/film culture, including: in the 1960s, for "Gidget" (1965–66) and Sister Bertrille on "The Flying Nun" (1967–70); in the 1970s, for "Sybil" (1976), "Smokey and the Bandit" (1977) and "Norma Rae" (1979); in the 1980s, for "Absence of Malice" (1981), "Places in the Heart" (1984) and "Steel Magnolias" (1989); in the 1990s, for "Not Without My Daughter" (1991), "Mrs. Doubtfire" (1993), "Forrest Gump" (1994) and "Eye for an Eye" (1996); in the 2000s, on the TV shows "ER" and "Brothers & Sisters" (2006–11); and in the 2010s in "The Amazing Spider-Man" and "Lincoln". She has also performed in numerous other roles. 
Field won the Academy Award for Best Actress in a leading role on two occasions: "Norma Rae" (1979) and "Places in the Heart" (1984). Field's professional achievements also include winning three Emmy Awards: for her role in the TV film "Sybil" (1976); her guest-starring role on "ER" in 2000; and for her starring role as Nora Holden Walker on ABC's series "Brothers & Sisters" in 2007. She has also won two Golden Globes and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actress. She also won the Best Female Performance Prize at the Cannes Film Festival, for "Norma Rae" (1979). In 2012, Field garnered widespread acclaim for portraying Mary Todd Lincoln in Steven Spielberg's "Lincoln"; her supporting role received numerous nominations for Best Supporting Actress, including an Academy Award, Golden Globe, BAFTA and a Screen Actors Guild Award.
Early life.
Sally Field was born in Pasadena, California. Her father, Richard Dryden Field, was an Army officer, and her mother, Margaret Field (née Morlan), was an actress. Her parents divorced in 1950, and her mother later married actor and stuntman Jock Mahoney.
Field attended Portola Middle School, followed by Birmingham High School in Van Nuys, where she was a cheerleader. Her classmates included infamous financier Michael Milken, actress Cindy Williams (of "Laverne & Shirley" fame) and Michael Ovitz of Creative Artists Agency (CAA) and Walt Disney Studios fame.
Career.
Television.
Field got her start on television as the boy-crazy surfer girl in the mid-1960s surf culture sitcom series, "Gidget". She went on to star as Sister Bertrille in "The Flying Nun" (1967–70). In an interview included on the DVD release of "The Flying Nun", she said that she would have preferred to continue playing Gidget. Field said she hated being on "The Flying Nun" because she was not treated with respect by various directors. After her iconic role on "The Flying Nun", she had become typecast. Later, she starred opposite John Davidson in a short-lived series called "The Girl with Something Extra" (1973–74).
In 1971, Field starred in "Maybe I'll Come Home in the Spring" with David Carradine and a soundtrack by Linda Ronstadt. She played the role of a discouraged teen runaway who returned home after a year on the road with a bearded drug-abusing hippie named Flack (Carradine).
She made several guest appearances, including a recurring role on the western comedy "Alias Smith and Jones", starring Pete Duel (with whom she had worked on "Gidget") and Ben Murphy, and she played in the "Night Gallery" episode "Whisper".
Having played mostly comedic characters on television, Field had a difficult time being cast in dramatic roles. She studied with famous acting teacher Lee Strasberg, who had previously helped Marilyn Monroe go beyond the "bimbo" roles with which her career had begun.
Soon afterward, Field landed the title role in the 1976 TV film "Sybil", based on the book written by Flora Rheta Schreiber. Field's dramatic portrayal of Sybil, a young woman afflicted with Dissociative Identity Disorder (previously known as multiple personality disorder) in the TV film, not only garnered her an Emmy Award (in 1977) but also enabled her to break through the typecasting she had experienced from her television sitcom roles.
Music.
While starring on "The Flying Nun", Field tried her hand at singing. She sang on the soundtrack for "The Flying Nun" in 1967, and she sang "The Flying Nun" theme song "Who Needs Wings to Fly". The same year she made it to the Billboard Hot 100 with one single, "Felicidad". In 2008 she sang on the soundtrack for "".
Film.
Field had made her film debut in 1962 with a small part in "Moon Pilot". Her first major film role was in "The Way West" (1967). In 1977, she co-starred with Burt Reynolds, Jackie Gleason and Jerry Reed in that year's #2 grossing film, "Smokey and the Bandit". In 1979, she played a union organizer in "Norma Rae", a successful film that established her status as a dramatic actress. Vincent Canby, in his review of the film for the "New York Times", wrote: ""Norma Rae" is a seriously concerned contemporary drama, illuminated by some very good performances and one, Miss Field's, that is spectacular." She won the Best Female Performance Prize at the Cannes Film Festival and the Academy Award for Best Actress.
Field did three more of Reynolds' films ("The End", "Hooper" and "Smokey and the Bandit II"). In 1981, Field continued to change her image, playing a foul-mouthed prostitute opposite Tommy Lee Jones in the South-set film "Back Roads", which received middling reviews and grossed $11 million at the box office. She received Golden Globe nominations for the 1981 drama "Absence of Malice" and the 1982 comedy "Kiss Me Goodbye".
Then came a second Oscar for her starring role in the 1984 drama "Places in the Heart". Field's gushing acceptance speech is well remembered and has since been both admired as earnest and parodied as excessive. She said, "I haven't had an orthodox career, and I've wanted more than anything to have your respect. The first time I didn't feel it, but this time I feel it, and I can't deny the fact that you like me, right now, you like me!" The line ending in "...I can't deny the fact that you like me, right now, you like me!" is often misquoted as simply, "You like me, you really like me!" which has subsequently been the subject of many parodies. (Field parodied the line herself in a Charles Schwab commercial.) The phrase, "You like me", was originally from her performance in the film "Norma Rae", but many people missed the connection.
The following year, she co-starred with James Garner in the romantic comedy "Murphy's Romance". In A&E's biography of Garner, she cited her on-screen kiss with Garner as the best cinematic kiss she had ever had.
Field appeared on the cover of the March 1986 issue of "Playboy" magazine, in which she was the interview subject. She did not appear as a pictorial subject inside the magazine, although she did wear the classic leotard and bunny-ears outfit on the cover. That same year, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.
For her role as the matriarch, M'Lynn, in the film version of "Steel Magnolias" (1989), she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress. She had supporting roles in a number of other movies, including "Mrs. Doubtfire" (1993) in which she played Miranda Hillard, the wife of Robin Williams's character and the love interest of Pierce Brosnan's character Stuart 'Stu' Dunmyer. She followed this with the role of Forrest Gump's mother in "Forrest Gump" (1994), even though she is only 10 years older than Tom Hanks, with whom she had co-starred six years earlier in "Punchline".
Her other films in the 1990s included "Not Without My Daughter", a controversial suspense film based on the real-life experience of Betty Mahmoody's escape from Iran with her daughter Mahtob, and "Soapdish", a comedy in which Field, playing Celeste Talbert, the pampered star of a television soap opera, heads an all-star cast including Kevin Kline, Whoopi Goldberg, Elisabeth Shue and Robert Downey, Jr. In 1996, Field was awarded with the Berlinale Camera award at the 46th Berlin International Film Festival for her role as a grieving vigilante mother in "Eye for an Eye" for director John Schlesinger. She co-starred with Natalie Portman in "Where the Heart Is" (2000) and appeared opposite Reese Witherspoon in "".
Recent activity.
In November 2009, Field appeared on an episode of "The Doctors" to talk about osteoporosis and her Rally With Sally Foundation.
Field had a recurring role on "ER" in the 2000-01 season as Dr. Abby Lockhart's mother, Maggie, who suffers from bipolar disorder, a role for which she won an Emmy Award in 2001. After her critically acclaimed stint on the show, she returned to the role in 2003 and 2006. She also starred in the very short-lived 2002 series "The Court". 
Field's directorial career began with the television film "The Christmas Tree" (1996). In 1998, she directed the episode "The Original Wives' Club" of the critically acclaimed TV mini-series "From the Earth to the Moon", also portraying a minor role as Trudy, the wife of astronaut Gordon Cooper. In 2000, she directed the feature film "Beautiful".
Field was a late addition to the ABC drama "Brothers & Sisters", which debuted in September 2006. In the show's pilot, the role of matriarch Nora Walker had been played by actress Betty Buckley. The producers of the show, however, decided to take the character of Nora in another direction, and Field was cast in the role. She won the 2007 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for the role. The drama also starred actresses Calista Flockhart and Rachel Griffiths, in the roles of Nora's adult daughters.
Field had a voice role as Marina del Rey, the primary antagonist in Disney's "", which was released in August 2008.
She portrayed Aunt May in the Marvel Comics film "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012), and Mary Todd Lincoln in Steven Spielberg's film "Lincoln", written by Tony Kushner.
Activism.
During her 2007 acceptance speech for her 2006-07 Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series, Field made an anti-war statement: "If the mothers ruled the world, there would be no wars in the first place!" Though the crowd present at the Emmy Awards heard it, viewers watching the telecast in the United States only heard "if mothers ruled the world there would be no ...", due to the censoring of the rest of the statement (in the rest of the world, her remark was not bleeped). In the 2008 presidential election, she supported Hillary Clinton in her bid for the Democratic Party nomination.
Field is a dedicated advocate for women's rights. She has served on the Board of Directors of Vital Voices Global Partnership, an international women's NGO, and has co-hosted the Global Leadership Awards six times. 
Field is also an activist for gay rights. In 2012, Field won the Human Rights Campaign's Ally for Equality Award (her youngest son, Sam, came out as gay).
Personal life.
Field married Steven Craig in 1968. The couple had two sons: Peter Craig, a novelist, and Eli Craig, an actor and director. Craig and Field divorced in 1975. 
Sally Field was romantically involved with Burt Reynolds for many years, during which time they co-starred in several films, including "Smokey and the Bandit", "Smokey and the Bandit II", and "The End". She married film producer Alan Greisman in 1984, and they had one son, Sam in 1987; Field and Greisman divorced in 1993. 
On October 29, 1988, she and her family survived a crash after their charter plane lost power on takeoff. They all survived with minor injuries.
Field suffers from osteoporosis and has become a vocal advocate for women's health issues, encouraging early diagnosis of such conditions through technology, such as bone density scans.
