Mr. Bean is a British comedy television programme series of 14 twenty-five-minute episodes written by and starring Rowan Atkinson as the title character. Different episodes were also written by Robin Driscoll, Richard Curtis and one by Ben Elton. The pilot episode was broadcast on ITV on 1 January 1990, with the last television episode, "Goodnight Mr. Bean" broadcast on 31 October 1995. The final episode, "Hair by Mr. Bean of London", was a video exclusive released on 15 November 1995, but not broadcast in the UK until 2006.
Based on a character originally developed by Atkinson while he was studying for his master's degree at Oxford University, the series follows the exploits of Mr. Bean, described by Atkinson as "a child in a grown man's body", in solving various problems presented by everyday tasks and often causing disruption in the process. Bean rarely speaks, and the largely physical humour of the series is derived from his interactions with other people and his unusual solutions to situations. The series was influenced by physical performers such as Jacques Tati and comic actors from silent films.
During its five-year run, the series gained large UK audience figures, including 18.74 million for the 1991 episode "The Trouble With Mr. Bean". The series has been the recipient of a number of international awards, including the Rose d'Or. The show has been sold in 245 territories worldwide, and has inspired an animated cartoon spin-off, two feature films, and an appearance at the London 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony.
Origins and influences.
The character of Mr. Bean was developed while Atkinson was studying for his master's degree in Electrical Engineering at Oxford University. A sketch featuring the character was performed at the Edinburgh Fringe in the early 1980s. A similar character called Robert Box, played by Atkinson, appeared in the one-off 1979 ITV sitcom "Canned Laughter", which also featured routines used in the 1997 film "Bean". In 1987, one of Mr. Bean's earliest appearances occurred at the "Just For Laughs" comedy festival in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. When programme co-ordinators were scheduling Atkinson into the festival programme, Atkinson insisted that he perform on the French-speaking bill rather than the English-speaking programme. Having no French dialogue in his act at all, programme co-ordinators could not understand why Atkinson wanted to perform on the French bill. As it turned out, Atkinson's act at the festival was a test platform for the "Mr. Bean" character and Atkinson wanted to see how the silent character's physical comedy would fare on an international stage with a non-English speaking audience.
The name of the character was not decided until after the first programme had been produced, with a number of other vegetable-influenced names, such as "Mr. Cauliflower", being explored. Atkinson cited the earlier comedy character Monsieur Hulot, created by French comedian and director Jacques Tati, as an influence on the character. Stylistically, "Mr. Bean" is also very similar to early silent films, relying purely upon physical comedy, with Mr. Bean speaking very little dialogue (although like other live-action TV series of the time, it features a laugh track). This has allowed the series to be sold worldwide without any significant changes to dialogue.
In November 2012, Atkinson told newspaper "The Daily Telegraph" he was looking at retiring the character, as "someone in their 50s being childlike becomes a little sad".
Characters and recurring props.
Mr. Bean.
The title character, played by Rowan Atkinson, is a childish and self-centred buffoon who brings various unusual schemes and contrivances to everyday tasks. He lives alone in his small flat in Highbury, and is almost always seen in his trademark tweed jacket and a skinny red tie. He also usually wears a digital calculator watch. Mr. Bean rarely speaks, and when he does, it is generally only a few mumbled words which are in a comically low-pitched voice. His first name (he names himself "Bean" to others) and profession, if any, are never mentioned. In the first film adaptation, "Mr." appears on his passport in the "first name" field, and he is shown employed as a guard at London's National Gallery. In "Mr. Bean's Holiday", however, his name is listed on his passport as "Rowan", the actor's first name.
Mr. Bean often seems unaware of basic aspects of the way the world works, and the programme usually features his attempts at what would normally be considered simple tasks, such as going swimming, using a television set, redecorating or going to church. The humour largely comes from his original (and often absurd) solutions to problems and his total disregard for others when solving them, his pettiness, and occasional malevolence.
At the beginning of episode two onwards, Mr. Bean falls from the sky in a beam of light, accompanied by a choir singing "Ecce homo qui est faba" ("Behold the man who is a bean"). These opening sequences were initially in black and white in episodes two and three, and were intended by the producers to show his status as an "ordinary man cast into the spotlight". However, later episodes showed Mr. Bean dropping from the night sky in a deserted London street against the backdrop of St. Paul's Cathedral; the imagery and the choir would suggest that Bean is a being cast out of Heaven. At the end of episodes three and six he is also shown being sucked right back up into the sky in the respective background scenes (black scene in episode 3 and street scene in episode 6). Atkinson himself has acknowledged that Bean "has a slightly alien aspect to him". In the animated series (episode 38, "Double Trouble") he is taken inside a spacecraft with "aliens" who look exactly like him and even have their own plushy toys. In an obvious homage, the aliens send him back home in a beam of light similar to the opening of the original Mr. Bean series. Whether Mr. Bean himself is an extraterrestrial is not clear. Mr. Bean lives in Flat 2, 12 Arbour Road, London, England.
Irma Gobb.
Mr. Bean's girlfriend, Irma Gobb (played by Matilda Ziegler), appears in a number of episodes. In "The Curse of Mr. Bean" and "Mr. Bean Goes to Town," the character is simply credited as "the girlfriend." She is treated relatively inconsiderately by Bean, who appears to regard her more as a friend and companion than a love interest. However, he does become jealous when she dances with another man at a disco in "Mr. Bean Goes to Town", and she certainly expects him to propose to her on Christmas Day in "Merry Christmas, Mr. Bean", with his failure to do so resulting in her leaving him for good. The character does not appear in any subsequent episodes, however, she later appears in the animated series. The spin-off book "Mr. Bean's Diary" (1993) states that Mr. Bean met Irma Gobb at a local library.
Teddy.
Teddy is Mr. Bean's teddy bear and perhaps Mr. Bean's best friend. The little brown bear is a knitted oddity with button eyes and sausage-shaped limbs, invariably ending up broken in half or in various other states of destruction and disfiguration. Although Teddy is inanimate, Mr. Bean often pretends it is alive. For example, when Mr. Bean hypnotises Teddy, he snaps his fingers and the bear's head falls backwards as if it has fallen asleep instantly (Bean used his finger to prop Teddy's head up). Mr. Bean behaves as if the bear is real, buying it a Christmas present or trying not to wake it in the mornings. The bear is often privy to Mr. Bean's various schemes and doubles as a dish cloth or paint brush in an emergency; it has been decapitated ("Mr. Bean in Room 426"), used as his paint brush ("Do-It-Yourself Mr. Bean") and shrunk in the wash ("Tee Off, Mr. Bean"). Teddy is also Mr. Bean's "pet" in "Hair by Mr. Bean of London" and is used to win a pet show. The Teddy that was used in filming sits in the windshield of the replica of Mr. Bean's mini that is on display at the National Motor Museum. Over the years, Teddy has undergone several changes. When it debuted on "The Trouble with Mr. Bean", it had a smaller head. Two episodes later, its head reached its current size, but its "eye" was not present until Bean placed gold thumb tacks on its face. The "eyes" have since been replaced with two small white buttons sewn over Teddy's face, giving it a distinct image.
Mr. Bean's car.
Mr. Bean's car, a British Leyland Mini 1000, developed its own character of sorts over the series and was central to several antics, such as Mr. Bean getting dressed in it, driving while sitting in an armchair strapped to the roof, starting it with a number of locks and keys, or attempting to avoid a parking garage toll by driving out through the entrance.
At first, it was an orange 1969 BMC Mini MK II (registration RNT 996H), but this was destroyed in an off-screen crash at the end of the first episode. From then on, the car was a 1976 – 1980 model (registration SLW 287R), Austin Citron Green in colour with a matte black bonnet.
The Mini also had a number of innovative security measures. For example, Bean uses a bolt-latch and padlock, rather than the lock fitted to the car, and removes the steering wheel instead of the key. These formed a running joke in several episodes, at one point deterring a car thief. However, after changing parking spaces with another car and exact same make in "Back to School Mr. Bean", his car is crushed by a tank. Fortunately for him, his padlock still remains, and he hurries off to "hijack" another car with the same colour scheme.
In some episodes Mr. Bean has a long-running feud with the unseen driver of a light blue Reliant Regal Supervan III (registration GRA 26K), which will usually get turned over, crashed out of its parking space and so forth by Mr.Bean in his Mini. This conflict originated in the first episode, when the Reliant's driver held the Mini up on the way to a mathematics exam, and subsequently became another running joke throughout the series.
Both the Mini and the Reliant re-appeared as characters in the animated "Mr. Bean" cartoons, and the mini in the film "Mr. Bean's Holiday", registration YGL 572T. Also seen is a left hand drive version of his Mini, owned by the character Sabine which has a French registration (207 UHO 75). For the 1997 feature film Bean (film) a sequence involving the Mini driving through Harrod's Department Store was shot, but this was not included in the final cut, in this his Mini's registration plate number is C607 EUW. In the animated series, his Mini's registration plate number is STE 952R.
After filming ended, one of the original Minis was sold to Kariker Kars to be hired for various events. It was then temporarily displayed as a major attraction at the Rover Group's museum. In 1997, it was purchased by the Cars of the Stars Motor Museum and was on display for while, but is no longer there, having been sold; it went to America with another. There is one in the south of England, and another on display at National Motor Museum, Beaulieu. This is the car that was used to promote the animated series.
Hubert & Rupert.
Rupert & Hubert are friends of Mr. Bean who only appeared in "Do it Yourself Mr. Bean." They attended Mr. Bean's New Year's Eve party. They got bored, altered Mr. Bean's living room clock, and fled to a nearby party, with Hubert leaving his hat at Bean's. After the party Hubert was last seen going for his hat during which he got caught in the blast of white paint. Neither are seen after "Do it yourself Mr. Bean".
Other characters.
Although Mr. Bean is the only significant human character in the programme, others appear, usually as foils for his various antics. Other than his girlfriend there are more characters in each episode. However, several notable British actors and comedians appear alongside Atkinson in sketches as various one-off supporting characters, including Richard Briers, Angus Deayton, Nick Hancock, Paul Bown, Caroline Quentin, Danny La Rue, Roger Lloyd Pack, David Schneider and Richard Wilson.
Production.
The programme was produced by Tiger Television (later Tiger Aspect Productions) for Thames Television from 1990 to 1992 and for Central Independent Television from 1993 to 1995. Rather than being shown as a series, each episode of "Mr. Bean" was produced individually, and broadcast at intermittent intervals on the ITV network in the United Kingdom across six years, often around New Year. The episode "Hair by Mr. Bean of London" has not been broadcast on ITV, but was instead reserved for video release.
Music.
The theme was later released on Goodall's album "Choral Works". Goodall also wrote an accompanying music track for many episodes. The first episode of "Mr. Bean" did not feature the choral theme tune, but instead an up-beat instrumental piece, also composed by Howard Goodall, which was more an incidental tune than a theme. It was used while Bean drove between locations intimidating the blue Reliant, and as such, was sometimes heard in later episodes whenever Bean's nemesis is seen.
In the episode "Tee Off, Mr. Bean" Howard Goodall's choral theme tune for another Richard Curtis comedy, "The Vicar of Dibley", is heard playing on a car stereo. In "Merry Christmas, Mr. Bean.", while playing with Queen's Royal Guards figurines and the nativity set, he hums "The British Grenadiers", which was quoted in the theme to "Blackadder Goes Forth".
Mr. Bean appears in a music video made for the 1991 Comic Relief fund raising single by Hale and Pace called "The Stonk". Mr. Bean also appeared in the music video for Boyzone's single "Picture of You" in 1997. The song featured on the soundtrack to the first Bean movie.
Mr Bean also made a Comic Relief record in 1992. This was "(I Want To Be) Elected" and was credited to "Mr Bean and Smear Campaign featuring Bruce Dickinson". This was a cover of an Alice Cooper song and reached number 9 in the UK singles chart.
Awards.
The first episode won the Golden Rose, as well as two other major prizes at the 1991 Rose d'Or Light Entertainment Festival in Montreux. In the UK, the episode "The Curse of Mr. Bean" was nominated for a number of BAFTA awards; "Best Light Entertainment Programme" in 1991, "Best Comedy" (Programme or Series) in 1991, and Atkinson was nominated three times for "Best Light Entertainment Performance" in 1991 and 1994.
International broadcast history.
After its original run it has been shown repeatedly on PBS and satellite channels such as Telemundo in the United States, CBC in Canada, ABC & The Comedy Channel in Australia, TVB in Hong Kong, Nickelodeon, Comedy Central and ITV3, Cartoon Network on 11 June 2012, in the UK, Disney Channel Asia in Southeast Asia, TV3 in Malaysia, MediaCorp Channel 5 in Singapore, ABS-CBN or, previously, People's Television Network 4 and Disney Channel Asia, in the Philippines and RCTI in Indonesia. Digital channel ITV3 began rebroadcasting the series on 5 January 2010, and again on 24 May 2010. In Pakistan it has been aired on a number of channels such as Cartoon Network, Starlite TV, Raavi and on Syndicated Networks as well.
Spin-offs.
The animated series.
Bean was revived in a 2002–2004 animated cartoon series, again featuring little dialogue, with most being either little soundbites or mumbling. The series, which consist of 26 episodes (with 2 segments each), expanded the number of additional characters, featuring Bean's unpleasant landlady, Mrs. Wicket, and her evil one-eyed cat, Scrapper. Atkinson provided the voice for Bean, and all of the animated Bean actions are taken from Atkinson himself. Other characters' voices are provided by Jon Glover, Rupert Degas, Gary Martin and Lorelei King. A video game based on the Animated series was released on 14 December 2007 and was a third person platformer. The games were released on PAL only for PS2, Nintendo DS, and Wii (called Mr. Bean's Wacky World).
Film adaptations.
Two films featuring Bean have been released. The first, "Bean: The Ultimate Disaster Movie" was directed by Mel Smith and released in 1997. This broke from the programme's tradition by using a subplot with more developed characters – instead of being the sole centre of attention, Bean here interacted with a suburban Californian family he stayed with while overseeing the transfer of "Whistler's Mother" to a Los Angeles art gallery. The film grossed over US$250 million globally ($45 million in the USA) on a budget estimated at $22 million.
News broke out in March 2005 that a second "Bean" film, "Mr. Bean's Holiday" was in development, with Atkinson returning in the title role. The film had been through several changes of name during its development, including "Bean 2" and "French Bean". Filming began on 15 May 2006 and began post-production in October 2006. It was released in the UK on 30 March 2007. On 17 July 2007, the North American premiere was held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, at the Just For Laughs festival; the launching pad for the Mr. Bean character 20 years earlier. The film was then released nationwide in North America on 24 August 2007. The film follows Bean on an eventful journey across France for a holiday in the French Riviera, which after a number of misfortunes culminates in an unscheduled screening of his video diary at the Cannes Film Festival. It was directed by Steve Bendelack and, according to Atkinson, is the last appearance of Bean. It grossed nearly US$230 million globally ($33 million in the USA).
The London 2012 Olympic opening ceremony.
The character as represented by Atkinson plays a single note on a synthesiser in the performance of "Chariots of Fire" during the 2012 Summer Olympics opening ceremony. Instead of his usual dress, he wears white tie tuxedo suit like the other musicians around him. During his performance, he becomes bored with playing the same note repeatedly on the synthesiser and gets jealous of the more interesting part that another member of the orchestra playing with him has on the grand piano. Still remaining bored, he takes out his mobile and takes a picture of himself, looking chuffed. He then sneezes in a comical fashion and tries to retrieve his handkerchief from his bag behind him. He finds that he cannot reach and has to keep playing the note with his umbrella to retrieve it. When he finally blows his nose, he throws his handkerchief into the grand piano. He then falls asleep continuing to play the note.
In a dream sequence, it is the opening scene of the film "Chariots of Fire" where they are running across a beach, except Mr. Bean is running with them. He begins to fall behind, until he hails a car to overtake all the others. In front and running, a runner tries to overtake Bean but is tripped by him. He crosses the line with elation and then he wakes up. The rest of the orchestra had stopped playing while he continues his one recurring note. Realising this, and upon encouragement from conductor Simon Rattle, he plays an extended flourish and lastly touches a note that makes a flatulent sound then stops. In November 2012, Atkinson told newspaper "The Daily Telegraph" he was looking at retiring the character, as "someone in their 50s being childlike becomes a little sad".
Books.
Two books were released related to the original series: "Mr. Bean's Diary" in 1992 and "Mr. Bean's Pocket Diary" in 1994. The two books have identical content and differ only in the format in which they are printed. The content of both is a template diary with handwritten content scrawled in by Mr. Bean. They provide some additional information on the setting: for example, they establish that Mr. Bean lives in Highbury and rents his flat from a landlady named Mrs. Wicket. They confirm the name of Mr. Bean's girlfriend as "Irma Gobb", and also give the name of the other man she actually dances with in "Mr. Bean Goes to Town" (Giles Gummer). An additional book called "Mr. Bean's Diary" was released in 2002 to accompany the animated series; this book was also graded as a children's reader.
Video and DVD releases.
The series was available on a number of Thames Television VHS compilations. In the United Kingdom (Region 2), episodes of "Mr. Bean" were released on a yearly basis by Universal Pictures UK from 2004. The complete collection is now available, including the two feature films and other extras. In the United States (Region 1), the complete series has been available since 2003 on A&E Home Video as "The Whole Bean".
The record-selling UK videos were withdrawn shortly before the release of "Bean", and DVDs were released on an annual basis as of 2004.
In August 2009 an official YouTube channel was launched featuring content from the live action and animated series.
Popular culture.
The sale of "Mr Bean" worldwide has enabled his character to secure a place in the popular culture of several countries. Notably, a number of public figures have been compared to the character, usually as an insult. Tony Blair, then-Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, was identified by Homer Simpson as "Mr. Bean" when his cartoon form greeted the Simpsons to the United Kingdom in an episode of the eponymous programme, allegedly demonstrating the stereotypical view of the British by Americans.
Arthur Batchelor, one of the Royal Navy captives held by Iran during the 2007 Iranian seizure of Royal Navy personnel, has stated that some of his captors had mocked him calling him "Mr. Bean". NRL Referee Sean Hampstead is regularly nicknamed "Mr. Bean" in nationally broadcast commentary by Australian television/radio personality Ray Warren as a result of his similar appearance. In 2007, Vincent Cable, the acting leader of the Liberal Democrats, described the recent decline in Prime Minister Gordon Brown's fortunes as his "remarkable transformation in the last few weeks from Stalin to Mr. Bean". The former Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero is often mocked in his own country for his facial resemblance to Mr. Bean, and a computer hacker broke into Spain's official website for its presidency of the European Union, inserting the character on the front page of the website. Satirists have also compared Zapatero to Mr. Bean when discussing government policies that are deemed to have been unsuccessful.
Several of the visual jokes in the series have been used as experiments on the Discovery Channel's "MythBusters" series. In episode 52 – "Mind Control", the idea of painting a room with a stick of explosives (Firework, or other) placed in a paint can, as in the episode "Do-It-Yourself, Mr. Bean", was tested and deemed impossible, as adequate coverage was not achieved.
An image of Mr. Bean has also been used as an internet meme usually accompanied by the statement, "if you know what I mean."
Though Rowan Atkinson is not typecast to characters like Mr. Bean, he has played similar characters in other works, such as Enrico in the 2001 film "Rat Race".
In Tetsuo Hara and Buronson's manga "Souten no Ken", a parody of Mr. Bean can be found in a minor character appearing in chapter 45, contained in vol. 5. In it, a barman identical to Mr. Bean tends the main character Kenshiro Kasumi, for comic relief.
In the video game "Resident Evil 2", during the opening sequence in the streets of Raccoon City, Mr. Bean's British Leyland Mini 1000 can be seen parked against a barricade.
"Mr. Bean" has also been influential on later series, such as "The World of Lee Evans".
"Private Eye" magazine features a cartoon strip, The Adventures of Mr Milibean, in which British Labour party leader Ed Miliband is drawn as Bean.
Rowan Atkinson performed as this character at the Opening Ceremony of the 2012 Olympics during "Chariots of Fire" with the London Symphony Orchestra.
