Looper is a 2012 American science fiction action film written and directed by Rian Johnson. The film stars Bruce Willis, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, and Emily Blunt. In "Looper", time travel is invented by the year 2074 and, though immediately outlawed, is used by criminal organizations to send those they want killed into the past where they are killed by "loopers", assassins paid with silver bars strapped to their targets. Joe, a looper, encounters himself when his older self is sent back in time to be killed.
"Looper" was selected as the opening film of the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival. It was released to positive reviews in Australia on September 27, 2012, and in the US and the UK on September 28, 2012 by TriStar Pictures and Alliance Films.
Plot.
In the year 2044, 25-year-old Joseph Simmons (Gordon-Levitt), works for a mafia company in Kansas City as a "looper". Led by a man sent from the future named Abe (Daniels), loopers kill and dispose of victims sent back in time from 2074, and are paid by employers with bars of silver attached to the target. Additionally, when a looper is retired, the looper's future self is sent back in time exactly thirty years as a routine target, but with a gold bar payment; this event is referred to as "closing the loop", and, similarly to routine hits, carries serious consequences if not carried out.
One night, Seth (Dano), Joe's friend and a fellow looper who is a telekinetic, visits him in a panic; on the verge of closing his own loop, Seth's future self (Brennan) warned him of a mysterious character called the Rainmaker, who overran the future crime bosses and was retiring all of the loopers' contracts in 2074, resulting in numerous premature looper deaths. Hesitating, Seth unintentionally allowed his future self to escape, and is being hunted by his employers for failing to close his own loop. Joe hides Seth in his apartment and is taken to Abe; under threat of losing half of all his silver, Joe reluctantly tells Abe where he hid Seth. Mutilating the young version of Seth, Abe scares the future Seth into returning by violently damaging his past self's body; upon returning, however, the future Seth is killed to close his loop.
When Joe closes his own loop, he shoots his older self (Willis) without hesitation, as his head is sacked and is therefore initially unidentifiable. He retires to Shanghai, China, where he later falls in love and marries. After his 30 years pass, Joe is taken from his home to be sent back to 2044 to close the loop, but his wife is killed in the process. Fighting and killing his captors as a result, Joe returns to 2044 unmasked and unbound, allowing him to surprise his younger self and avoid death. Later meeting his younger self, old Joe explains he still returned to 2044 to kill the Rainmaker as a child. Young Joe, still trying to close his loop, ends up in a struggle trying to kill old Joe. Stealing a map containing coordinates and a code from old Joe, young Joe then flees when Kid Blue (Segan) and Abe's men appear with the intent to kill them.
Young Joe, following the map, reaches a farm house owned by Sara (Blunt) and her son Cid (Gagnon). When Joe shows Sara the map, Sara recognizes the code as Cid's birthday along with the zip code of the hospital he was born in, prompting Joe to discover old Joe is going to kill the three children that could become the Rainmaker. Joe then decides to wait at the farm for the arrival of his older self, and becomes close to Sara. Joe soon learns that Sara is a telekinetic, and that Cid was raised by Sara's sister for most of his life until she was accidentally killed by Cid. One morning, they are attacked by one of Abe's thugs named Jesse (Dillahunt), who is killed when Cid falls into a rage and lets out a large telekinetic blast. Cid's extraordinary telekinetic powers – which are far more powerful than any other mutant's – cause Joe to realize that he is the Rainmaker; however, the realization radically changes old Joe's memories, tipping him off that Cid is the Rainmaker. Before old Joe can act, however, Kid Blue captures him.
Escaping capture, old Joe kills Abe and his gang, and heads for Sara's house. Kid Blue, reaching the farm, is fought and killed by young Joe; concurrently, old Joe pursues Sara and Cid into the farm cane fields where he maims Cid, resulting in Cid causing a telekinetic blast. Before Cid can kill old Joe, Sara calms and reassures him to stop his telekinetic rage; then, telling Cid to run, Sara stands in old Joe's path to stop him shooting Cid. Young Joe realizes that his older self will shoot Sara and enrage Cid, perpetuating the creation of the Rainmaker rather than preventing it. Unable to stop his older self, and knowing it's his last chance to stop the Rainmaker, young Joe instead shoots himself; by doing so, he erases his future self through suicide, saving Sara and potentially preventing Cid from becoming the Rainmaker.
Production.
"Looper" was written and directed by Rian Johnson. After Johnson released "The Brothers Bloom" in 2008, he re-teamed with producer Ram Bergman, who produced Johnson's previous two films, with the goal of starting production of "Looper" in 2009. In May 2010, Joseph Gordon-Levitt was cast in one of the lead roles, which he would play after completing "Premium Rush". Later in the month, Bruce Willis was also cast. In the following October, Emily Blunt joined Gordon-Levitt and Willis. Noah Segan, Jeff Daniels, and Piper Perabo were cast in January 2011. 
Filming began in Louisiana on January 24, 2012.
Makeup artist Kazuhiro Tsuji created the prosthetics that Gordon-Levitt wore in the film so that he would physically resemble Willis.
The film's score was composed by Nathan Johnson, Rian Johnson's cousin.
Release.
"Looper" premiered on September 6, 2012 at the opening night of the Toronto International Film Festival. The film was then released theatrically in the United States on , 2012. The film's studio Endgame Entertainment negotiated a deal with FilmDistrict at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2011, for FilmDistrict to release the film in the United States through TriStar Pictures.
The Chinese release of the film reintegrates a substantial number of scenes set in Shanghai that were edited out due to pacing reasons. The move was requested by Chinese production company DMG Entertainment in order to further appeal to Chinese audiences. 
Johnson released a free audio commentary on SoundCloud to be downloaded and listened to during the film, with the warning: "Needless to say, this is NOT to be listened to on a first viewing, or before you've seen the film."
Home media.
The film was released on Blu-ray and DVD in North America on December 31, 2012. The film will also be released on January 28, 2013 in online UK stores and a general release on February 4, 2013. The US iTunes store released the film on December 21, 2012 to own in HD and SD forms as part of an early release deal it has on certain films.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Looper" holds a 93% "Certified Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 240 reviews and an average score of 8.1/10, with the reported consensus: "As thought-provoking as it is thrilling, Looper delivers an uncommonly smart, bravely original blend of futuristic sci-fi and good old-fashioned action." On Metacritic, the film holds an 84/100 average rating based on 44 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".
Barbara Fowler wrote: ""Looper" can be viewed as the story of a moral journey out of depravity. Joe starts out at the lowest point possible – a ruthless murderer, ready to kill people he does not know for monetary gain; "taking his silver" after each killing evokes Judas Iscariot's thirty pieces of silver. When first offered a chance to morally redeem himself he fails, betraying his friend rather than part with his ill-gotten silver. (…) In the life which he "originally" lived and which led to his becoming "the old self" in the film, loving Xu and being loved by her had been a purifying experience in an otherwise "dirty" life – but when Xu is killed, Joe regards the end of bringing her back to life as justifying the means of killing innocent children. His younger self, finding love at an earlier age, takes at the film's climatic moment the ultimate choice of sacrificing himself in order to save both his beloved and her child, thus finally atoning for his murderous career and achieving redemption".
Toronto International Film Festival.
James Mottram of "Total Film" gave "Looper" 5 stars out of 5, concluding that it was "the best sci-fi movie since "Moon". The best time-travel yarn since "12 Monkeys". And one of the best films of 2012." 
Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" gave the film a positive review, calling it "an engaging, neatly worked-out time-travel sci-fi thriller", but also criticizing the effects involved in making Gordon-Levitt resemble Willis: "At first, the effect is a bit odd, and you can't quite put your finger on what's off; then it feels downright weird to be looking at a version of Gordon-Levitt who is no longer the actor you've known for a few years now." 
Peter Debruge of "Variety" also gave the film a positive review, writing that writer-director Johnson's "grandly conceived, impressively mounted third feature shows a giddy, geeky interest in science-fiction, then forces it into the back seat and lets the multidimensional characters drive. In a genre infamous for loose ends, this thinking man's thriller marshals action, romance and a dose of very dark comedy toward a stunning payoff."
General release.
Kim Newman of "Empire" magazine gave "Looper" 5 stars out of 5, writing, "Intelligent science-fiction sometimes seems an endangered species—too much physics and there's a risk of creating something cold and remote, too many explosions and get lost in the multiplex. "Looper" isn't perfect, but it pulls off the full "Wizard Of Oz": it has a brain, courage and a heart." Noel Murray of "The A.V. Club" gave the film an A− grade, writing, ""Looper" is a remarkable feat of imagination and execution, entertaining from start to finish, even as it asks the audience to contemplate how and why humanity keeps making the same rotten mistakes." Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" gave the film a positive review, writing, ""Looper" is way inventive but it wears its creativity lightly, like it's no big deal. This is a highflying, super-stylish science-fiction thriller that brings a fresh approach to mind-bending genre material. We're not always sure where this time-travel film is going, but we wouldn't dream of abandoning the ride."
Claudia Puig of "USA Today" gave the film 3.5 stars out of 4, writing, ""Looper"s heady blend of time travel, gritty action and a jot of romance is such a thrilling and cerebral mind-bender that it will likely have moviegoers gathering outside the theater afterward to hash out details of its intricately constructed universe. Not that that's a bad thing." Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" also gave the film 3.5 stars out of 4, praising the performances of Willis and Gordon-Levitt and concluding, "Lacing tremendously exciting action with touching gravity, "Looper" hits you like a shot in the heart." Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" also gave the film 3.5 stars out of 4, praising its screenplay and writing, ""Looper", a smart and tricky sci-fi story, sidesteps the paradoxes of time travel by embracing them. Most time travel movies run into trouble in the final scenes, when impossibilities pile up one upon another. This film leads to a startling conclusion that wipes out the story's paradoxes so neatly it's as if it never happened."
Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the film a B+ grade, writing, "The time swivels in "Looper" evoke some of "Inception"s fancy temporal tricks (some of which, of course, also involved Gordon-Levitt straddling multiple time zones at once). But it's the glimpses of "Children of Men"-like societal dystopia that give the movie its real weight". Keith Staskiewicz, also writing for "Entertainment Weekly" (reviewing the DVD) and also giving a "B+", said, "The film's premise is markedly inventive, and Rian Johnson spends a lot of time making his universe seem lived-in and believable, but he's not just concerned with whiz-bang what-ifs. The showdown of selves illuminates just how little Gordon-Levitt's character has changed over the intervening years, stuck as he is in a feedback loop of drug use and violence despite his pipe dream of moving to Europe. The retro trench coats and firearms also suggest a sort of eternal recurrence, and as "Looper"'s plot gets more complex, its central question simplifies: If we can't fix our mistakes, can we at least make sure we don't repeat the same ones over and over again?"
Richard Corliss of "Time" magazine gave the film a positive review, calling "Looper" a "hybrid, mashing Quentin Tarantino and Philip K. Dick into a species of pulp science fiction" and also writing, "A fanciful film with the patina of hyper-realism, "Looper" is well served by actors who behave not as if they were dropped carelessly into the future but spent their whole desperate lives there." Dana Stevens of "Slate" gave the film a mixed review, writing, ""Looper" felt to me like a maddening near-miss: It posits an impossible but fascinating-to-imagine relationship – a face-to-face encounter between one's present and future self, in which each self must account for its betrayal of the other – and then throws away nearly all the dramatic potential that relationship offers."
Audiences polled by the market research firm CinemaScore gave the film a B+ grade on average.
