Daryl Dixon is a fictional character from the American television series "The Walking Dead", portrayed by Norman Reedus. He is an original character and has no comic counterpart. He has become immensely popular since his first appearance, emerging as a major fan-favorite and was subsequently featured in a Super Bowl XLVII commercial for Time Warner Cable.
Daryl is a Southern hunter and expert tracker who constantly lives in the shadow of his brother, Merle. Like his brother, he is initially shown as volatile and short-tempered, but is tolerated by the group due to his survival skills. Daryl becomes furious when Merle goes missing, eventually leading Rick Grimes to start a search party for him. However, they are unable to find Merle. It is later revealed in Season 3, that Merle and Daryl had initially intended to ransack the Atlanta group of supplies.
As the series progresses, Daryl becomes more independent and eventually starts to bond with the group. At the end of the second season, he becomes Rick's right-hand man as Shane becomes more & more unhinged. By season 3, Daryl has largely shed his aloof personality with the exception of dealing with strangers, and is shown to be an extremely proficient zombie killer and has become Rick's trusted henchman. He also becomes "the go-to guy" of sorts for the group. 
Daryl appears as the main playable protagonist in the 2013 video game "", focusing on him and Merle during the early days of the zombie apocalypse.
Fictional character biography.
In their childhood, Daryl and his older brother, Merle, lived with an abusive, alcoholic father. He was raised by Merle, though Merle was often away (sometimes serving time in juvenile institutions). Daryl spent significant periods of time alone and, throughout these lonely periods, learned to fend for himself and adopted a hard-boiled survivalist mindset.
Daryl first appears furious when the scavenging survivors, along with Rick, return to the campsite without Merle. Daryl becomes upset with Rick for handcuffing Merle to a roof, and with T-Dog who admits to dropping the key. He, Rick, Glenn, and T-Dog soon head back into the city to rescue Merle, only to find his severed hand in the place where he had been left. Daryl grieves for his brother for a short time before managing to bottle up his emotions and continuing to put on a strong appearance. While he and the others search the streets for any sign of Merle, they run into a band of thugs, one of whom is captured by the group and threatened numerous times by Daryl. After realizing that the "thugs" are merely nursing home employees and intend no harm, they return to the camp. Shortly following their return, zombies invade the campsite and kill many of the survivors. The following morning, Daryl helps impale, carry and burn the dead survivors (one of whom he allows Carol to impale because he was her abusive husband).
When the survivors find out that Jim has been bitten, Rick thwarts Daryl's attempts to kill Jim. Instead, Daryl is convinced to let Jim die peacefully in the woods, even though Daryl secretly wishes that he could have killed him beforehand. Daryl and the others briefly find respite at the CDC, enjoying the luxuries the facility has to offer, including hot water and couches to sleep on. He enjoys dinner and wine with everyone and learns about TS-19 and Dr. Jenner's work, as well as the fall of the CDC's infrastructure. He is enraged when Jenner attempts to lock them inside the building that is about to blow up and attempts to kill Jenner. The group is successfully able to escape due to Rick's grenade, which shatters the windows. Daryl drives off as the ruins burn.
In season 2, Daryl is shown to be calmer and more cooperative and has developed fledgling friendships with various group members. He also reveals a more compassionate side, defending fellow group members' lives from zombies on multiple occasions and assisting them in their times of need. It is he who searches the most for Carol's missing daughter, Sophia, and refuses to give up. 
He slowly begins to form a bond with Carol, who was previously a victim of abuse like he was. She befriends him and encourages him to think better of himself. Following the revelation that Sophia reanimated as a zombie and was in the barn, he becomes emotionally detached from everyone and hesitates to go out looking for people anymore. Carol attempts to bring him back into the fold of the group, much to his frustration, and he attempts to avoid the group as much as possible, especially Carol. After a time, Daryl starts to warm to the group again; he participates in meetings and helps out Rick and Shane with their prisoner, Randall. Daryl shoots Dale out of mercy when he is fatally attacked by a walker, as Rick is hesitant to kill him, and attempts to convince Daryl that they should go it alone when Rick's leadership is in doubt. Daryl asks Carol what she really wants, and she declares she wants "a man of honour"; Daryl responds, "Rick's got honour."
While it is implied in season 1 that he may share his brother's racist beliefs, they are not as apparent in season 2; this suggests that he may have overcome them after being forced to work with the group. However, the motorcycle that Daryl rides throughout much of season 2 bares an insignia used by the Schutzstaffel that is commonly featured in Nazi and white supremacist ideology. In season 2, Daryl hints to Dale that the motorcycle was Merle's. In the final episode of season 2, he jokes that he could identify Glenn by his driving, due to Glenn being Asian (a joke which Glenn laughs off). Daryl usually has a serious demeanour, but occasionally makes wry comments and jokes to break the tension. By season 3, he has become a responsible, trusted and loyal member of the group. His loyalties are tested when he learns that his brother is still alive and working for an opposing group.
During the group's attack on Woodbury, Daryl is captured. After accusing Merle of treason, The Governor orders the brothers to fight to the death in the Woodbury arena, with its citizens surrounding them and screaming with blood lust. Daryl and Merle escape after intervention from Rick and Maggie. Eventually, the present group members disagree with letting him back in. When he antagonizes the group, Rick knocks him out as they further discuss his re-entry. It is decided that they will not welcome Merle back; in response, Daryl leaves with Merle. He saves a Mexican family from walkers with minimal help from Merle. Following the rescue Merle attempts to loot the family's car but Daryl stops him. Daryl decides to go back to the prison; he and Merle get into an argument as Daryl walks away. Merle accidentally rips his shirt, revealing scars on Daryl's back from their dad as kids. Daryl hurriedly covers his back and walks off. Merle is hesitant to follow as he knows he'll never be accepted into the group, but he follows. They then save Rick outside the prison when a herd of walkers are let loose by The Governor and his followers.
Reception.
Daryl Dixon was originally a recurring character, but, due to his popularity he was upgraded to the main cast in Season 2. As of Season 3 he receives 4th place in top billing and has become one of the main protagonists of the series. 
Daryl Dixon has become a fan favorite character. Fan groups such as "Dixon's Vixens" follow the character and Norman Reedus in other roles.
"Entertainment Weekly" featured Reedus as Daryl, on the cover of an issue previewing season 3 of "The Walking Dead".
