Katherine Webb (born April 24, 1989) is an American model, beauty queen, and television personality. She was Miss Alabama USA 2012 and is perhaps best known for her appearance during the broadcast of the 2013 BCS National Championship Game.
Early life.
Webb was born in Montgomery, Alabama. She attended middle school and high school in Columbus, Georgia, and graduated from Northside High School in 2007. She then attended Auburn University. She graduated from Auburn in May 2011 with a Bachelor of Science degree in business management and administration.
She worked at Chick-fil-A in Columbus, Georgia, as a training director. She also models professionally for clients in New York, Los Angeles, Miami, and Atlanta.
Pageant history.
In 2007, Webb ranked in the Top 15 for the title of Miss Georgia USA. She was crowned Miss Alabama USA in 2012, and then went on to finish in the Top 10 of the Miss USA 2012 competition.
BCS National Championship Game appearance.
Webb, who is the girlfriend of Alabama quarterback A. J. McCarron, gained national attention during the 2013 BCS National Championship Game telecast, in which announcer Brent Musburger talked about Webb when the broadcast image centered on her as she stood watching the game in the audience. Musburger referred to her as a "lovely lady" and "beautiful", and remarked to his broadcast partner, former quarterback Kirk Herbstreit, "You quarterbacks get all the good-looking women".
After the game, media coverage of Musburger's remarks on Webb was widespread. Some of the media coverage of Webb had focused on her being an Auburn University graduate, because of the long Auburn-Alabama sports rivalry. Many media commentators compared Musberger's remarks on Webb to Musberger's earlier remarks on the then-unknown Jenn Sterger at the 2005 Florida State-Miami game; Musberger had pointed out Sterger in the crowd and said "1,500 red-blooded Americans just decided to apply to Florida State", thereby launching Sterger to fame and eventually a career in journalism.
Due to the incident, the number of followers on Webb's Twitter account jumped overnight from about 2,000 to over 175,000. Among her new Twitter followers were NBA star LeBron James, and Webb received messages from NFL defensive end Darnell Dockett and Georgia Bulldogs quarterback Aaron Murray. The next day, the phrase "AJ McCarron girlfriend" was one of Google's highest trending terms, with over 1 million searches. A YouTube video of her appearance in the game has garnered over 3 million views.
Some of the coverage was critical of Musburger's comments as sexist, and an ESPN spokesperson issued an apology. Webb herself said that she was not offended by Musburger's comments.Webb told Matt Lauer that she wasn’t offended by the remarks and didn’t feel an apology from ESPN was necessary.
“I think the media has been really unfair to ,” Webb said. “I think that if he would have said … that we were hot or sexy or made any derogatory statements like that, I think that would have been a little bit different. But the fact that he said we were beautiful and gorgeous, I don’t see why any woman wouldn’t be flattered by that.”<ref>
