Halo is a multi-billion dollar science fiction video game franchise created by Bungie and now managed by 343 Industries and owned by Microsoft Studios. The series centers on an interstellar war between humanity and a theocratic alliance of aliens known as the Covenant. The Covenant are led by their religious leaders, The Prophets, and worship an ancient civilization known as the Forerunners, who perished in combat with the parasitic Flood. Many of the games center on the experiences of Master Chief John-117, a cybernetically enhanced human super-soldier, and his artificial intelligence (AI) companion, Cortana. The term "Halo" refers to the Halo rings: large, habitable structures that were created by the Forerunners to destroy the Flood. They are similar to the Orbitals in Iain M Banks' "Culture" novels, and author Larry Niven's "Ringworld" concept.
The games in the series have been praised as being among the best first-person shooters on a video game console, and are considered the Xbox's "killer app". This has led to the term ""Halo" killer" being used to describe console games that aspire, or are considered, to be better than "Halo". Fueled by the success of ', and immense marketing campaigns from publisher Microsoft, its sequels went on to break various sales records. "Halo 3" sold more than US$170 million worth of copies in the first twenty-four hours of release, breaking the record set by "Halo 2" three years prior. ', in turn, broke the record set by "Halo 3", selling US$200 million worth of copies on its first day of release. Continuing the trend, "Halo 4" broke '"s" record on its opening day by grossing US$220 million. The games have sold over 50 million copies worldwide, with the games alone grossing almost $3.4 billion.
Strong sales of the games led to the franchise's expansion to other media; there are multiple bestselling novels, graphic novels, and other licensed products. "Halo Wars" took the franchise into new video game genre territory, as it is a real-time strategy game, while the rest of the games in the series are first-person shooters. Beyond the original trilogy, Bungie developed the expansion ', and a prequel, ', their last project for the franchise. A high-definition remake of the first game entitled "" was released on November 15th, 2011, exactly ten years after the release of the original. A new installment in a second trilogy of games, "Halo 4", was released on November 6, 2012.
The cultural impact of the "Halo" series has been compared by writer Brian Bendis to that of "Star Wars". The collective group of fans of the series is referred to as the "Halo Nation".
Story overview.
In the distant past, an intellectual race called the Forerunners fought an alien parasite known as the Flood. The Flood, which spread through infestation of sentient life, overran much of the Milky Way Galaxy. One of the races affected was humanity, who went into space and came into conflict with the Forerunners. Exhausted by their war and after having explored all other options, the Forerunners conceived a weapon of last resort to combat the Flood. Using an installation known as the Ark, they built large ring-shaped megastructures known as Halos. The Halo Array, when activated, would destroy all sentient life in the galaxy—depriving the Flood of their food. Delaying as long as they could, the Forerunners activated the rings and disappeared.
Tens of thousands of years later, in the 26th century, humanity—under the auspices of the United Nations Space Command, or UNSC—colonize many worlds thanks to the development of faster-than-light "slipspace" travel. Tensions escalate between the older and more stable "Inner Colonies" and the remote "Outer Colonies", leading to civil war. The UNSC creates an elite group of enhanced supersoldiers, known as Spartans, to suppress the rebellion covertly. In the year 2525, the human colony of Harvest falls under attack by a theocratic alliance of alien races known as the Covenant. The Covenant leadership declares humanity heretics and an affront to their gods—the Forerunners—and begins a holy war of genocide. The Covenant's superior technology and numbers prove decisive advantages; though effective, the Spartans are too few in number to turn the tide of battle in humanity's favor.
In 2552, the Covenant arrive at Reach, the UNSC's last major stronghold beyond Earth, and launch an invasion of the planet. The last Spartans and UNSC military are unable to stop the Covenant from bombarding the surface with plasma. Following directives to avoid leading the Covenant to Earth, Cortana, the AI aboard the fleeing UNSC ship "Pillar of Autumn", selects random coordinates that lead the ship to a Halo installation. The Covenant follow, damaging the "Autumn" and leading its crew to take the fight to the ring's surface. The Covenant accidentally release Flood imprisoned on the ring; in order to nullify the threat, the ring's AI caretaker, 343 Guilty Spark, enlists the help of the Spartan, John-117, or Master Chief. However, before the pair can activate Halo's defenses, Cortana reveals that Halo's activation would mean their own destruction. Master Chief and Cortana instead detonate the "Autumn"s engines, destroying Halo and preventing the escape of the Flood. They return to Earth with a few other human survivors, warning of an impending Covenant attack.
The Covenant, unaware of the destructive nature of the rings, attempt to fire another ring, Installation 05, in order to fulfill their religious prophecy. and to do so launch an attack on Earth. Helping the Chief to defend the Earth are Sergeant Avery Johnson and Commander Miranda Keyes. One race in the Covenant, the Elites, learn the truth about the rings, and join forces with humanity in order to stop the firing of the ring. Though they are successful, the unexpected shutdown of the installation triggers a fail-safe protocol, priming all the rings for firing from one location, referred to as the Ark. Still oblivious to the true nature of the rings, the Covenant High Prophet of Truth and the remaining loyalist Covenant proceed to head to Earth, where they believe the Ark is buried. A battle rages on Earth between human forces, the Covenant and a Flood-infected army. Eventually, the Covenant is repulsed and flees through a slipspace portal, and the Flood is purged from Earth, resulting in the devastation of Africa.
Following a message Cortana left aboard the Flood ship, the Chief, Arbiter, Elites, Johnson, Keyes and their troops follow Truth through the portal. Joining them is 343 Guilty Spark, who aids the Chief as he has no function to fulfill after the destruction of his ringworld. Traveling through the portal, the humans and Elites discover an immense artificial structure known as the Ark, far beyond the edges of the Milky Way galaxy. The Flood arrive "en masse" aboard "High Charity", the Covenant's 'holy city', and begin infesting the installation, Johnson is captured by Truth. Gravemind, a being representing the group-mind of the Flood, actually aids Arbiter and the Chief in finding Truth, since the activation of the Ark would doom its species. They find Keyes, who had tried to mount a solo rescue, dead and Johnson being used by Truth to activate the Ark. The Chief and Arbiter stop the activation, and Arbiter kills Truth before he can be consumed by the Flood. The group then discover that the Ark is constructing a new Halo ring to replace the one the Chief destroyed. The Chief decides to activate this Halo; the ringworld would eliminate the Flood infestation on the Ark while sparing the galaxy at large from destruction. To activate the ring, the Chief rescues Cortana, who has the Activation Index of the destroyed Halo, from "High Charity".
The Chief, Arbiter, and Johnson travel to Halo's control room to activate the ring. Guilty Spark explains that because the ring is not yet complete, a premature activation will destroy it and the Ark. When Johnson ignores his warning, Guilty Spark kills him to protect "his" ring. The Chief and Arbiter destroy Guilty Spark, activate the ring, and escape the ring's self-destruction on the UNSC frigate "Forward Unto Dawn". However, the force of Halo's blast causes the slipspace portal to collapse, resulting in only the front half of "Forward Unto Dawn", carrying the Arbiter, making it back to Earth. Believing the Chief to have perished, a memorial service is held on Earth for the fallen heroes of the Human-Covenant war. After the memorial service, the Arbiter and his Elite brethren departs for their home planet. But it is shown that the rear half of "Forward Unto Dawn" is floating in space, with the Chief and Cortana on board. Cortana activates a distress beacon and the Chief goes into hibernation.
Four years after the destruction of the Ark, the Chief and Cortana awake to find they are being attacked by a Covenant splinter group. Caught in an artificial gravity well, they are pulled down, with the remains of the "Forward Unto Dawn", onto the artificial Forerunner planet of Requiem.. Upon receiving a signal from the UNSC ship "Infinity", whish received the "Dawn"'s signal and is eventually captured in the gravity well, they go to the planet's core to deactivate what seem to be signal jammers: but, instead, they release a hostile Forerunner warrior called the Didact. The Chief and Cortana narrowly escape and, fighting both Covenant and AI soldiers called Prometheans, they reach the "Infinity". During this time, Cortana reveals that she is becoming Rampant, a state in AIs when their knowledge base becomes too large and gradually go insane. Upon going to destroy the gravity well, a Forerunner consciousness called the Librarian tells him about the Didact: during the crisis with the Flood, the Didact tried to use a device called the Composer (meant to turn lifeforms into digital beings immune to infection, but instead created horrific abominations) on humanity, a race he hated because of the war between their races, turning them into an army to fight the Flood. He was imprisoned by his own race, with Forerunner soldiers and humans he had already converted, the Prometheans, as his guardians.
Defying the "Infinity" captain's orders to retire the increasingly erratic Cortana and escaping to chase after the Didact, he tries to deny him the Composer, hidden in an asteroid belt near one of the old Halo rings. He fails to stop the Didact, who reactivates the Composer and converts the humans on the research station set up to study it. Following the Composer through slipspace to Earth, the Chief and Cortana get on board and prepared to destroy the Composer and the Didact. The Chief brings a nuke on board, while Cortana sends her Rampant personality spikes into the system, disrupting the Didact's shield. The Didact tries to kill the Chief, but Cortana intervenes, allowing the Chief to defeat the Didact and set off the nuke, destroying the Composer and saving the Earth. Cortana performs one final act for the Chief, shielding him from the blast and leaving him for the UNSC ships to rescue: but, while the Master Chief survives, Cortana perishes with the Composer.
Game series.
Original trilogy.
ImageSize = width:250 height:500
PlotArea = left:50 bottom:10 top:10 right:0
DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/2001 till:01/01/2013
TimeAxis = orientation:vertical
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:1 start:2001
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:1 start:2001
Colors =
Define $dx = 25 # shift text to right side of bar
Define $up = shift:($dx,3)
Define $dw = shift:($dx,-8)
PlotData=
</timeline>
The games of the main "Halo" trilogy were developed by Bungie, and are first-person shooters in which the player experiences most action from the protagonist's perspective. The first title in the series is the Xbox version of "", released on November 15, 2001. The game was initially intended to be released for Mac OS and Microsoft Windows platforms, until Microsoft's purchase of Bungie in 2000 led to the game becoming an Xbox launch title and platform exclusive. "Halo: Combat Evolved" introduced many gameplay and plot themes common to the whole trilogy. Players battle various aliens on foot and in vehicles to complete objectives, while attempting to uncover the secrets of the eponymous Halo. One concept introduced in "Halo: Combat Evolved", is limiting the number of weapons players could carry to two, forcing them to carefully select their preferred armament. Players fight with ranged and melee attacks, as well as a limited number of grenades. Bungie refers to the "weapons-grenades-melee" format as the "Golden Triangle of "Halo"", which has remained fundamentally unchanged throughout the trilogy. In "Halo: Combat Evolved", the player's health is measured in both hit points and a continually recharging energy shield. A Windows and Mac OS X port was later developed by Gearbox Software, and released on September 30 and November 11, 2003 respectively. A stand-alone expansion, entitled "Halo: Custom Edition", was released as a Windows exclusive, and allowed players to create custom content for the game.
Its sequel, "Halo 2" was released on the Xbox on November 9, 2004 and later for Windows Vista on May 17, 2007. For the first time, the game was released in two different editions: a standard edition with just the game disc and traditional Xbox packaging; and the Collector's Edition with a specially designed aluminum case, along with an additional bonus DVD, extra booklet, and slightly different user manual. "Halo 2" introduced new gameplay elements, chief among them the ability to hold and fire two weapons simultaneously, known as "dual wielding". Unlike its predecessor, "Halo 2" fully supported online multiplayer via Xbox Live. The game uses "matchmaking" to facilitate joining online matches by grouping players looking for certain types of games. This was a change from the more traditional "server list" approach, which was used to find matches in online games at this time. Upon release, "Halo 2" became the game played by the most people on the Xbox Live service that week; it retained this title for over two years — the longest streak any game has held the spot.
"Halo 3" is the final game in the main "Halo" trilogy, ending the story arc begun in "Halo: Combat Evolved". The game was released on the Xbox 360 on September 25, 2007. It adds to the series new vehicles, new weapons, and a class of items called equipment. The game also includes a limited map-editing tool, known as the Forge, which allows players to insert game objects, such as weapons and crates, into existing multiplayer map geometry. Players can also save a recording of their gameplay sessions, and view them as video, from any angle.
Reclaimer trilogy.
At E3 2011, Microsoft announced the development of "Halo 4", as the first entry in a new series of "Halo" games dubbed the "Reclaimer" trilogy. "Halo 4" was released worldwide on November 6, 2012.
Spin-offs.
The success of the main "Halo" trilogy spurred the creation of spin-off games. "Halo Wars" is a real-time strategy game developed by Ensemble Studios for the Xbox 360. Set in the year 2531, the game takes place 21 years prior to the events of "Halo: Combat Evolved". Much effort was spent on developing a control scheme that was simple and intuitive, unlike other console strategy games. The game was announced at X06, and released in February and March 2009.
In a July 2008 interview with MTV, Microsoft's head of Xbox business, Don Mattrick, stated that Bungie was working on a new "Halo" game for Microsoft, independent of other "Halo" projects. An announcement of the new "Halo" project was expected at the 2008 E3 game exposition, which Bungie stated "has been building for several months", but was delayed by their publisher Microsoft. The "Halo" announcement was to be part of Microsoft's 150-minute E3 presentation, and was cut to trim the presentation down to 90 minutes; Microsoft stated it wanted to give the game its own dedicated event. After the release of an ambiguous teaser trailer on September 25, the project was revealed as "Halo 3: Recon", later changed to "". Set between the events of "Halo 2" and "Halo 3", players take control of elite human soldiers called Orbital Drop Shock Troopers (ODST). The game was released on September 22, 2009.
Announced at E3 2009, "" is a prequel to the main trilogy and Bungie's last "Halo" game. Players control Noble Six, a "Hyper Lethal Vector" who is one of the members of the Spartan squad "Noble Team" as they defend Reach against the Covenant. The ending of the game leads directly into the events of "Combat Evolved". The game was released on September 14, 2010.
Cancelled and related projects.
Alternate reality games were used to promote the release of the games in the main trilogy. The Cortana Letters, a series of cryptic email messages, were circulated by Bungie prior to "Halo: Combat Evolved"s release. "I Love Bees" was used to promote the release of "Halo 2". The game revolved around a website created by 42 Entertainment, commissioned by Microsoft and endorsed by Bungie. Over the course of the game, audio clips were released that eventually formed a complete five-hour story set on Earth between "Halo" and "Halo 2". Similarly, "Iris" was used as a viral marketing campaign for the release of "Halo 3". It featured five web servers containing various media files related to the "Halo" universe.
Spin-off titles were planned for release on handheld systems, but did not progress far in development. Rumors of a handheld "Halo" title for the Game Boy Advance surfaced in 2004. Bungie denied the rumors and commented that such a project between Microsoft and Nintendo would be "very unlikely". At a Las Vegas consumer technology convention in January 2005, rumors spread about a version of "Halo" for the handheld Gizmondo system. Bungie denied the rumors stating they were not making a game for the system. A former Gizmondo employee later revealed development only extended to basic story and game structure concepts to obtain funding from investors. In 2006, a concept video for Microsoft's portable Ultra-Mobile PC featured footage of "Halo" and caused speculation for a handheld title. Microsoft later stated the footage was for demonstration purposes only; "Halo" was included because it was a Microsoft-owned property. In January 2007, IGN editor-in-chief Matt Casamassina claimed he played a version of "Halo" for the Nintendo DS. He later demonstrated on-camera, in-game footage of an early-development style version of "Halo DS". The demonstrated work featured dual-wielding and a version of the "Halo 2" map Zanzibar. On October 5, 2007, Bungie employee Brian Jarrard explained the "Halo DS" demo was in fact an unsolicited pitch that was never taken on.
In 2006, Microsoft announced an episodic video game to be developed by film director Peter Jackson's Wingnut Interactive. The game, dubbed "Halo: Chronicles", was confirmed to be in development in 2007, and by 2008 was still hiring for positions on the development team. Jackson told game blog Joystiq in July 2009 that the project was no longer in development. Jackson's manager Ken Kamins explained that the project was cancelled as part of budget cuts tied to job layoffs in January 2009.
Before the company was shuttered after producing "Halo Wars", Ensemble Studios had been working on a "Halo"-themed massively multiplayer online game, often referred to as "Titan Project", or just "Titan". The project was cancelled internally in 2007-2008, without a formal announcement from Microsoft.
Elements from the Halo universe have also appeared in other games. A "Halo"-based character, SPARTAN Nicole-458, appeared in "Dead or Alive 4", a product of the collaboration between Tecmo's Team Ninja and Microsoft's Bungie Studios. The "Halo" theme tune was also available DLC for "".
Development.
Bungie games.
Bungie (formerly Bungie Software Products Corporation) is a Chicago, Illinois-based game development company started in 1991 by Alex Seropian. Seropian partnered with programmer Jason Jones to market and release Jones' game "". Focusing on the Macintosh game market because it was smaller and easier to compete, Bungie became the biggest Mac developer with games including the shooters "Pathways Into Darkness" and "Marathon". What became "Halo" was originally code-named "Monkey Nuts" and "Blam!", and took place on a hollowed-out world called Solipsis. The planet eventually became a ringworld, and an artist suggested the name "Halo", which became the game's title.
The first "Halo" game was announced on July 21, 1999, during the Macworld Conference & Expo. It was originally planned to be a real-time strategy game for the Mac and Windows operating systems, but later changed into a third-person action game. On June 19, 2000, Microsoft acquired Bungie Studios and "Halo: Combat Evolved" became a launch title for the Xbox video game console. After receiving Xbox development kits, Bungie Studios rewrote the game's engine, heavily altered its presentation, and turned it into a first-person shooter. Though the first "Halo" was meant to include an online multiplayer mode, it was excluded because Xbox Live was not yet available.
"Halo" was not intended to be the Xbox's flagship game due to internal concerns and gaming press criticism, but Microsoft VP of game publishing Ed Fries did not act on these concerns. The Xbox's marketing heavily featured "Halo", whose green color palette meshed with the console's design scheme.
The success of the game led to a sequel, "Halo 2", which was announced on August 8, 2002 at the Microsoft's New York X02 press event. It featured improved graphics, new weapons, and a multiplayer mode on Xbox Live. "Halo 3" was announced at the 2006 Electronic Entertainment Expo. The initial conception for the third game was done before "Halo 2" was released in 2004. It utilized a proprietary, in-house graphics engine, and employed advanced graphics technologies.
They created two more Halo games before becoming independent as part of their deal with Microsoft: a side story "Halo 3: ODST" and a prequel "Halo: Reach" in 2009 and 2010 respectively.
343 Industries.
Following the release of "Halo 3", Bungie announced it was splitting off from Microsoft and becoming an independent limited liability company. While Bungie remained involved in the "Halo" series by developing games such as "ODST" and "Reach", the rights to "Halo" remain with Microsoft. To oversee everything "Halo", Microsoft created an internal division, 343 Industries, serving as "stewards" for the franchise. Frank O'Connor, formerly a Bungie employee, now serves as 343's creative director.
In announcing the formation of 343 Industries, Microsoft also announced that Xbox Live would be home to a central hub for "Halo" content called Halo Waypoint. Waypoint is accessed from the Xbox 360 Dashboard and offers players access to multimedia content in addition to tracking their "Halo" game "career". O'Connor described Waypoint as intended to be the prime destination for "Halo".
The company's first new game, "Halo 4", was released on November 6, 2012, to generally positive reviews.
Cultural influences.
In 2006, in acknowledgement of the "wealth of influences adopted by the Bungie team", a list of Bungie employees' favorite science fiction material was published on the company's website. The developers acknowledged that the "Halo" series' use of ring-shaped megastructures followed on from concepts featured in Larry Niven's "Ringworld" and Iain M. Banks' Culture series (of which "Consider Phlebas" and "Excession" were said to be particularly influential). In a retrospective article in "Edge", Bungie's Jaime Griesemer commented, "The influence of something like "Ringworld" isn't necessarily in the design—it's in that feeling of being somewhere else. That sense of scale and an epic story going on out there." Griesemer also explained, "One of the main sources of inspiration was "Armor" John Steakley, in which a soldier has to constantly re-live the same war over and over again. That sense of hopelessness, a relentless battle, was influential." The Flood were influenced by the assimilating alien species in Christopher Rowley's "The Vang"; it has also been speculated that the Master Chief's name "John 117" may have been a reference to a character named Jon 6725416 in Rowley's "Starhammer", or to the John Spartan character of "Demolition Man". An IGN article exploring the literary influences present in the "Halo" franchise commented on similarities between "Halo" and Orson Scott Card's "Ender's Game": aspects of the SPARTAN Project and the design of the Covenant Drones are perceived as reminiscent of the super soldier program and Buggers found in the novel. Bungie has also acknowledged James Cameron's film "Aliens" as a strong cinematic influence.
A report written by Roger Travis and published by "The Escapist" compares "Halo" with the Latin epic "Aeneid", written by classical Roman poet Virgil. Travis posits similarities between the plots of both works and compares the characters present in them, with the Flood and Covenant taking the role performed by the Carthaginians, and the Master Chief's role in the series to that of Aeneas.
Music.
Seven "Halo" soundtracks have been released. The "Halo Original Soundtrack" contains most of "Combat Evolved"s music. Due to the varying nature of gameplay, the music present was designed to use the game's dynamic audio playback engine. The engine allows for the mood, theme, and duration of music played to change according to gameplay. To afford a more enjoyable listening experience, O'Donnell rearranged portions of the music of "Halo" into standalone suites, which follow the narrative course of the game. The soundtrack also contains music not used in the game, including a variation on the Halo theme that was first played at "Halo"s debut at Macworld 1999.
For "Halo 2"s soundtrack, producer Nile Rodgers and O'Donnell decided to split the music into two separate volumes. The first, Volume One, was released on November 9, 2004 and contained all the themes as well as the "inspired-by" music present in the game (featuring Steve Vai, Incubus, Hoobastank, and Breaking Benjamin). The second release, Volume 2, contained the rest of the music, much of which was incomplete or not included in the first soundtrack, as the first soundtrack was shipped before the game was released. "Halo 2", unlike its predecessor, was mixed to take full advantage of Dolby 5.1 Digital Surround Sound.
The soundtrack for "Halo 3" was released on November 20, 2007. O'Donnell noted he wanted to bring back the themes from the original game in order to help tie together the end of the trilogy. The tracks are presented, similarly to the , in a suite form. Unlike previous soundtracks, where much of the music had been synthesized on computer, the soundtrack for "Halo 3" was recorded using a 60-piece orchestra, along with a 24-voice chorus. The final soundtrack was recorded by the Northwest Sinfonia at Studio X in Seattle, Washington. The soundtracks were bundled and released as a box set in December 2008. A soundtrack for "Halo 3: ODST" was released alongside the game and included many of the tracks from the game.
For "Halo Wars", the task of creating the game's music fell to Stephen Rippy. Rippy listened to O'Donnell's soundtracks for inspiration and incorporated the "Halo" theme into parts of his arrangements. In addition to synthesized and orchestral components, the composer focused on the choir and piano as essential elements, feeling these were important in creating the ""Halo" sound". Rather than use the Northwest Sinfonia, Rippy travelled to Prague and recorded with the FILMharmonic Orchestra before returning to the United States to complete the music. A standalone compact disc and digital download retail version of the soundtrack was announced in January 2009 for release on February 17.
The music of "Halo 4" was composed by Neil Davidge. The "Halo 4 Original Soundtrack" was released on October 22, 2012, followed by a two-disc Special Edition on November 6.
Adaptations.
The "Halo" franchise includes various types of merchandise and adaptations outside of the video games. This includes bestselling novels, graphic novels, and other licensed products, from action figures to a packaging tie-in with Mountain Dew. Numerous action figures and vehicles based on "Halo" have been produced. Joyride Studios created "Halo" and "Halo 2" action figures, while "Halo 3" poseable and collectible action figures, aimed at collectors, were produced by McFarlane Toys and became some of the top-selling action figures of 2007 and 2008. MEGA Blocks partnered with Microsoft to produce "Halo Wars"-themed toys.
Books.
There have been numerous printed adaptations based on the "Halo" canon established by the video games. Larry Niven (author of "Ringworld") was originally approached to write a "Halo" novelization, but declined due to unfamiliarity with the subject matter. The first novel was ', a prequel to "Halo: Combat Evolved". It was written by Eric Nylund in seven weeks, and published in October 2001. William C. Dietz wrote an adaptation of "Halo: Combat Evolved" called ', which was released in 2003. Eric Nylund returned to write the third novel, ', which takes place between "Halo: Combat Evolved" and "Halo 2", and was published in December 2003. Nylund also wrote the fourth adaptation, ', which was published on October 31, 2006. Bungie employee Joseph Staten wrote the fifth book, ', which was released on October 30, 2007, while Tobias S. Buckell produced the sixth, ', published in November 2008. Bungie considers the "Halo" novels as additions to the "Halo" canon.
A collection of "Halo" stories, "", was simultaneously released in print and audiobook formats in November 2009. "Evolutions" includes original material by Nylund, Buckell, Karen Traviss and contributions from Bungie. Tor eventually re-released the first three "Halo" novels with new content and cover art.
Science fiction author Greg Bear has been contracted to write a trilogy of books focusing on the Forerunners, called The Forerunner Saga. The first book, entitled ', was released in January 2011, while the second book, ', was released in January 2012. ', the third and final book, is scheduled for release on March 19, 2013. Karen Traviss is writing the Kilo-Five trilogy, which takes place after the events of "Halo 3" and "Halo: Ghosts of Onyx". The first, entitled ', came out October 2011. Its sequel, "", was released on October 2, 2012.
Comics.
The "Halo" universe was first adapted into the graphic novel format in 2006, with the release of the "Halo Graphic Novel", a collection of four short stories. It was written and illustrated by graphic novelists Lee Hammock, Jay Faerber, Tsutomu Nihei, Brett Lewis, Simon Bisley, Ed Lee and Jean Giraud. At the 2007 New York Comic Con, Marvel Comics announced they would be working on an ongoing "Halo" series with Brian Michael Bendis and Alex Maleev. The limited series, titled "", bridges the gap between the events of "Halo 2" and "Halo 3"; initially planned to conclude shortly before the release of "Halo 3", the constant delays led to the final issue being published April 2009.
Marvel announced at the 2009 Comic Con that two new comics, a five-part series written by Peter David and a second series written by Fred Van Lente, would appear the coming summer and winter. David's series, "Halo: Helljumper", is set prior to "Halo: Combat Evolved" and focuses on the elite Orbital Drop Shock Troopers. The five-part series was published between July and November 2009. Lente's series, originally titled "Spartan Black", revolves around a black ops team of Spartan supersoldiers assigned to the UNSC Office of Naval Intelligence. The rebranded comic, "Halo: Blood Line", debuted in December 2009. A comic-retelling of the novel "Halo: The Fall of Reach" was the most recent comic series entitled: "Halo: Fall of Reach". Fall of Reach was split into 3 mini-stories: "Boot Camp", "Covenant", and "Invasion".
Film.
In 2005, Columbia Pictures president Peter Schlessel began working outside the studio system to produce a "Halo" filmic adaptation. Alex Garland wrote the first script, which was then pitched to studios by couriers dressed as Master Chief. Microsoft's terms required $10 million against 15 percent of gross; most studios passed, citing the lack of risk for Microsoft compared to their large share of potential profits. 20th Century Fox and Universal Studios decided to partner to produce the film, paying Microsoft $5 million to option the film and 10 percent of grosses. Peter Jackson was slated to be the executive producer, with Neill Blomkamp as director. Before Blomkamp signed on, Guillermo del Toro was in negotiations to direct.
D. B. Weiss and Josh Olson rewrote Garland's script during 2006. The crew stopped and resumed preproduction of the film several times. Later that year, 20th Century Fox threatened to pull out of the project, leading Universal to issue an ultimatum to Jackson and Schlessel: either cut their large "first-dollar" deals, or the project was ended. Both refused, and the project stalled.
Blomkamp declared the project dead in late 2007, but Jackson replied that the film would still be made. Blomkamp and Jackson collaborated on "District 9", but the director told /Film that he was no longer considering working on a "Halo" film if the opportunity arose, saying that after working on the film for five months before the project's collapse it would be difficult to return. The rights for the film have since reverted to Microsoft. O'Connor has stated that the movie will be made at some point. In 2009, filmmaker Steven Spielberg expressed interest in being involved in the making of a film adaptation of "Halo".
Anime.
Microsoft announced at Comic-Con 2009 that it was overseeing production of a series of seven short anime films, together called "Halo Legends". Financed by 343 Industries, the animation was created by five Japanese production houses: Bones, Casio Entertainment, Production I.G., Studio 4°C, and Toei Animation. Shinji Aramaki, creator and director of "Appleseed" and "Appleseed Ex Machina", served as the project's creative director. Warner Bros. distributed "Legends" on DVD and Blu-ray in February 2010. Six of the stories are officially part of the "Halo" canon, with the seventh, made by Toei, intended to be a parody of the universe.
Reception and critical response.
The "Halo" franchise has been highly successful commercially and critically. During the two months following "Halo: Combat Evolved"s release, it sold alongside more than fifty percent of Xbox consoles and sold a million units by April 2002. "Halo 2"s sales generated US$125 million on its premiere day, making it the fastest selling United States media product in history up to that time. Combined with "Halo"s sales, the two games sold 14.8 million units before "Halo 3"s release.
GameSpot reported 4.2 million units of "Halo 3" were in retail outlets on September 24, 2007, a day before official release—a world record volume. "Halo 3" broke the previous record for the highest grossing opening day in entertainment history, making US$170 million in its first twenty-four hours. Worldwide, sales exceeded US$300 million the first week, helping to more than double the sales of the Xbox 360 when compared with the weekly average before the "Halo 3" launch. At the end of 2007, "Halo 2" and "Halo: Combat Evolved" were the number one and two best-selling Xbox titles, respectively, and "Halo 3" was the best-selling Xbox 360 title. "Halo Wars" was the best-selling RTS console game, selling more than one million units. The "Halo" series went on to sell more than 27 million copies by August 2009, and more than 34 million copies by May 2010. Tor Books reported that sales of all franchise materials are greater than $1.7 billion, and Bungie's games before "Reach" accounted for $1.5 billion in sales. The soundtracks to "Halo 2", "Halo 3", "ODST" and "Reach" all appeared on the Billboard 200 charts for at least one week. By May 2011, total gross of "Halo" merchandise was $2 billion, with 40 million copies of the games sold. and $2.8 billion in January 2012.
The "Halo" adaptations have been successful as well. Many of the novels have appeared on "Publisher Weekly"s bestseller charts and the "Halo Graphic Novel" sold more than 100,000 copies, a "rare hit" for the games-to-comics genre. "Ghosts of Onyx", "Contact Harvest", "The Cole Protocol" and the first volume of "Cryptum" appeared on "The New York Times" bestseller lists, and "The Cole Protocol" also opened 50th overall on "USA Today" bestsellers list. Tor's first three novels sold more than one million copies by April 2009.
Overall, the "Halo" series has been well received by critics. "Halo: Combat Evolved" has received numerous Game of the Year awards. In March 2007, IGN listed it as the top Xbox game of all time, while readers ranked it the fourteenth best game ever on "IGN Readers' Choice 2006 - The Top 100 Games Ever". Conversely, GameSpy ranked "Halo: Combat Evolved" tenth on its list of "Top 25 Most Overrated Games of All Time", citing repetitive level design and the lack of an online multiplayer mode. "Halo 2" also received numerous awards, with IGN listing it as the number two top Xbox game of all time in March 2007. From its initial release on the Xbox in November 2004 until the launch of "Gears of War" on the Xbox 360 in November 2006 - two years later - "Halo 2" was the most popular video game on Xbox Live. "Halo 3" was nominated for and won multiple awards; it won "Time" magazine's "Game of the Year" and IGN chose it as the Best Xbox 360 Online Multiplayer Game and Innovative Design of 2007. Most publications called the multiplayer aspect one of the best features; IGN said the multiplayer map lineup was the strongest of the series, and GameSpy added that the multiplayer offering will greatly please ""Halo" veterans". Complaints focused on the game's plot. "The New York Times" said the game had a "throwaway" plot and Total Video Games judged the single-player aspect ultimately disappointing. The series' music and audio has received enthusiastic response from game reviewers.
Cultural impact.
The main trilogy, particularly its protagonist, has been declared iconic and a symbol of today's videogames; a wax replica of the Master Chief was made by Madame Tussauds in Las Vegas, where Pete Wentz compared the character to notable characters from previous generations like Spider-Man, Frodo, and Luke Skywalker. "The Escapist" author Roger Travis compared "Halo"s story to Virgil's "Aeneid", saying the religious and political struggle described in the games relates to the modern epic tradition. "GamesTM" stated "Halo: Combat Evolved" "changed videogame combat forever", and "Halo 2" showcased Xbox Live as a tool for communities. GameDaily noted "Halo 2"s launch was "easily comparable to the biggest in other sectors of the entertainment industry", marking the first time a video game launch has become a major cultural event in America. "Time" magazine included the franchise in the "2005 Time 100", highlighting that in the first ten weeks after the release of "Halo 2", players spent 91 million combined hours playing the game online. A "The New York Times" report noted the success of "Halo 3" was critical for Microsoft, persuading consumers to buy the Xbox 360 console which was experiencing waning sales compared with the Nintendo Wii, as well as helping restore the console's image. On September 25, 2007, the release date for "Halo 3", Microsoft's shares rose 1.7% based on sales expectations for the game. "Halo" has been described as a series that "has reinvented a genre that didn't know it needed to be reinvented", with aspects of the main trilogy being duplicated in other FPS games multiple times.
"Variety" called "Halo" "the equivalent of "Star Wars"".
Machinima.
As a highly popular video game series with a large and active fan base, the "Halo" trilogy has given rise to an array of video productions in an emerging entertainment medium, machinima. Virtually all machinima footage based around the Halo games is taken from the multiplayer modes of the main trilogy games. Most productions are set outside "Halo" canon, while others are based on fan fiction closely relating to the official story. "Halo 3" includes a saved film function that allows camera angles not possible in previous games, and other features that simplify production. The game has become one of the most popular tools for generating machinima, and Microsoft updated its user license agreement to allow noncommercial distribution of such films.
A notable machinima production is the comedy series "Red vs. Blue" created by Rooster Teeth Productions. It has achieved an unparalleled level of success in "Halo" machinima in specific, and machinima in general; it is credited with bringing attention to the genre. "Red vs. Blue" generated annual revenues of US$200,000, and special promotional episodes were commissioned by Bungie. The series ended on June 28, 2007, after 100 regular episodes and numerous promotional videos. Sequels to the series include ', which contains more dramatic elements than its comedic predecessor, "," "," and '. Other machinima series include "Fire Team Charlie", "The Codex", and the in-game interview show "This Spartan Life".
