Joshua Ryan "Josh" Hutcherson (born October 12, 1992) is an American film and television actor. He began working in the early 2000s, appearing in several minor film and television roles. He gained wider exposure with major roles in the 2005 films "Little Manhattan" and "Zathura", the 2006 comedy "RV", the 2007 family adventure film "Firehouse Dog", and the film adaptations of "Bridge to Terabithia", "Journey to the Center of the Earth" and "". On March 30, 2008, Hutcherson won a Young Artist Award for Best Leading Young Actor. Hutcherson was also featured on a Celebrity Teens edition of the hit show "MTV Cribs", and portrayed Peeta Mellark in the 2012 film "The Hunger Games". 
Early life.
Josh Hutcherson was born in Union, Kentucky. His mother, Michelle, is a former Delta Air Lines employee who now assists Josh, and his father, Chris Hutcherson, is an analyst for the EPA. He has a younger brother, Connor, as well as many pets, including two dogs, Diesel and Nixon (a boxer). He has wanted to be an actor since he was four years old, but had only begun auditioning for roles in 2002, at the age of 9. He moved from Union to California due to limited acting opportunities.
Career.
Hutcherson's first role was in the 2002 pilot episode, "House Blend"; in the same year, he appeared in an episode of "ER". In 2003, he played the lead role in the comedy "Miracle Dogs" (released on Animal Planet); starred opposite Peter Falk and Timothy Daly in the made-for-television film, "Wilder Days"; and had a minor role in the well-reviewed independent film, "American Splendor". He performed for the motion-capture imagery in 2004's "The Polar Express".
In 2005, Hutcherson appeared in several Hollywood films: he had a minor role in the Will Ferrell comedy "Kicking & Screaming", voiced Markl in the animated film "Howl's Moving Castle" (June), and played the lead roles in "Little Manhattan" (September) and "Zathura", which was released in November to positive reviews. The following year, Hutcherson appeared in the comedy "RV", playing the son of Robin Williams' character. Hutcherson subsequently played Jesse Aarons in the drama "Bridge to Terabithia", which was filmed in New Zealand and released on February 16, 2007, performing well critically and commercially. He had not read the novel that the film is based on before being cast in the role.
Hutcherson's next role was in "Firehouse Dog" (released on April 4, 2007), in which he played Shane Fahey, a firefighter's son who befriends a dog. Hutcherson filmed "Firehouse Dog" before "Bridge to Terabithia", though the latter film was released first. He next appeared in the independent drama "Winged Creatures" and the science fiction adventure "Journey to the Center of the Earth", a new 3D version of the novel of the same name. Filming on "Journey", which was released on July 11, 2008, began in Montreal in June 2006 and ended in October of that year. Hutcherson also appeared in a film adaptation of the book "Cirque Du Freak".
In 2010, he had a supporting role in the critically acclaimed movie "The Kids Are All Right", playing Laser. Hutcherson has said that he would like to appear in every type of film genre. On April 4, 2011, Lionsgate announced that Hutcherson had been cast as Peeta Mellark in the 2012 film, "The Hunger Games". He appeared in the 2012 "Red Dawn" remake.
Personal life.
Hutcherson briefly dated his "" co-star Vanessa Hudgens but the two are now "good friends".
Hutcherson has cited actor Jake Gyllenhaal as an inspiration.
On August 11, 2007, Hutcherson served as the Grand Marshal at the Meijer Indy 300 at Kentucky Speedway. In September 2008, he traveled to Italy for the first time. He visited Rome and Milan, and participated in a local event for children interested in moviemaking. Hutcherson recorded a video for the "Straight But Not Narrow" campaign, designed to encourage young, straight men to come out in support of their gay peers. On April 21, 2012, Josh received the Vanguard Award from GLAAD, awarded to those in the entertainment industry who make a significant difference in promoting equal rights for LGBT people.
Being from Northern Kentucky, Hutcherson has been a lifelong fan of both the University of Kentucky's Wildcats and nearby Cincinnati, Ohio's Major League Baseball team, the Reds. As a guest on Conan, Hutcherson talked about painting his face to show his support during Kentucky Wildcats basketball games and being a season ticket holder. On April 7, 2012, Hutcherson threw the ceremonial opening pitch before the Reds' game against the Miami Marlins at Great American Ball Park.
In April 2012, Hutcherson adopted a pit bull named Driver from the Hands, Paws & Hearts rescue organization in Lancaster, CA.
