Psych is an American detective comedy-drama television series created by Steve Franks and broadcast on USA Network. It stars James Roday as Shawn Spencer, a young crime consultant for the Santa Barbara Police Department whose "heightened observational skills" and impressive detective instincts allow him to convince people that he solves cases with psychic abilities. The program also stars Dulé Hill as Shawn's best friend and reluctant partner Burton "Gus" Guster, as well as Corbin Bernsen as Shawn's captious father, Henry.
The series airs new episodes in the U.S. on Wednesdays at 9PM ET/PT, 9PM CST on USA Network. During the second season, an animated segment was added to the series titled "The Big Adventures of Little Shawn and Gus". "Psych" debuted on Friday, July 7, 2006, immediately following the fifth season premiere of "Monk", and continued to be paired with the series until "Monk"'s conclusion on December 4, 2009. It was the highest-rated U.S. basic cable television premiere of 2006. The sixth season ended on April 11, 2012. It is currently USA Network's longest-running original series on air. On January 10, 2012, USA renewed the series for a seventh season, to include 16 episodes. On December 19, 2012, a renewal for season eight was announced. "Psych" will begin its seventh season on February 27, 2013.
Overview.
Most episodes begin with a cold open in the form of a flashback to Shawn and Gus's childhood. The flashbacks usually involve Shawn and Gus being taught a lesson by a young Henry Spencer, who wishes that his son would follow in his footsteps and become a law enforcement officer. As a child, Shawn was taught by Henry to hone his powers of observation and deduction, often using games and challenges to test him. Each flashback also sets the theme for the episode.
Shawn originally becomes known as a psychic when, after calling in tips on dozens of crime covered on the news, which help the police to close the case, the police become suspicious of his knowledge. The police theorize that such knowledge could only come from the "inside" and they decide to arrest him as a suspect. To avoid being sent to jail, Shawn uses his observational skills to convince the police that he is psychic. The interim police chief warns Shawn that if his "powers" are fake, he will be prosecuted. With no choice but to keep up the act, and having proven himself an effective aid to the police in solving crimes, he establishes a psychic detective agency, Psych, and becomes a consultant to the police. Pretending to have psychic powers allows him to engage in strange and comic behavior as he turns real clues into hunches and otherworldly visitations. He enjoys teasing lifelong friend Gus, a pharmaceutical representative, about Gus's eclectic interests as they drive around in a Toyota Echo nicknamed "the blueberry" solving crimes.
Head detective Carlton Lassiter (Timothy Omundson), playfully named "Lassie" by Shawn and Gus, quietly respects Shawn's crime-solving skills but doubts his psychic abilities and is constantly exasperated by his antics. On the contrary, junior detective Juliet "Jules" O'Hara (Maggie Lawson) and Chief Vick (Kirsten Nelson) are far less antagonistic – with O'Hara expressing belief in Shawn's abilities, while Vick is mum on the subject – and usually willing to give Shawn the leeway he needs to solve cases. Henry and Shawn have a difficult relationship, but despite this, Henry reluctantly helps Shawn on various occasions.
Production.
The show uses White Rock, British Columbia, Canada for its Santa Barbara, California setting. "Psych" also incorporates Vancouver and various locations around the Lower Mainland of British Columbia as a backdrop. Santa Barbara is on a mountainous coastline without bays and just has the few Channel Islands miles offshore. Many of the overlooking helicopter shots and set up shots (in which the exterior of the Santa Barbara Courthouse is shown) are actually filmed in Santa Barbara. The animated segments "The Big Adventures of Little Shawn and Gus" were created by J.J. Sedelmaier Productions, Inc. The music, effects and sound design for "The Big Adventures of Little Shawn and Gus" were created by Fred Weinberg.
Theme song.
The theme song for "Psych" is "I Know You Know" by The Friendly Indians, series creator Steve Franks' band. Some episodes in Seasons 3, 4, 5, and 6 use the extended full-length version of "I Know You Know", but most episodes use the usual, shortened version. In some episodes the theme song is changed, usually as a tie-in to the theme of the episode to come. 
The Christmas and Hindi-themed variations of the song also include variations on the main titles. In particular, the Hindi and Chinese-themed episodes phonetically translated words into Devanagari and Chinese characters, respectively, in their title sequences. The theme in the "Twin Peaks" tribute is an almost shot-for-shot recreation of the "Twin Peaks" theme.
Pineapple.
Since the series first aired, a pineapple has been a recurring theme, with one visible or with an implied presence in every episode. The pineapple is a major marketing point for items related to the show on the USA website. There is also a website that is dedicated to finding a pineapple or pineapple related object in each episode.
Response.
Critical reaction and ratings.
"Psych" scored a 4.51 rating and an average of 6.1 million total viewers at its premiere, which made it the highest rated scripted series premiere on basic cable in 2006 in all key demographics (households, P18-49, P25-54, and total viewers), according to a USA Network press release, quoted from the Futon Critic.
"From the San Jose Mercury News:"
"From the Seattle Post-Intelligencer:"
DVD releases.
Seasons one through six are available on DVD in Region 1, while seasons one, two, and three are available in Regions 2 and 4. Seasons one through six are available for online streaming on Netflix and Hulu, and for download in the iTunes Store. Season 5 is available for download through Amazon's Instant Video Store. Despite the entire series being recorded in HD resolutions and available in HD over streaming video services, no Blu-ray release of "Psych" exists.
International distribution.
In , the series is broadcast on TV1 and One.
In . the series is broadcast on NRK3.
In . the series is broadcast on RTÉ Two.
In , and the series is broadcast on Studio Universal channel.
In , the series is broadcast on RTL.
In Hong Kong. the series is broadcast on ATV World.
In . the series is broadcast on Comedy Central.
In , the series is broadcast on 13ème Rue and on NT1 channels.
In , the series is broadcast on Calle 13 and on FDF channels; it was formerly aired on Cuatro channel.
In , the series is broadcast on POP TV.
In , the series is broadcast on Kanal 5.
In , the series is broadcast on Prima Cool.
In , the series is broadcast on TV2 (Hungary) and on the Universal Channel.
In ,the series is broadcasted on the cable television Fox Crime.
In , the series is broadcast on cable STUDIO Universal channel.
In , the series is broadcasted on NOVA Tv.
In , the series is broadcasted on MTV3.
In , the series is broadcasted on Joy.
In , the series is broadcast on Universal Channel.
In South Africa, the series is broadcasted on Universal Channel.
In , the series is broadcasted on Yes Action.
In , the series is broadcasted on Novyi Kanal.
In , the series is broadcasted on Fox Crime.
In , the series is broadcasted on Fox Crime.
In , the series is broadcasted on MBC4.
In , the series is broadcasted on FX (Portugal).
In , the series will be broadcasted on Jack City, this coming 2013.
In , the series is broadcasted on Dizimax Vice.
In , the series is broadcasted on Fox Crime.
In , the series is broadcast on Universal Channel
In , the series is broadcast on Universal Channel
In , the series is broadcast on Universal Channel
In , the series is broadcast on Digi Plus
In , the series is broadcast on Universal Channel
Novels.
William Rabkin has written and published five novels based on the series. The novels are written in third person narrative style.
