John Abraham (born 17 December 1972) is an Indian film actor, producer and former model. After modeling for numerous advertisements and companies, Abraham made his film debut with "Jism" (2003), which earned him a Filmfare Best Debut Award nomination. This was followed by his first commercial success, "Dhoom" (2004). He received two Filmfare Award nominations, for his negative roles in "Dhoom", and then in "Zinda" (2006). He later appeared in the major critical success "Water" (2005). He was nominated for a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actor for the film "Baabul" (2006). In 2012, he produced his first production "Vicky Donor" which was a critical and commercial success. He then established his own production house, John Abraham Entertainment.
Early life and education.
Abraham was born in Mumbai to a Malayali father and a Parsi mother. His father is an architect from Aluva, Kerala; his mother is named Firoza Irani. Abraham's Parsi name is "Farhan" while his father being a Marthomite Syrian Christian named him "John". He has a sister Susy Mathew and younger brother, Alan.
Abraham studied at Bombay Scottish School, Mahim in Mumbai. He got his bachelor's degree in economics from Jai Hind College. John also received an MMS from Mumbai Educational Trust (MET).
Career.
Modeling.
John Abraham started his modelling career appearing in the music video of the song "Surma" by Punjabi singer Jazzy B. He then joined a media firm Time & Space Media Entertainment Promotions Ltd., which, however, closed because of financial problems. Later, he worked for Enterprises-Nexus as a media planner. In 1999, he won the Gladrags Manhunt Contest and went to the Philippines for Manhunt International, where he won second place. Following this, he was signed by Carrie Models in Singapore and did some modelling there; he later modelled in Hong Kong, London and New York City. He also appeared in a number of commercial advertisements and in other music videos for singers including Pankaj Udhas, Hans Raj Hans and Babul Supriyo. To improve his acting skills, Abraham joined the Kishore Namit Kapoor acting laboratory and completed an acting course while juggling modelling assignments.
Actor.
Abraham made his acting debut with "Jism" (2003), a thriller film which according to Box Office India, was "above average" grossing 13,25,00,000.
His next films included a paranormal thriller "Saaya" (2003), Pooja Bhatt's directorial debut "Paap" (2004) and Ahmed Khan's "Lakeer – Forbidden Lines" (2004).
He played the role of Kabir - the main antagonist in "Dhoom" in 2004, an action film produced by Yash Raj Films. The film was one of the highest grossing films of that year.
In 2005 he starred in the supernatural thriller "Kaal" and the comedy "Garam Masala" both of which did well at the box office. Later that year, he had a role in "Water", which portrayed the tragic fate of Hindu widows in British India of the 1930s. The film was written and directed by independent Canadian film-maker Deepa Mehta. It was popular internationally, and was nominated for the 2006 Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film at the 79th Academy Awards.
In the summer of 2006, Abraham performed at the "Rockstars Concert" along with fellow Bollywood actors Salman Khan, Zayed Khan, Kareena Kapoor, Esha Deol, Shahid Kapoor and Mallika Sherawat. In that same year, he starred in the films "Zinda", "Taxi No. 9211", "Baabul" and "Kabul Express". Among these "Taxi No. 9211" and "Kabul Express" were substantially successful.
Nikhil Advani's multi-starrer "" was Abraham's first release in 2007. The movie failed to do well at the Indian box office, though it did well in the overseas markets. His last two 2007 releases included the arthouse thriller "No Smoking" and the sports film "Dhan Dhana Dhan Goal".
In 2008, Abraham starred alongside Abhishek Bachchan and Priyanka Chopra in "Dostana", his only release that year. His first release of 2009 was a production by Yash Raj Films, "New York".
He has a fashion line— branded JA Clothes — which primarily features his favorite article of clothing, jeans.
In 2011, was seen in the films "Aashayein" and "Jhootha Hi Sahi". Both of the films turned out to be box office failures. Lately, Abraham has appeared in films "Force" (2011), "Desi Boyz" (2011), and "Housefull 2" (2012), which were all successful films worldwide. He is currently working on "Shootout at Wadala", in which he will be portraying the role of Manya Surve..
Producer.
His debut film as a producer was titled "Vicky Donor" (2012) and featured Ayushmann Khurrana, Annu Kapoor and Yami Gautam. Abraham also appeared in an item-number for the film. It opened to positive response, and turned out to be a critical and commercial success worldwide. He is currently working on his second production, "Hamara Bajaj" which will be directed by Shoojit Sircar and is to go on floors early 2013.
Personal life.
Abraham was in a 9 year relation with actress Bipasha Basu before they broke up in 2011. He is now in a relationship with Priya Runchal, an NRI financial analyst and investment banker from USA native to McLeodganj, whom he met in Mumbai, in December, 2010.
Social causes.
Abraham takes an interest in PETA and Habitat for Humanity. He donated 10 lakhs to the Lilavati Hospital and Research Centre, Mumbai, according to his website.
In January 2009, Abraham led a group of Indian celebrities in the Mumbai Marathon, an annual event to benefit the United Way.
Awards and nominations.
Won
