Kate Garry Hudson (born April 19, 1979) is an American actress. She came to prominence in 2001 after winning a Golden Globe and receiving several nominations, including a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, for her role in "Almost Famous". She then starred in the hit film "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days" (2003) which gained her wider fame. She has since established herself in Hollywood after starring in several productions including "Raising Helen" (2004), "The Skeleton Key" (2005), "You, Me and Dupree" (2006), "Fool's Gold" (2008) and "Bride Wars" (2009). She is currently playing the recurring role of Cassandra July in the musical comedy-drama series "Glee".
Early life.
Hudson was born in Los Angeles, California, the daughter of Academy Award-winning actress Goldie Hawn and Bill Hudson, an actor, comedian, and musician. Her parents divorced eighteen months after her birth; she and her brother, actor Oliver Hudson, were raised in Snowmass, Colorado by her mother and her mother's long-time boyfriend, actor Kurt Russell.
Hudson has stated that her biological father "doesn't know me from a hole in the wall", and that she considers Russell to be her father. Her biological father has indicated that he has made several efforts to connect with Kate and Oliver, but neither has reciprocated. Hudson has described her mother as "the woman that I've learned the most from, and who I look up to, who has conducted her life in a way that I can look up to". She has four half-siblings: Emily and Zachary Hudson, from her biological father's subsequent marriage to actress Cindy Williams; Lalania Hudson, from his relationship with another woman; and Wyatt, from her mother's relationship with Russell.
Hudson is of Italian (from her paternal grandmother), English, and Hungarian Jewish descent. She was raised in her maternal grandmother's Jewish religion. In 1997, she graduated from Crossroads, a college preparatory school in Santa Monica. She was accepted to New York University but chose to pursue an acting career instead of an undergraduate degree.
Career.
Hudson's breakthrough was as Penny Lane in Cameron Crowe's "Almost Famous" (2000), for which she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress and won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress - Motion Picture. She had previously appeared in the lesser-known films "Gossip", a teenage drama, and "200 Cigarettes", a New Year's-set comedy with a large cast of actors. Regarding her early career and success, Hudson has noted that she is a "hard worker" and did not want to be associated with her well-known parents, wishing to avoid the perception that she "rode on somebody's coattails".
In 2002, she starred in the remake of the historical romance "The Four Feathers", a film which was not well received by critics or audiences. Her next film, the romantic comedy "How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days", was a box office success, grossing over $100 million after its February 2003 release. Hudson subsequently appeared in several romantic comedies, including "Alex and Emma" and "Raising Helen"; the films met with varying degrees of success.
Hudson headlined a thriller called "The Skeleton Key" in 2005. The film, which had a production budget of $43 million, enjoyed box office success, grossing over $91.9 million worldwide ($47.9 million in North America). Her later film, a comedy titled "You, Me and Dupree" and co-starring Owen Wilson and Matt Dillon, grossed $21.5 million on its opening weekend of July 14, 2006.
In 2007, Hudson directed the short film "Cutlass", one of Glamour magazine's "Reel Moments" based on readers' personal essays. "Cutlass" co-stars Kurt Russell, Dakota Fanning, Virginia Madsen, Chevy Chase and Kristen Stewart.
In 2008, she appeared in "Fool's Gold", a romantic comedy released on February 8, and her second film to co-star Matthew McConaughey. She had been certified in scuba diving in the Great Barrier Reef for the movie's underwater scenes. Also the same year, she appeared in another romantic comedy, "My Best Friend's Girl", which was released in September.
Hudson next appeared in the musical film "Nine", alongside Daniel Day-Lewis, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz, Nicole Kidman and Judi Dench. The film, directed by Rob Marshall, was released in December 2009. Hudson was critically acclaimed for her unknown dancing skills, showcased in a stylish 1960s inspired original piece called "Cinema Italiano", which was written specifically for the film and for Hudson's character.
She starred in the film adaptation of Jim Thompson's "The Killer Inside Me". The film premiered on January 24, 2010, at the Sundance Film Festival.
In 2011, she played Darcy in "Something Borrowed", based on Emily Giffin's novel of the same name.
In 2012, she will have a recurring role in "Glee" as Cassandra July. Hudson's character will be Rachel Berry's dance teacher at NYADA (New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts); Hudson will be appearing in six episodes during the fall.
Personal life.
Hudson married Chris Robinson, the frontman for The Black Crowes, on December 31, 2000 in Aspen, Colorado. The couple lived in a house that was once owned by director James Whale and traveled together during Hudson's film shoots or Robinson's music tours. Hudson gave birth to son Ryder Russell Robinson in January 2004. On August 14, 2006, Hudson's publicist announced that Hudson and Robinson had separated. On November 18, 2006, Robinson filed divorce papers, citing "irreconcilable differences". The divorce was finalized on October 22, 2007.
In spring 2010, Hudson began dating Muse frontman Matthew Bellamy. In January 2011, it was announced Hudson and Bellamy were expecting a child. In February 2011, Hudson bought a house in London, England. A "Daily Mail" source reported that she plans to live in London with her partner six months a year. On April 27, 2011, on "The Today Show" she said that she and Matthew Bellamy got engaged the prior week. Their son Bingham Hawn Bellamy was born in July 2011.
Hudson has also said that she does not enjoy seeing herself on screen, specifying that she "gets cold... shakes and... sweats" when watching her performances for the first time.
In July 2006, Hudson sued the British version of the "National Enquirer" after it reported she had an eating disorder, describing her as "painfully thin". Hudson said the tabloid's statements were "a blatant lie" and she was concerned about the impact the false report could have on impressionable young women. The newspaper apologized and compensated her.
