Sex and the City is an American television comedy-drama series created by Darren Star and produced by HBO. Broadcast from 1998 until 2004, the original run of the show had a total of ninety-four episodes. Throughout its six-year run, the show received contributions from various producers, writers and directors, perhaps most significantly from Michael Patrick King.
Set and filmed in New York City and based on the book of the same name by Candace Bushnell, the show follows the lives of a group of four women—three in their mid-thirties and one in her forties—who, throughout their different natures and ever-changing sex lives, remain inseparable and confide in each other. Starring Sarah Jessica Parker, Kim Cattrall, Kristin Davis and Cynthia Nixon, the quirky series had multiple continuing storylines that tackled relevant and modern social issues like sexuality, sexually transmitted diseases, safe sex, promiscuity, and femininity while exploring the difference between friendships and relationships.
The series received both acclaim and criticism for its subjects and characters, and spawned two feature films, "Sex and the City" (2008) and its sequel "Sex and the City 2" (2010), and a spin-off by The CW, "The Carrie Diaries". It also won seven of its 54 Emmy Award nominations, eight of its 24 Golden Globe Award nominations, and three of its 11 Screen Actors Guild Award nominations. "Sex and the City" still airs in syndication worldwide and has been listed on "Entertainment Weekly"'s end-of-the-decade "best of" list and as one of "Time" magazine's 100 Best TV Shows of All-"TIME".
Origins.
The show was based in part on writer Candace Bushnell's book of the same name, compiled from her column with the "New York Observer". Bushnell has stated in several interviews that the Carrie Bradshaw in her columns is her alter ego; when she wrote the "Sex and the City" essays, she used her own name initially; for privacy reasons, however, she created the character of Carrie Bradshaw, played by Sarah Jessica Parker. Carrie Bradshaw was a writer living in New York City. Carrie also has the same initials, a flourish emphasizing her connection with Bushnell.
Cast and characters.
Carrie Bradshaw.
Played by Sarah Jessica Parker, Carrie Bradshaw is the narrator of each episode. Each episode is structured around her train of thought while writing her weekly column, "Sex and the City", for the fictitious newspaper the "New York Star". A member of the New York glitterati, she is a club/bar/restaurant staple who is known for her unique fashion sense. Carrie's one-room apartment is in an Upper East Side brownstone. Stanford Blatch, a gay talent agent from an aristocratic family played by Willie Garson, is Carrie's best friend outside the other three women.
Carrie is entangled with Mr. Big (Chris Noth), whose name is eventually revealed to be John James Preston, in a tumultuous, on-and-off-again relationship. He is the reason for many of Carrie's breakdowns as he never seems ready to fully commit to Carrie. He is once divorced by the time the series opens, depicted as a prominent businessman, a big jazz fan, and a heavy cigar smoker. When Carrie and Big break up, Manhattan furniture designer Aidan Shaw (John Corbett) is Carrie's next serious boyfriend in season three. Aidan is seen as being somewhat more traditional and patient about relationships than many of Carrie's other love interests. Aleksandr Petrovsky (Mikhail Baryshnikov) is a famous artist who becomes Carrie's lover in the final season. Despite their age difference, he sweeps her off her feet with huge romantic gestures and shows her the foreign pockets of New York that she has never seen before. By the end of the third season she has developed unusual sugar cube cravings brought by her first encounter with Mr. Big.
Samantha Jones.
The oldest and most sexually confident of the foursome, Samantha Jones (Kim Cattrall), is an independent businesswoman with a career in public relations. She is confident, strong, and outspoken, and calls herself a "try-sexual" (meaning she'll try anything once). Samantha has a number of extremely brief sexual relationships in the show, including a lesbian relationship with an artist named Maria (Sônia Braga) and one with hotel magnate Richard Wright (James Remar). Jerry/Smith Jerrod (Jason Lewis) is a young waiter Samantha seduces in the final season. He is a much younger struggling actor whose career jump starts thanks to Samantha's PR connections. He mentions being a recovering alcoholic who attends AA. He also shows a fierce loyalty to Samantha throughout their relationship.
Charlotte York Goldenblatt.
Working in an art gallery, Charlotte York Goldenblatt (Kristin Davis) has had a conventional Connecticut upbringing. She is the most optimistic of the group and the one who places the most emphasis on emotional love as opposed to lust. A true romantic, Charlotte is always searching for her "knight in shining armor". Charlotte was a "straight A" student who attended Smith College where she was a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma (note that there are no sororities at the real Smith College) majoring in art history with a minor in finance. During the series, it is also revealed that Charlotte was voted homecoming queen, prom queen, "most popular", student body president, and track team captain in addition to being an active cheerleader and teen model. Trey MacDougal (Kyle MacLachlan) is an attractive, Scottish-American Park Avenue cardiologist with a pedigree and country house whom Charlotte meets in season three. He is everything she has always believed she should look for in a husband, and they soon marry. However, Trey's family is headed by his mother "Bunny", a manipulative, overbearing sort who complicates his relationship with Charlotte, and unexpected problems arise in their intimate life. When their marriage ends, she meets Harry Goldenblatt (Evan Handler), a Jewish divorce lawyer, at the beginning of season five. She is not attracted to him initially but after she discovers that sex with him is "the best I've ever had", they begin a relationship that eventually leads to marriage.
Miranda Hobbes.
A career-minded lawyer with sometimes cynical views on relationships and men, Miranda Hobbes (Cynthia Nixon) is a Harvard Law School graduate from Philadelphia with two siblings. Miranda is often seen as the practical voice of reason in the group. In the early seasons, she is portrayed as a bit masculine and borderline misandric, but this image softens somewhat over the years, particularly after she becomes pregnant and gives birth. Her storyline then explores the difficulties she faces as a single woman juggling a beloved but demanding career along with motherhood, dating, and relationships. During the series, she purchases a condo in the city's Upper West Side and later a home in Brooklyn. Steve Brady (David Eigenberg), is Miranda's on-and-off boyfriend throughout the series after being introduced in the second season. He is one of the few men on the show meant to counterbalance all the emotionally unstable men encountered throughout the series, as he is a constant and sensitive male character. His alcoholic mother, Mary Brady (Anne Meara), is also a prominent recurring character.
Episodes.
The series was divided up into six seasons altogether. The first season was twelve episodes, the second, third, and fourth seasons were eighteen episodes each. The fifth season was eight episodes, and the final season was twenty episodes split into two parts of ten episodes each. In total, there were 94 episodes of "Sex and the City".
The season 4 episode titled "Just Say Yes", was also the last to feature the iconic New York City skyline with the World Trade Center's Twin Towers in the opening credits.
Series overview.
Season one (1998).
Carrie Bradshaw lives in Manhattan and writes a column called "Sex and the City". At a birthday party for Miranda, Carrie and her friends decide to start having sex like men, meaning without all the emotional attachment, which sets the tone for the series.
Bradshaw has many chance encounters with a handsome businessman that Samantha refers to as "Mr. Big", which becomes the name by which he's known (or just "Big") throughout the series. They begin to date but Carrie is dismayed to find out he is still seeing other people and although he eventually agrees to exclusivity, he doesn't introduce Carrie to his mother and won't refer to her as "the one". Rather than go on a planned vacation with him, Carrie breaks it off.
Miranda gets set up with Skipper, a friend of Carrie's. They date on and off; he is more laid back while Miranda is more forceful, but after a breakup, Miranda sees him with another woman and she is compelled to begin again with him, but they again break up when he wants an exclusive relationship and she does not.
Charlotte dates a marriage-minded man but they clash over china patterns. She declines to have anal sex with another boyfriend yet consents to pose nude for a famous painter.
Samantha sleeps with an artist who likes to videotape his encounters, Charlotte's doorman, a married couple, and others. But when she meets James, a man who seems utterly perfect for her, she's heartbroken to discover that he has an extremely small penis.
Season two (1999).
Carrie dates a baseball player while on the rebound, but breaks it off when she realizes she's not over Big. She then dates a sell-out filmmaker, a shoplifter, and a nice guy she scares away by snooping, and then takes up with Big again, something she at first keeps from her friends. Their relationship is rocky, and when he announces that he might have to move to Paris for a year but doesn't clearly invite Carrie to come with him, they break up a second time. Carrie then tries without success to convert a friend with benefits to something more, dates a writer with a great family but who is always "early" in bed, then a recovering alcoholic who uses Carrie to replace his old addiction. She then runs into Big, returned from Paris, and his new 20-something fiancee, Natasha (played by Bridget Moynahan).
Miranda dates a dirty talker, fakes it with an ophthalmologist, and tries to adjust to a guy who likes to watch porn during sex. By the time she meets Steve, the bartender, she's definitely not willing to believe he is as nice as he seems. They start dating but the differences in their schedules and their finances lead to a break-up. She winds up back in bed with Steve, but not before dating a guy who wants to get caught, a Peeping Tom in the next building, and a divorced dad.
Charlotte encounters a legendary purveyor of cunnilingus, a handy actor next door, a widower on the make, a man who undergoes adult circumcision, a famous actor, a too-effeminate pastry chef, a shoe salesman with a foot fetish, and a 20-something guy who gives her crabs.
Despite a brief attempt at couples therapy, Samantha breaks up with James. She then sleeps with a litigator, a salsa dancer, her trainer, a sports fan who can only rally when his team does well and Charlotte's brother. She then meets a man whose penis is too big even for her.
The end of Season Two also marks the end of characters talking directly to the camera.
Season three (2000).
Carrie starts off dating a politician, followed by a bi-sexual. Big marries Natasha, and Carrie meets Aidan, the furniture maker. They have a virtually flaw-free relationship until Carrie and Big begin an affair. When caught in Big's apartment by Natasha, their affair ends as does eventually both Big's marriage and Carrie's relationship with Aidan.
Miranda and Steve move in together; he tells Miranda that he'd like them to have a baby but a puppy purchase instead alerts Miranda to the fact that they're very different when it comes to maturity. Steve moves out and Miranda makes partner at her law firm. She also goes on to date a phone sex guy, a fake ER doctor, a guy who doesn't swallow his food, and a police detective.
Charlotte, looking for a husband, dates an I-banker with an anger management problem, a photog who gets her into menswear, a bad kisser, and a climax name caller. She then meets Trey McDougal; despite an awkward "proposal", the discovery of his low libido and inability to perform sexually the night before their marriage, and conflict with his domineering mother, the two marry. They begin their marriage with a sexless honeymoon, a continuing problem in their relationship, and the two eventually separate.
Samantha sleeps with a fireman, a short man, her assistant, a black guy with a disapproving sister, a recreational Viagra user, a guy who tastes bad, Trey's Scottish cousin, a dildo model, and a college-aged virgin. She also has a menopause scare, gets tested for HIV, and buys a new apartment in the Meatpacking District where she has to make peace with the transvestites on her street.
After her breakups with Big and Aidan, Carrie dates a guy who still lives at home, teaches a class at the Learning Annex on how to meet men, gets mugged, and tries to apologize to Natasha. She and Big also make an attempt at being friends.
Season four (2001–2002).
After a chance meeting with Aidan at the opening of a bar he co-owns, Carrie convinces him to restart their relationship. He moves into her apartment after purchasing it when her building goes co-op and then proposes. Despite her misgivings, Carrie accepts the proposal and then eventually realizes she's not ready for marriage. Despite discussing her concerns and initially agreeing to give her more time, Aidan soon pushes Carrie for marriage and she realizes this is because he does not trust her, given her past affair with Big. They break up and he moves out, and Carrie purchases her apartment after being loaned the down payment money from Charlotte. At the end of Season Four, Carrie discovers that Big has sold his apartment and is moving to Napa.
Charlotte and Trey are living apart but continuing to have marital relations; they eventually reconcile and Charlotte moves back into their shared apartment. They decide to try for a baby but realize Charlotte is reproductively challenged; after fertility treatments and adoption discussion, their marriage breaks apart under the strain and they decide upon divorce.
Miranda supports Steve through testicular cancer and surgery. Later, when he feels emasculated due to surgery, they have sex and Miranda gets pregnant; she at first considers an abortion, which is particularly distressing to Charlotte as she deals with her struggles to get pregnant, but Miranda then decides to keep the baby.
Samantha flirts with a priest, has nude photos taken of herself, tries to have a relationship with a lesbian, sleeps with a baby talker, a wrestling coach, and a farmer. She then lands a big PR account with resolutely single hotel magnate Richard and begins a relationship with him that starts out as purely sex but becomes something more to both of them, and they attempt monogamy. However, she eventually catches him in infidelity, and they break up.
Season five (2002).
Carries spends time by herself in Season Five; she fears this means she will be fired from writing her sex column but instead a publisher wants to turn the columns into a book. A book tour lands her in San Francisco where she reunites briefly with Big, and in New York she meets Jack Berger, another author with whom she feels sparks but who is attached.
Samantha tries again with Richard but finds her lack of trust in him too much and she breaks it off for good.
Miranda is now mother to son Brady and finds it difficult to work, date, and carry on her previous life as such; Steve is supportive and she falls into bed with him one afternoon, making her question her feelings for him.
Charlotte has a run-in with her former mother-in-law over the legalities of the apartment she shared with Trey, and hires Harry Goldenblatt as her divorce attorney. Despite his physical shortcomings she finds herself attracted to him and they begin a sexual relationship, but then soon finds that she is developing real feelings for him. Harry however reveals that he must marry within his Jewish faith, causing Charlotte to actually consider conversion.
Season six (2003–2004).
Carrie begins dating Jack Berger but his struggles as an author and her success with her upcoming book cause too much conflict between them and they break up. Big returns to New York for angioplasty and Carrie realizes she still has feelings for him but also realizes he still cannot fully commit. After he returns to Napa, she meets Aleksandr, a famous Russian artist. Aleksandr seems to be attentive to her in a way that Big never was, and asks her to come to Paris with him. She does, briefly, but realizes how inattentive he is when working and she breaks it off with him just as Big arrives in Paris, looking for her, ready to finally commit to her being "the one".
Charlotte decides that life with Harry, someone accepting of her fertility issues, would be worth conversion to the Jewish faith. After this process, she presses Harry to "set the date" in such a way that is insulting to him and he breaks it off with her. However, they run into each other at a mixer and, after her tearful apology, start their relationship again, eventually marrying. After fertility treatments fail, they decide to adopt and receive eventual news that they have been approved to adopt a child from China.
Once Miranda realizes she's still in love with Steve, he begins a serious relationship with someone else, and so she does the same. However, at son Brady's first birthday, they reveal their feelings for each other and begin their relationship again. Miranda proposes to Steve and they marry in a public park. Needing more room for their growing family, she consents to moving to Brooklyn where they buy a home. After Steve's mother Mary (played by Anne Meara) is revealed to have suffered a stroke and subsequent memory loss, she moves in with the couple.
Samantha begins a relationship with a much younger waiter, Jerry Jerrod, who turns out to also be a struggling actor. She uses her PR skills to help his career, even changing his name to Smith Jerrod. Despite trying to keep their relationship as casual as all others, she develops true feelings for him. Smith supports her after she is diagnosed with breast cancer, shaving his own head in sympathy after catching her doing the same to herself when her hair starts falling out due to chemotherapy, and insisting on waiting for her when her sex drive also wanes during treatment. When he flies home from his movie shoot just to tell her that he loves her, she replies, "You have meant more to me than any man I've ever known."
The season and the series concludes with the four girls reunited in New York, and with Carrie receiving a phone call from Big (which finally reveals his first name, John), telling her that his Napa house is up for sale and he is headed back to New York, and with Carrie's final voiceover, "The most exciting, challenging and significant relationship of all is the one you have with yourself. And if you find someone to love the you "you" love, well, that's just fabulous."
Reception.
"Sex and the City" premiered on HBO, June 6, 1998, and was one of the highest-rated sitcoms of the season. The last original episode aired on February 22, 2004.
Awards and recognition.
Over the course of its six seasons, "Sex and the City" was nominated for over 50 Emmy Awards, winning seven times. These include two for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series (Jennifer McNamara), one for Costumes, one for Outstanding Comedy Series, one for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series, one for Sarah Jessica Parker for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series, and one for Cynthia Nixon for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series.
It has also been nominated for 24 Golden Globe Awards, winning 8. In 2007 it was listed as one of "Time" magazine's "100 Best TV Shows of All-"TIME"". "Entertainment Weekly" put it on its end-of-the-decade, "best-of" list, saying, "The clothes from SATC raise your cosmos! A toast to the wonderful wardrobe from "Sex and the City", which taught us that no flower is too big, no skirt too short, and no shoe too expensive."
Criticism.
Criticism has been expressed about the influence the show has on adolescents and how the images displayed on the show affect the way women and young girls view themselves. "Sex and the City", along with the sitcom "Friends", were specifically recognized for "glamori sex while hardly mentioning its downsides, such as pregnancy and sexually transmitted diseases" by a 2008 study published in the "American Journal of Paediatrics". The study found that females 12–17 who watched these, and similarly "sexually charged" shows were about twice as likely to get pregnant as those who did not, and teenage male viewers were more likely to impregnate someone. The "Daily Mail" article noted that similar studies have also found an association between viewing sexual content and earlier sex and higher disease risk.
Tanya Gold of "The Telegraph" stated, ""Sex and the City" is to feminism what sugar is to dental care. The first clue is in the opening credits of the television show. Carrie is standing in a New York street in a ballet skirt, the sort that toddlers wear. She is dressed, unmistakably, as a child. And, because she is sex columnist on a newspaper, a bus wearing a huge photo of her in a tiny dress trundles past. 'Carrie Bradshaw knows good sex,' says the bus. And there, before any dialogue hits your ears, you have the two woeful female archetypes that "Sex and the City" loves—woman as sex object and woman as child ... In another , Carrie realizes she is homeless because she has spent $40,000 on shoes and does not have a deposit for an apartment. (In this crisis, she cries and borrows the money for the deposit—what child would do anything else?)."
Joan Swirsky, a New York–based journalist and author, wrote in 2003: "Another example that feminism is dead is the popularity of "Sex and the City", the HBO show that features 30- and 40-something women sending out the unmistakable messages to females both younger and older that careers, money, looks and, ostensibly, intelligence are nothing compared to doing anything to get a man, including endlessly obsessing about the subject, engaging in loveless or even like-less sexual encounters."
Broadcast and distribution.
Season one of "Sex and the City" aired on HBO from June to August 1998. Season two was broadcast from June until October,1999. Season three aired from June until October 2000. Season four was broadcast in two parts: from June until August 2001, and then in January and February 2002. Season five, truncated due to Parker's pregnancy, aired on HBO during the summer of 2002. The twenty episodes of the final season, season six, aired in two parts: from June until September 2003 and during January and February 2004.
"Sex and the City" is currently syndicated in the US by HBO corporate sibling (under Time Warner) Warner Bros. Television Distribution. CBS Television Studios (successors to Rysher Entertainment and Paramount Domestic Television) and their distribution arm own international rights.
The United States cable channel HBO was the original broadcaster. TBS and WGN began showing edited reruns of the series. The series then went into international syndication.
In Australia, the Nine Network aired the first run of the show Every Monday Between 9:30 pm and 11:00 pm. After 2004 the Cable Channel W. Channel aired it until summer 2008 when Arena TV started airing it in a block with "Will & Grace" with promos stating "all the good guys are gay". The series was repeated on Network Ten from 2005 until 2010, and on Eleven from February 2011.
In the Republic of Ireland, TV3 premiered Sex and the City in February in 1999. Since 2006 repeats of the series aired on 3e.
Channel 4 originally aired the series in the UK with the first episode shown in early 1999. As of August 2009 a double bill of the show airs each weeknight at 10:30 pm on Comedy Central and a double bill airs on Wednesdays from 9 pm on 5*.
DVD releases.
All six seasons of "Sex and the City" have been released commercially on DVD, with season six being split into two parts. They have been released officially on region 1 (Americas), region 2 (Europe & Middle East), region 3 (Korea) and region 4 (Oceania & South Pacific) formats. In addition to their region encoding, releases vary depending on the region in which they were released.
In addition to standard single season DVD box sets of the show, limited edition collectors' editions have also been released that include all six seasons in one complete set. Even these vary between region 1, 2 and 4. While Europe got a complete set that came with special 'shoebox' packaging (a reference to Sarah Jessica Parker's character's love for shoes in the show), the USA and Canada version came packaged in a more traditional fold-out suede case and with an additional bonus DVD including many special features. Mexico's and Oceania's edition come packaged in a beauty case.
As well as missing out on some special features, many in Europe had trouble with the region 2 edition of the season 1 DVD. The season was not converted into a PAL video signal, instead remaining in its original American NTSC format which caused some compatibility problems with some European television sets and DVD players. All subsequent Region 2 DVD releases of the program were appropriately transferred to PAL video using the original film prints, and season 1 has since been re-released in PAL format.
Outside the US, "Sex and the City" boxed sets were released through Paramount Pictures. American and Canadian DVDs were released through the program's original broadcasters, HBO. In Australia, single editions have been released, where each disc is sold separately. In South Korea, a complete, six-season, special DVD shoebox sets were released. In Brazil, the first and fifth season were released on DVD Dual, but all other seasons were released the DVD box set, had its launch in the Brazilian market in 2006, and only with subtitles in Portuguese.
Selected episodes are also available as part of the "Sex and the City Essentials" DVD collection. These are four separately-packaged discs containing three selected episodes that fit a common theme.
Soundtrack releases.
There have been several CDs released to accompany the series "Sex and the City", two of which (the albums from Irma Records) contain tracks used in the show's actual soundtrack.
Films.
"Sex and the City" (2008).
A feature film based on "Sex and the City", written, produced and directed by Michael Patrick King, was released in 2008. The four lead actresses returned to reprise their roles, as did Chris Noth, Evan Handler, David Eigenberg, Jason Lewis, and Willie Garson. In addition, Oscar-winner Jennifer Hudson appears in the film as Carrie's assistant. The film is set four years after the series finale. The film was released to mixed reviews by critics; at the box office, it was the highest-grossing romantic comedy of the year.
"Sex and the City 2" (2010).
"Sex and the City 2" was released in May 2010. The film stars Sarah Jessica Parker, Cynthia Nixon, Kristin Davis, Kim Cattrall and Chris Noth, who reprised their roles again, as well as Evan Handler, David Eigenberg, Jason Lewis, and Willie Garson. It also features cameos from Liza Minnelli, Miley Cyrus and Penélope Cruz. The film is set two years after the events of the first movie. It was critically panned but a commercial success at the box office.
Prequel.
"The Carrie Diaries", as a prequel to the original series, based on the book of the same name by Candace Bushnell. The show premiered on The CW in 2013. AnnaSophia Robb played the role of the young Carrie Bradshaw.
