Star Trek Into Darkness is an upcoming American science fiction action film directed by J. J. Abrams, written by Roberto Orci, Alex Kurtzman, and Damon Lindelof, and produced by Abrams, Bryan Burk, Lindelof, Kurtzman, and Orci. It is the twelfth "Star Trek" film and serves as the sequel to 2009's "Star Trek".
Most of the crew of the previous film are returning, including director and producer Abrams and his regular collaborators: composer Michael Giacchino, cinematographer Daniel Mindel, and editors Maryann Brandon and Mary Jo Markey. Kurtzman and Orci are returning as screenwriters (and now also producers), while Lindelof returns as producer and now also acts as co-writer. Chris Pine, Zachary Quinto, Karl Urban, Zoe Saldana, Anton Yelchin, Simon Pegg, John Cho, and Bruce Greenwood return to reprise their roles from the previous film, with the addition of Alice Eve and Benedict Cumberbatch to the cast. The movie will be released on May 15, 2013, in large format theaters in the USA, two days before its general wide release. It is set to be released on May 17, 2013, in the USA, UK and other countries, on May 16 in Australia, Germany, and other countries, with the earliest release in Norway, on May 15, and the latest release in Japan, in September.
Plot.
After being called back home, the crew of the "Enterprise" find a seemingly unstoppable force which has attacked Starfleet and left Earth in chaos. Captain Kirk and the crew of the "U.S.S. Enterprise" are tasked with leading the deadly manhunt to capture the party responsible and settle an old score.
Cast.
Peter Weller, Joseph Gatt, Nazneen Contractor, Anjini Taneja Azhar, Nolan North, and Sean Blakemore have also been cast, but their roles are unspecified. Heather Langenkamp has also been cast in what she describes as a small role.
Production.
Development.
In June 2008, it was reported that Paramount Pictures was interested in signing the main producers of the 2009 "Star Trek" film, J. J. Abrams, Bryan Burk, Damon Lindelof, Alex Kurtzman, and Roberto Orci for a sequel. In March 2009, it was reported that these five producers had signed up to produce the film with the script to be again written by Orci and Kurtzman with Lindelof joining the writing team. A preliminary script was rumored to be completed by Christmas 2009 for a 2011 release. Screenwriters Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci began writing the script in June 2009, originally intending to split the film into two parts. Leonard Nimoy, the original Spock who plays an older version of the character in the 2009 film, stated he would not be making an appearance in the film. Abrams was reportedly considering including William Shatner in the sequel.
By 2010, a release date of June 29, 2012, was set, with Damon Lindelof announcing he had begun working on the script with Kurtzman and Orci. Pre-production was set for a January 2011 start, though producer Bryan Burk stated that actual filming would probably begin in the spring or summer. Actor Zachary Quinto later stated that these reports were untrue. Writer Lindelof, who is also a producer, compared the sequel to "The Dark Knight". Abrams, Kurtzman, and Orci stated that selecting a villain was hard, with Abrams saying that "the universe Roddenberry created is so vast that it's hard to say one particular thing stands out". The interview also saw them discuss the possibility of Khan Noonien Singh and Klingons. Kurtzman and Lindelof stated that they had "broken" the story (created an outline) and rather than being a sequel, it will act as a stand alone film. Abrams admitted in December 2010 that there was still no script.
In January 2011, Abrams, who was still not attached to direct, reported that he had not decided whether or not he was directing the sequel, citing that he had still not seen a script. Paramount Pictures then approached Abrams and requested the sequel be in 3D. Abrams stated the film would not be filmed in native 3D, but rather shot in 2D on film, and then be converted into 3D in post production. Abrams also expressed interest in shooting the film in the IMAX format, saying, "IMAX is my favorite format; I’m a huge fan." In February, Orci posted on his Twitter that he (and Lindelof and Kurtzman) aimed to deliver the script in March 2011. Though the script was not finished at the time, Paramount began financing pre-production. Similar circumstances on the next Jack Ryan film meant that Chris Pine would film the "Star Trek" sequel first. By April, Orci revealed at WonderCon that the film's first draft of the script had been completed. Abrams reported to MTV that once he finished work on his film "Super 8", he would be turning his full attention to the "Trek" sequel. Though a script was completed, uncertainty regarding the extent of Abrams' involvement led to the film being pushed back six months from its June 2012 release date. In June, Abrams confirmed his next project would be the sequel, also mentioning that he would prefer the film to be good than be ready by its set release date. Simon Pegg, who plays Scotty, stated in an interview that he believed filming would begin in the last few months of the year. Abrams stated he would be prioritizing the film's story and characters above an early release date. In September, Abrams officially signed on to direct the film, with the cast from the previous film reprising their respective roles and that a Winter 2012 or Summer 2013 release date was intended. In October, Orci reported that location scouting was underway and a series of comic books, of which Orci will act as creative director, will "foreshadow" the film. The film was given a revised release date and pushed to a 2013 slot. Michael Giacchino confirmed he will be returning to score the film.
Actor Benicio del Toro had reportedly been sought for the role of the villain and had met with Abrams to discuss the role. He later bowed out. Actress Alice Eve has signed on for a role
and so has Peter Weller. Actor Noel Clarke has signed up for an unknown role, but it is reported to be "a family man with a wife and young daughter". Demián Bichir also auditioned for the role but as reported by "Variety" on January 4, 2012, Benedict Cumberbatch has been cast in the role of the villain in the film.
Filming.
The film began principal photography on January 12, 2012, with a scheduled release date of May 17, 2013. Sequences of the film were also filmed using IMAX cameras. The film is due to be released in 3D. On February 24, 2012, images from the set surfaced depicting Benedict Cumberbatch's character engaged in a fight with Spock. Filming completed in May 2012.
Filming took place on location in Los Angeles, California, and around the area at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in Livermore; also at Paramount Studios in Hollywood, Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City, and the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove.
Title.
On September 10, 2012, Paramount confirmed the film's title as "Star Trek Into Darkness". J. J. Abrams had indicated that unlike some of the earlier titles in the film franchise, his second "Star Trek" would not include a number. The decision was made to avoid repeating the sequel numbering that started with "", or making a confusing jump from "Star Trek " to "Star Trek 12". Writer and producer Damon Lindelof addressed his team's struggle to settle upon a title, stating "there have been more conversations about what we're going to call it than went into actually shooting it." He claimed that "everything that people are turned off about when it comes to "Trek" is represented by the colon" in the titles of previous "Star Trek" films.
Distribution.
Dolby Laboratories and Paramount Pictures announced "Star Trek Into Darkness" would be released in Dolby Atmos, with Andy Nelson and Anna Behlmer handling the mix under the supervision of Ben Burtt and Matthew Wood.
Marketing.
As part of a contest Abrams designed after the release of "Super 8", the prize for answering a series of questions will be a walk-on role in this film for two people. 
J. J. Abrams also debuted three frames of the film on "Conan" on October 4, 2012, showing what he described as Spock "in a volcano, in this crazy suit".
The official poster for the film was released on December 3, 2012, showing a mysterious figure, thought to be Benedict Cumberbatch's villain, standing atop a pile of burning rubble looking over what appears to be a damaged London.
He is standing in a hole in the shape of the Starfleet insignia blown out of the side of a building.
Roughly nine minutes of film footage of the opening sequence was shown prior to IMAX presentations of "" which was released in the US on December 14, 2012. Alice Eve together with Cumberbatch and Burke unveiled the IMAX prologue in London, England on December 14, 2012. 
A two-minute teaser was released in iTunes Movie Trailers on December 17, 2012. This teaser also marked the beginning of a viral marketing campaign, with a hidden link directing fans to a movie-related website. A 30-second teaser premiered February 3, 2013, during the temporary stadium blackout of Super Bowl XLVII.
Paramount also released an app for iPhone and Android that enables users to unlock tickets two days prior to the release date.
