Spontaneous human combustion (SHC) describes reported cases of the burning of a living (or very recently deceased) human body without an apparent external source of ignition. There have been about 200 cited cases worldwide over a period of around 300 years.
Objections to natural explanations typically refer to the degree of burning of the body with respect to its surroundings. Indeed, one of the common markers of a case of SHC is that the body – or part of it – suffered an extraordinarily large degree of burning while the surroundings or the lower limbs remained comparatively undamaged. Supernatural explanations of spontaneous human combustion remain popular.
Forensic investigation.
An extensive two-year research project—involving thirty historical cases of alleged SHC—was conducted in 1984 by science investigator Joe Nickell and forensic analyst John F. Fischer. Their lengthy, two-part report was published in the journal of the International Association of Arson Investigators, as well as part of a book. Nickell has written frequently on the subject, appeared on television documentaries, conducted additional research, and lectured at the New York State Academy of Fire Science at Montour Falls, NY, as a guest instructor.
Nickell and Fischer’s investigation—which looked at cases in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries—showed that, again and again, the burned bodies were near plausible sources for the ignition: candles, lamps, fireplaces, and so on. Sometimes these sources were left out of popular accounts of the alleged phenomenon while they were hyped as mysterious. The investigations also found that there was a correlation between alleged SHC deaths and victims’ drunkenness or other incapacitation that could have caused them to be careless with fire and less able to respond properly to an accident. Where the destruction of the body was not extensive, the significant fuel source was the victim’s clothing.
However, where the destruction was extensive, additional fuel sources were involved, such as chair stuffing, floor coverings, the flooring itself, and the like. The investigators described how such materials helped retain melted fat to burn and destroy more of the body, yielding still more liquified fat, in a cyclic process known as the “wick effect” (or “candle effect”).
That nearby objects often went undamaged was not a scientific mystery but a matter of physics. Fire tends to burn upward, and it burns laterally with some difficulty. The fires in question are relatively small, achieving considerable destruction by the wick effect, and relatively nearby objects may not be close enough to catch fire themselves (much as one can get rather close to a modest campfire without burning). As with other mysteries, Nickell and Fischer cautioned against a one-explanation-fits-all approach but rather urged investigating on a case-by-case basis.
Suggested explanations.
Many hypotheses attempt to explain how SHC might occur but according to those that rely on scientific understanding, incidents that might appear as "spontaneous" combustion actually had an external source of ignition – and the likelihood of true spontaneous human combustion is quite low. Benjamin Radford, science writer and deputy editor of the science magazine "Skeptical Inquirer", casts doubt on the plausibility of spontaneous human combustion, “If SHC is a real phenomenon (and not the result of an elderly or infirm person being too close to a flame source), why doesn’t it happen more often? There are 7 billion people in the world, and yet we don’t see reports of people bursting into flame while walking down the street, attending football games, or sipping a coffee at a local Starbucks.” Paranormal researcher Brian Dunning states that SHC stories “are simply the rare cases where a natural death in isolation has been followed by a slow combustion from some nearby source of ignition.” Other stories of people suddenly aflame should be called “Unsolved deaths by fire”; just because the cause was not discovered does not mean SHC occurs.
In fiction.
Russian and Ukrainian author Nikolai Gogol includes SHC in three works, including his novel "Dead Souls". Charles Dickens provides a very graphic depiction of the death of the shopkeeper Mr. Krook by spontaneous combustion in his novel "Bleak House" (1852). At the time, many readers considered spontaneous combustion highly dubious if not impossible, but Dickens nonetheless staunchly defended the plausibility of his account. Considering his prominence, Dickens’ portrayal likely renewed public interest and belief in the phenomenon.
Jules Verne describes in his novel "Dick Sand, A Captain at Fifteen" (1878) that when a fictional African “King of Kazounde” tasted a punch set aflame, “An act of spontaneous combustion had just taken place. The king had taken fire like a petroleum bonbon. This fire developed little heat, but it devoured nonetheless.” Verne had no doubt about SHC being the result of alcoholism: “In bodies so thoroughly alcoholized, combustion only produces a light and bluish flame, that water cannot extinguish. Even stifled outside, it would still continue to burn inwardly. When liquor has penetrated all the tissues, there exists no means of arresting the combustion.”
In the 1984 mockumentary "This Is Spinal Tap", Spontaneous Human Combustion is included as the cause of death of one of the band’s numerous former drummers, leaving only “a little green globule on his drum seat”. The band’s current drummer later dies in the same way, in an on-stage explosion that leaves no remains. By way of explanation, lead singer David St. Hubbins claims that “dozens of people spontaneously combust each year, it’s just not really widely reported.” 
The science fiction writer Bob Shaw’s 1984 novel "Fire Pattern" deals with spontaneous human combustion.
In Michael Scott’s novels, "The Secrets of the Immortal Nicholas Flamel", spontaneous human combustion is described as being caused by one using up all of one’s aura (magical energy).
In the episode “”, a pig carcass is wrapped in cloth and a lit cigarette is placed on the cloth to test the wick effect.
In the "Dead Like Me" episode "Defying Death", Daisy reaps the soul of a man who dies of this phenomenon after over exerting himself in an arm wrestling competition. 
In the Greek 2005 novel "Mother Ash" writer Alexis Stamatis, makes spontaneous human combustion the central element of the plot, when a middle-aged woman and mother of the protagonist suddenly bursts into flames.
In the television series "Fringe", episode “Brave New World (Part 1)”, spontaneous human combustion was caused by nanites.
In the Playstation video game Parasite Eve, the NPCs experience spontaneous combustion through a reaction from the primary characters affecting the mitochondria of the NPCs.
