Maya Khabira Rudolph (born July 27, 1972) is an American actress, comedian, and singer who rose to prominence as a cast member on "Saturday Night Live" from 2000 to 2007.
Since her tenure on "SNL" she has appeared in several films, most notably "Away We Go", "Grown Ups" and "Bridesmaids". Rudolph received an Emmy Award nomination in 2012 for returning to host an episode of "SNL", and is currently starring in the second season of the NBC sitcom "Up All Night".
She is the daughter of R&B and soul singer Minnie Riperton and music producer/composer Richard Rudolph.
Early life.
Rudolph was born in Gainesville, Florida. She is the daughter of soul singer Minnie Riperton and composer/songwriter/producer Richard Rudolph. Her father is a white Ashkenazi Jew, and her mother was African-American. Her paternal grandfather was Sidney Rudolph, a philanthropist who once owned all of the Wendy's and Rudy's restaurants in Dade County, FL. Her parents moved to Los Angeles when she and her brother Marc were very young, and they grew up primarily in the Westwood section.
Rudolph was in the studio when her mother recorded "Lovin' You". Near the end of the track, Riperton can be heard singing "Maya, Maya, Maya" to Rudolph. Riperton incorporated this into her performance of the song on "The Midnight Special". Riperton died on July 12, 1979, at age 31, from breast cancer, just shy of Rudolph's seventh birthday. Rudolph's godmother was R&B singer Teena Marie.
Education.
Rudolph graduated from Crossroads School in Santa Monica, California in 1990, where she became friendly with fellow student Gwyneth Paltrow, and continued her education at the University of California, Santa Cruz, where she graduated in 1995 with a B.A. in photography from Porter College.
Career.
"Saturday Night Live".
In May 2000, Rudolph joined the cast of "Saturday Night Live" as a featured player for the final three episodes of the 1999–2000 season, after a stint as a member of The Groundlings improv troupe, where she met future "Saturday Night Live" cast member Will Forte.
Rudolph's characters on the show have included "Attorney Glenda Goodwin" and "Megan" from the "Wake Up, Wakefield!" sketches. Rudolph has done a number of celebrity impressions on "Saturday Night Live" during her tenure, they include Amanda Byram, Ananda Lewis, Barbra Streisand, Bern Nadette Stanis (as Thelma Evans on "Good Times"), Beyoncé, Charo, Christina Aguilera, Condoleezza Rice, Darcel Wynne, Diana Ross, Donatella Versace, Donna Fargo, Emily Robison, Fredricka Whitfield, Free, Gayle King, Halle Berry, Ivanka Trump, Ja'net Du Bois (as Willona Woods on "Good Times"), Jennifer Lopez, Joyce "Fenderella" Irby, Justin Guarini, Kara Saun, LaToya Jackson, Lisa Kudrow, Lisa Ling, Lucy Liu, Lynda Lopez, Macy Gray, Mario Vasquez, Mary Roach, Maya Angelou, Melinda Doolittle, Melissa Stark, Michelle Obama, Mýa, Nelly Furtado, Omarosa Manigault-Stallworth, Oprah Winfrey, Paris Hilton, Patti LaBelle, Phylicia Rashad (as Clair Huxtable on "The Cosby Show"), Rocsi, Scott Joplin, Teresa Heinz, Terra Patrick, Tina Turner, Tyra Banks, Valerie Simpson, Vanessa Hudgens (as Gabriella Montez from "High School Musical 3"), Wanda Sykes and Whitney Houston.
Rudolph's musical talents were frequently employed on "Saturday Night Live". She sang as Beyoncé Knowles in the "Prince Show" sketches, as the "Space Creature" in the "Gays in Space" sketches (except for the one on the Season 31 episode hosted by Peter Sarsgaard, because it aired around the time Rudolph was on maternity leave. (Friend Will Forte substituted for her during that episode.) Her ability to change her looks and her command of many accents also led to her playing an unusually wide range of ethnicities on the show, often with only a change of wigs. She has been white (Paris Hilton, Liza Minnelli, Barbra Streisand, Lisa Kudrow), Asian (Lucy Liu, Lisa Ling), black (Diana Ross, Tina Turner), and Latina (Charo). As "Nooni Schoener," Rudolph, along with Fred Armisen, created a couple from an unspecified Scandinavian country, who have unplaceable accents and bewilderingly foreign manners. Rudolph was also able to play male characters such as Scott Joplin, Justin Guarini, and Mario Vazquez.
Her final show was on November 3, 2007, with host Brian Williams and musical guest Feist, the last episode before the writers' strike. She returned on October 25, 2008, in a featured guest appearance as Michelle Obama and sang a duet with Kenan Thompson about Amy Poehler's newborn. She then also appeared in the 2008 Christmas episode, where she reprised her role in the sketch Bronx Beat, with Amy Poehler. She also appeared in two sketches in the 2008–2009 season finale with Will Ferrell. She appeared in a Weekend Update Thursday sketch during the fall 2009–10 season as Oprah Winfrey speaking on behalf of Chicago's bid for the 2016 Olympics. She also appeared on the show in May 2010 to perform in skits including "The Manuel Ortiz Show" with Betty White.
She returned to "Saturday Night Live" for the Season 36 premiere, hosted by Amy Poehler, performing the "Bronx Beat" sketch and that same season for episode 700, hosted by Tina Fey.
On February 18, 2012 she returned to "Saturday Night Live" as a host for the first time and reprised her roles in sketches such as "Bronx Beat".
Television and film.
In addition to her work on "Saturday Night Live", Rudolph has appeared on other television shows, including the CBS medical drama series "City of Angels" and "Chicago Hope".
She had small parts in "Chuck & Buck", "Gattaca", "As Good as It Gets", "Duplex" and "Duets"; she was also a music supervisor for "Duets". Her first prominent film role came in 2006 with "A Prairie Home Companion". Earlier, she had costarred with Luke Wilson in the 2005 Mike Judge sci-fi comedy "Idiocracy", although that film was shelved until September 2006 and then only given a limited release. She also guest starred as Rapunzel in the DreamWorks animated film "Shrek the Third". She guest starred as Julia in the "The Simpsons" episode "The Homer of Seville". Rudolph guest starred as character Athena Scooberman in NBC's "Kath & Kim", and starred in the film "Away We Go" with "The Office" star John Krasinski. In 2010, she appeared in "Grown Ups" starring Adam Sandler, where she played the wife of Chris Rock's character. In 2011 she appeared in "Bridesmaids", together with "Saturday Night Live" colleague Kristen Wiig. Since 2011, she has costarred in NBC's latest sitcom, "Up All Night", with Christina Applegate and Will Arnett.
Music.
Prior to joining "Saturday Night Live", Rudolph was backing singer (1995-1999) and briefly a keyboardist in the band The Rentals, with whom she toured for a short time. She also appears in the music videos of the songs "Waiting" and "Please Let That Be You". She sang backing vocals for "Barcelona" and "My Head Is in the Sun," both from the album "Seven More Minutes." In 2004, she recorded a track with The Rentals frontman Matt Sharp, including a cover of Tegan and Sara's "Not Tonight." Rudolph also performed "Together In Pooping" and "Little Roundworm" with Triumph the Insult Comic Dog (Robert Smigel) on his album "Come Poop With Me".
Personal life.
Rudolph lives with director Paul Thomas Anderson and their three children — two daughters Pearl Minnie (born October 15, 2005) and Lucille (born November 6, 2009), and son Jack (born July 3, 2011). It was reported on February 16, 2013 that the couple is expecting their fourth child. 
