Smash is an American musical-drama television series that premiered on NBC on February 6, 2012. The series was created by playwright Theresa Rebeck and developed by NBC executive Robert Greenblatt, and famed director Steven Spielberg serves as one of the executive producers. The series is broadcast in the United States on the network channel NBC and is produced by DreamWorks Television and Universal Television. The second season premiered on February 5, 2013.
The series revolves around a fictional New York theater community and specifically the creation of a new Broadway musical. It features a large ensemble cast, currently led by Debra Messing, Jack Davenport, Katharine McPhee, Christian Borle, Megan Hilty and Anjelica Huston. 
The series, particularly the pilot episode, has enjoyed considerable success. The first season received an Emmy Award for choreography, and it was also nominated for a Golden Globe and a Grammy award.
Synopsis.
The show revolves around a group of characters creating new Broadway musicals, where everyone must balance his or her often chaotic personal life with the all-consuming demands of life in the theater. The series features original music by composers Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman.
Season one (2012).
Julia Houston (Debra Messing) and Tom Levitt (Christian Borle), a Broadway writing team come up with the idea of a new musical based on the life of Marilyn Monroe, entitled Bombshell. Producer Eileen Rand (Anjelica Huston), in the midst of divorce proceedings from her philandering husband, jumps on board and brings with her Derek Wills (Jack Davenport), a difficult but brilliant director. Ivy Lynn (Megan Hilty) is initially cast as Marilyn, but is forced to deal with competition from the talented, yet naive ensemble member Karen Cartwright (Katharine McPhee). Julia's former lover Michael Swift (Will Chase) is initially cast in the role of Joe DiMaggio. However when Julia and Michael's reunion causes serious trouble in her marriage to Frank (Brian d'Arcy James), the decision is made to fire Michael. The role of Marilyn is recast with film star Rebecca Duvall (Uma Thurman), leaving Ivy devastated. After a somewhat disastrous out-of-town opening in Boston, Rebecca has fallen sick due to a peanut allergy and the actor playing Joe departs the production for a better gig. Derek subsequently casts Karen in the role of Marilyn and Michael is reinstated as Joe. Karen discovers Ivy has slept with her fiancé Dev (Raza Jaffrey), while Eileen finds out that her assistant Ellis (Jamie Cepero) was the one who poisoned Rebecca and fires him. Karen gets through her debut and the season ends with the closing number being applauded by the audience.
Development and production.
Conception.
Development began in 2009 at Showtime by then-Showtime entertainment president Robert Greenblatt and Steven Spielberg, from an idea by Spielberg, who had been working on the concept for years. The original concept was that each season would follow the production of a new musical; if any of them were "stage-worthy", Spielberg would make them into actual Broadway musicals. The series was inspired by "The West Wing" and "Upstairs, Downstairs" as role models for successful TV dramas. Garson Kanin's novel "Smash" (New York: Viking, 1980) provided the title and setting, although both plots have little in common. 
Greenblatt then brought the project with him to NBC when he was made NBC Entertainment president in January 2011. Theresa Rebeck wrote the pilot script and is series creator. Executive producers Craig Zadan and Neil Meron suggested Rebeck for the series to Spielberg and Greenblatt. NBC ordered production of a pilot in January 2011 for the 2011–12 television season.
Michael Mayer directed the pilot episode, with Spielberg serving as an executive producer. It has been reported that the pilot cost $7.5 million to produce. On May 11, 2011, NBC picked the project up to series. When the network announced its 2011–12 schedule on May 15, 2011, the series was slated to premiere in mid-season. NBC opted to hold the show for mid-season in order to pair it up with the hit reality show "The Voice" on Monday nights. On August 1, 2011, it was announced that show's series premiere date would be February 6, 2012, the night after Super Bowl XLVI, with heavy promotion through early winter on many of the network's properties before the premiere. At the NBC Press Tour, Greenblatt announced that "Smash" would have 15 episodes produced for the first season to coincide with "The Voice".
Crew.
The series is a production of Universal Television in association with DreamWorks. Theresa Rebeck is the creator of the series and she also wrote the pilot episode and five episodes of the first season, including the season finale. The series has a large number of executive producers including Steven Spielberg, Craig Zadan, Neil Meron, David Marshall Grant, Rebeck, Darryl Frank and Justin Falvey. Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman serve as the composers and executive producers. In March 2012, Rebeck stepped down as showrunner of the musical drama. On April 24, 2012, "The Hollywood Reporter" reported that "Gossip Girl" executive producer Joshua Safran will take the lead for the second season while Rebeck will remain a writer and an executive producer. However, on May 2, 2012, Rebeck stated in an interview that she will not be returning to the show in any capacity.
Music.
NBC announced on June 9, 2011 that they had signed a deal with Columbia Records for a soundtrack of the series. The deal gives Columbia worldwide, digital and physical rights to the first season, with options to subsequent seasons. The deal includes both original songs written for the series and any covers of songs featured on the show.
The series soundtrack for Season 1 was released on May 1, 2012. The album debuted on the Billboard 200 at #9 with 40,000 copies sold in its first week.
A "Bombshell" cast recording, featuring original songs from the first and second season, is scheduled to be released on February 12, 2013. It will contain all 22 songs written for the fictional "Bombshell" musical and features lead vocals by Katharine McPhee (Karen Cartwright) and Megan Hilty (Ivy Lynn) as Marilyn Monroe.
Critical reception.
The pilot of "Smash" received overwhelming positive reviews from television critics, but the critical response was less positive as the season progressed. 
Review aggregator Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 of reviews from mainstream critics, calculated a score of 79 based on 32 reviews. Maureen Ryan of "The Huffington Post" called it one of the strongest new shows of the season. "The Huffington Post" writer Karen Ocamb praised the writing and the creativity of the series. Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" called the show a "triumph" and also went on to say that the creator Theresa Rebeck as well as her team, "have managed to capture the grand and sweeping gesture that is musical theater and inject it with the immediate intimacy of television." David Wiegand of the "San Francisco Chronicle", gave the program a rave review and said that, "so good you can't help wondering why no one thought of it before, a compelling mix of credible real-life melodrama with a fictionalized approximation of what it takes to get a Broadway show from the idea stage to opening night." Tim Goodman from "The Hollywood Reporter" called the pilot episode "Excellent, a bar-raiser for broadcast networks" and called it superior to "Glee". He also praised writing and acting for the series, comparing it to the quality of a cable television series. Matt Mitovich of TVLine called the cast "pretty damn perfect" and complimented the musical numbers. Robert Bianco of "USA Today" gave the show three and a half out of four stars and wrote, "Unless you're allergic to musicals in general and Broadway in particular, you should find that a compelling central story, a strong cast, an out-of-the-procedural-mold premise and some rousing, roof-raising numbers more than compensate for any lingering problems." Tanner Stransky of "Entertainment Weekly" ranked the pilot episode as the 8th best television episode of 2012 saying, "After we watched the subsequent 14 episodes of "Smash" with a mixture of fascination and dismay (seriously, did Debra Messing's Julia wear a men's pajama top to meet her lover?), it was difficult to recall that the pilot was positively magical. But it was. In fact, that episode-ending performance of "Let Me Be Your Star" (featuring dueling divas Megan Hilty and Katharine McPhee) was among TV's most watchable and gleeful three ­minutes of the year. Rare is the series whose high-water mark is its pilot, and Smash is a shining example." 
However, the critical reception for subsequent episodes was less enthusiastic. Chris Harnick of "The Huffington Post" wrote, "How has the rest of Season 1 been so far? Not so phenomenal. That's not to say it has been downright terrible -- there have been some highly entertaining moments -- but it certainly hasn't been goosebumps-inducing, like the final moments of Episode 1, set to "Let Me Be Your Star."" Kevin Fallon summed up the response in "The Atlantic", writing that "there's been an almost visceral reaction to how rapidly and sharply the show's quality has dipped, and just how much promise "Smash" has thwarted...In other words: It's "bad."" Fallon cites other critics in demonstrating the general acceptance of this opinion.
Awards and nominations.
"Smash" has received a number of awards and nominations. In 2012, it was nominated for four Emmys, winning one for Choreography.
Pre-release.
In June 2011, "Smash" was one of eight honorees in the "Most Exciting New Series" category at the Critics' Choice Television Awards, voted by journalists who had seen the pilots.
Due to the already positive buzz surrounding the show, NBC offered early viewings of the pilot on different platforms. From January 15 through January 30, 2012, it was screened on selected flights of American Airlines. From January 16 through February 6, 2012, the full pilot was offered for free on iTunes, Amazon Instant Video, Xbox, and Zune.
Ratings.
The ratings for the Season 1 premiere were strong but ratings steadily dropped as the series progressed. The pilot episode was watched by 11.44 million viewers and had an 18–49 rating of 3.8/10. It was also the third-highest rated new drama debut of the 2011–2012 television season (behind "Once Upon a Time" and "Touch") and delivered the biggest 10 p.m. rating of any drama in this television season. The program also had the highest 18–49 rating and viewership for an NBC series in the time slot since November 2008, but ratings have declined in subsequent episodes. The fourth episode, aired on February 27, was seen by 6.6 million viewers and received a 2.3/6 rating in the 18–49 age group. However, the show's fifth episode, aired on March 5, saw a 17% increase in ratings. It had an 18–49 rating of 2.7/7 and was seen by 7.76 million viewers. But ratings for the show decreased in later episodes, with the eighth episode dropping to an 18–49 rating of 2.1/5 and viewership going down to 6.4 million viewers. Nonetheless, it has become NBC's #1 drama in adults 18–49 and total viewers. The series is also up 160 percent in adults 18–49 versus NBC's season average in the time period prior to "Smash" (with a 2.6 rating vs. a 1.0, "live plus same day") and in total viewers, "Smash" has improved the time period by 100 percent (7.7 million vs. 3.9 million).
Home video releases.
The first season of "Smash" was released under the title "Smash: Season One" as a widescreen four-disc DVD box set on October 29, 2012 formatted for Region 2. The DVD formatted for Region 1 was released on January 8, 2013. Distributed by Universal Studios Home Entertainment, the set features every episode and include several DVD extras such as behind-the-scenes footage and making-of features as well as extended and deleted scenes and a blooper reel. Also included is an UltraViolet copy of each episode.
The Target exclusive edition of the season one set includes a fifth disc that includes the full length music video for "Touch Me" performed by Katharine McPhee, as well as twenty minutes of additional interviews with Jack Davenport (Derek Wills) and Megan Hilty (Ivy Lynn).
