Red is the fourth studio album by American singer Taylor Swift. It was released on October 22, 2012 through Big Machine Records, as the follow-up to her commercially successful 2010 album "Speak Now". It was announced through Swift's live webchat on August 13, 2012, in which she revealed the album title and album cover, and answered fan questions. Four promotional singles were released in the month leading up to the album release, three of which debuted inside the top ten of the US "Billboard" Hot 100. The album features collaborations with new producers and guest artists such as Gary Lightbody and Ed Sheeran, and sees Swift experimenting with new musical genres.
The album's lead single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together", was a worldwide commercial success, topping the iTunes charts all over the world and selling 623,000 copies in the first week, becoming Swift's first ever "Billboard" Hot 100 chart-topper after vaulting from 72 to number one and staying atop for three weeks. The second single, "Begin Again", was released on October 1. "I Knew You Were Trouble" was released as the third official single (promoted, like "Begin Again", from promotional single status) on November 27, 2012, becoming one of Swift's highest charting singles in both the UK and the US. "22" will be released as the fourth single from the album. "Red" has also spawned three other promotional singles, all of which reached top 15 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart. 
"Red" has been critically acclaimed by music critics, who praised Swift's versatility as a musician and enjoyed her experiments with new music genres. "Red" sold 1,208,000 copies in its first week in the US, debuting at number one on the "Billboard" 200 chart, the second-highest debut for a female artist, behind "Oops!... I Did It Again" by Britney Spears. It also spent 13 consecutive weeks at number one on "Billboard"'s Country Albums chart. "Red" became Swift's first chart-topper in the UK, and also topped the album charts in Australia, Canada, Ireland and New Zealand. The album sold 1.89 million copies in its first three weeks, surpassing One Direction's "Up All Night" as the second biggest-selling album of the year in the US. As of January 2013, the album has sold over 4 million copies in the US and nearly 5.4 million copies worldwide. 
Background and release.
</ref>
During the live webchat, she also revealed that she wrote more than 30 songs for the album, which she included 16 of them for the album and expressed that really dysfunctional and not good relationships can provide a lot of inspiration. Differently from her previous album "Speak Now" (2010), Swift enlisted the help of several of her favorite songwriters. In an interview with MTV News, the singer revealed that "This album is interesting because each song stands on its own. It's this patchwork quilt of different sounds and different emotions, and I don't think anything on the record sounds like ['We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together']". She also previewed songs from the album on "Good Morning America" every Monday, beginning on September 24 until October 15. Swift performed on October 22 for the album's release and the next day she performed a live concert on the same show. According to the singer she had spent over two years with the recording process, writing and preparation for the album. Sarah Barlow shot the album's cover, in which shows Swift's face and using red lipstick. The standard and deluxe versions of the album were released on October 22, 2012 in Italy, New Zealand, the United States, among others. A karaoke version of the album was also released on Fabruary 5, 2013 on iTunes Store, which includes the instrumental version from all tracks of its standard version.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Red" received critical acclaim from music critics. On Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 77 based on 22 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews." Melissa Maerz of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the album a (B+) and wrote that "Red" finds her singing about walking directly into traffic wading into quicksand and flirting with the kinds of jerks Kanye West might toast to" and closed the review saying that the album might be about flirting with danger." "The Guardian" was also very positive on the album, gave it four-stars-out-of-five and wrote: ""Red" was allegedly inspired by her experience of love and its fast-paced, crazy adventures, how she's had time to open her door to such a parade of lovers good and bad, God only knows." Jon Dolan from "Rolling Stone" found some influences on the album such as Joni Mitchell and U2, rated it three-and-half-stars out of five and said: "her self-discovery project is one of the best stories in pop. When she's really on, her songs are like tattoos." "Billboard" gave a very positive review to the album, called it "her most interesting full-length to date" and said that ""Red" puts Swift the artist front and center with big, beefy hooks that transcend her country roots for a genre-spanning record that reaches heights unseen since Shania Twain's "Up!"."
Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic stated that "Although she can still seem a little gangly in her lyrical details -- her relationship songs are too on the nose and she has an odd obsession about her perceived persecution by the cool kids -- these details hardly undermine the pristine pop confections surrounding them. If anything, these ungainly, awkward phrasings humanizes this mammoth pop monolith: she's constructed something so precise its success seems preordained, but underneath it all, Taylor is still twitchy, which makes "Red" not just catchy but compelling." Robert Christgau praised the album by saying that he likes the feisty ones, and complimented that "Begin Again" and "Stay Stay Stay" stay happy and hit as hard. Michael Gallucci of "The A.V. Club" said "Lyrically, it's the same path Swift has walked since her 2006 debut, just deeper and a little darker. But musically, it's bigger and bolder than anything she's ever done in the pop world." however saying "It's magnificent at times, but it's also complicated and sometimes unfocused". He dismissed the duets as boring, however, praising "State of Grace" and "All Too Well" as "occsionally fascinating work".
"Spin" positively said "Whatever it is, this music is full of adult pleasures, even if the most explicit image Swift offers is of an ex-boyfriend sniffing her scarf because it smells like her. On "Red" — the color of blood and lipstick and fire and Southern dirt and hearts and conservatism and tractors and communism and sin, this last a word whose charged valence here might discomfit know-it-alls who would never use it without scare quotes — Swift's too smart and tuneful to condescend to her contradictions. Or to yours." The "Los Angeles Times" praised the album by saying the "versatility is the album's most striking characteristic" and "By setting rural music alongside more 'urban' sounds of the moment, Swift is arguably just responding to a pop world in which country singles might please her base, but certainly doesn't expand it. But that's the cynic's view, and Swift on "Red" has little time for cynicism. Rather, she's striving for something much more grand and accomplished." Slant Magazine was critical, but said "While songs like "All Too Well" and "Treacherous" prove how adept Swift is at expressing genuine insights into complex relationship dynamics, there are also a handful of songs that lack her usual spark. Still, if "Red" is ultimately too uneven to be a truly great pop album, its highlights are career-best work for Swift, who now sounds like the pop star she was destined to be all along." Sputnikmusic was negative, saying that the album "tries to be everywhere all at once" and "as it stands for now though, "Red" is a mixed bag, and it's up to you to sort through the majority-holding bad in order to find the good".
Commercial response.
"Red" was a commercial success. In the United States, "Red" became the fastest-selling album in over a decade after selling 1,208,000 copies in its first week, and earned Swift her third number one album on the "Billboard" 200 and fifth top ten album. "Red" has the second highest first week sum by a female artist, only behind Britney Spears' "Oops!... I Did It Again" which opened with 1.3 million units. "Red" has the biggest sales week in 2012 which outsold the top 52 albums in the "Billboard" 200 during its debut week. "Red" has also the biggest one week sales for a country album beating Garth Brooks' "Double Live" which sold 1,085,000 copies in 1998. She is also the first female artist, first country artist, and fourth artist to achieve two or more albums with first week sales of more than a million. She is also the second artist, after the Backstreet Boys to see the sales increase from its first million-selling first-week to its second. "Red" sold 465,000 digital copies in its first week in the US, which is the second biggest after Lady Gaga's "Born This Way", which sold more including around 400,000 which were sold at 99 cents by Amazon. She is also the third female country artist to notch three number one albums. It sold around 1.459 million copies worldwide in its first week of sales. In its second week on the "Billboard" 200, the album remained at number one and sold 344,000 copies (down 72%). In its third week the album remained at number one and sold 196,000 (down 43%) which brought its sales to 1.749 million copies during its first three weeks of release and was easily ranked third biggest selling album of 2012 behind Adele's "21" and One Direction's "Up All Night". The album was dethroned by One Direction's "Take Me Home" on its fourth week and fell to number two spot selling 145,000. On its fifth week of release, the album stayed at number two (having been blocked by Rihanna's "Unapologetic" which sold 238,000 copies that time) selling 185,000 (up 25%) in its fifth week The album was steady at number two until its sixth week selling 136,000 copies., all the while maintaining the number two spot. On its seventh week, "Red" climbs back to number one on the "Billboard" 200 selling 167,000 and with that, Swift is now tied with Jay-Z and Whitney Houston for fourth most-weeks at number one on the "Billboard" 200 since Nielsen SoundScan began tracking in 1991. Swift held the "Billboard" 200 for its fifth non-consecutive weeks on its eighth week of release selling 208,000 copies and garnered the greatest gainer in that week. On it's ninth week the album reigned on top of the Billboard 200 for a sixth non-consecutive week at number one moving an additional 276,000 (up 32%), thus making Swift as the first artist since The Beatles way back in 1969 to log six or more weeks at number one with three consecutive studio albums. She achieves the feat with "Red", which tops The Billboard 200 for the sixth week. It follows "Fearless" (eleven weeks) and "Speak Now" (six weeks), thus making Swift as the female and solo artist to do so. Also, this is the third time that Swift has had the number one album in the last week before Christmas, which is traditionally the most competitive week of the year. She also achieved the feat with "Fearless" in 2008 and "Speak Now" in 2010. Since 1991, only one other artist has had the number one album in the last week before Christmas three times. Garth Brooks scored with "The Hits" in 1994, "Sevens" in 1997 and "Double Live" in 1998. "Red" spent its seventh non-consecutive week at number one in the sales week ending Dec. 30 2012, selling 241,000 (down 12%). This gave Swift a total of 24 weeks atop the "Billboard" 200 throughout her career, tying her with Adele as the woman with most weeks at No. 1 since SoundScan began powering the Billboard 200 in May, 1991. "Red" finished 2012 as the second biggest album despite being out for only two months, selling 3.11 million. It makes the fourth time she has an album ranked in the year's top three sellers.
"Red" also received commercial success outside the United States. In the United Kingdom, Swift garnered her first number one album with "Red" with sales of 61,000 copies on its opening week. In Canada, "Red" ranks Swift's third number one album as well selling 93,000 copies on its debut week and has easily crossed the Platinum certification in that country. With that sales, "Red" became the biggest one week sales in Canada since Michael Bublé's "Christmas" moved 107,000 copies last Christmas season of 2011 and the biggest first week sales since 2008. To date, "Red" has been certified triple platinum by Music Canada with shipments exceeding 240,000 copies. In Australia, the album debuted at number one and spent a total of three consecutive weeks at the top, becoming Swift's longest running number one album in Australia; "Red" has already been certified double platinum by the ARIA with shipments of 140,000 copies. In New Zealand, the album also became Swift's third number one album, and has been certified platinum by the RIANZ. Worldwide, Swift set a new worldwide iTunes record for highest ever first-week album sales with 566,000 copies sold digitally around the globe. The album has sold over 5.4 million copies worldwide.
Accolades.
"Red" was included on many year-end best-of lists. The album appeared at the runner-up spot on "Associated Press", "Rolling Stone" and Idolator, with the latter saying that ""Red" showcased abilities marvelously, in finely hewn details, the most varied production styles of her career and storytelling that remains as emotionally ass-whooping as any artist with her reach." Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" also ranked "Red" number two on his top ten albums list, stating that "[Swift goes Day-Glo on the most unexpected moments of this album, her fourth and the first that stops pretending she’s anything but a pop megastar." MTV ranked "Red" number three, stating that "Swift takes tremendous strides towards becoming a genuine artist, the kind equally adept at penning heartbreakers." The album was appeared at number five on "Billboard"'s top ten best albums of 2012, saying that ""Red" will likely be remembered for its sonic risks, with the pop of "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" and the dubstep wobbles of "I Knew You Were Trouble" pushing the country star out of her comfort zone." "The Daily Beast" writer Marlow Stern ranked the album at number seven, calling it "an uneven LP that nonetheless contains a diverse array of infectious tunes." while Glenn Gamboa of "Newsday" ranked the album number six, stating that Taylor "comes out as a full-fledged pop superstar." "Red" also ranked at number ten on both "The Salt Lake Tribune" and HitFix.
Promotion.
Singles.
The album's lead single, "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" was released on August 13 and has since became Swift's first number one single on the US "Billboard" Hot 100. The song's jump from its debut position number 72 to number one was the result of a massive digital demand on the song. With 623,000 downloads, the song placed second among all-time best week sales singles, behind Flo Rida's 2009 hit "Right Round." It stayed at number one for 7 weeks. It peaked at number 4 on the UK Singles Charts, giving her her first top 10 since "Love Story". As of December 2012, it has sold more than 3 million downloads in USA.
"Begin Again" was released to iTunes on September 25, 2012 as part of a countdown to the album release. It was later announced the track, initially a promotional single, would be serviced to country radio on October 1, 2012 as the second single from the album. The song sold 299,000 digital copies in its first week of release and debuted at number 7 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart dated October 4, 2012. A few hours later, “Begin Again” got an early release on iTunes, where it’s already shot to No. 1, thereby becoming the first single to dethrone “Gangnam Style” in a week.
"I Knew You Were Trouble" was released as the third single from "Red" on November 27, 2012 and impacted radio stations in the United States. and the second single for the album in the United Kingdom on December 10, 2012. The song debuted at number three on Billboard Hot 100 with 416,000 copies sold in its first week, Swift's second largest first week singles sales. It became Swift's 14th top 10 hit and her 11th song to debut inside the top 10. With sales of 416,000 from "I Knew You Were Trouble", Taylor Swift became the first artist in digital history to have two songs that debuted with sales of 400,000 or more copies. In its 11th week, it sold a massive sum of 582,000 in the US, making it the fourth biggest digital sales week of all time. It caused the song to re-peak at number 2 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. "I Knew You Were Trouble" became a commercial success, selling over 3 million copies in the US and reaching number one on Billboard's Hot 100 Airplay chart, and also reached the top ten in ten countries.
"22" is set for release as the fourth single from "Red". It was sent to Australian radio on February 4, 2013. It will be released in the United States on March 5, 2013 and in the United Kingdom on April 1, 2013..
Promotional singles.
During the four weeks preceding the release of "Red", one track was released each week digitally on iTunes after a preview of it had been heard on "Good Morning America". The first of the four promotional singles is "Begin Again", which was released digitally on iTunes on September 25, 2012. "Red" is the second promotional single off the album, and became available for download on October 2, 2012. "Red" debuted at number 6 on the Hot 100 with sales of 312,000. "I Knew You Were Trouble" is the third promotional single off the album, and became available for download on October 9, 2012. The fourth and final promotional single is "State of Grace", which became available for download on October 16, 2012. Each of them reached No. 1 on iTunes and the top 15 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, with "I Knew You Were Trouble" having the highest peak at No. 3 as Swift's 14th top 10 song. With sales of 416,000 from "I Knew You Were Trouble" Taylor Swift became the first artist in digital history to have two songs that debuted with sales of 400,000 or more copies.
Tour.
Swift has announced details of the first leg of her Red Tour. From March to September 2013, she is set to play 58 dates across North America. Ed Sheeran is scheduled to appear as the opening act for all dates.
