This is a list of country calling codes defined by ITU-T recommendations E.123 and E.164, also called IDD (International Direct Dialling) or ISD (International Subscriber Dialling) codes.
The telephone numbering plan for a telephone system includes an international dialing prefix, such as "00" or "011", which is added before the country calling code and is specific to the country from which the caller is dialling. Generally, as in the list below, the need for this prefix is specified with a "+".
At a glance.
Country calling codes form a prefix code; hence, they can be organized as a tree. In each row of the table below, the country codes given in the leftmost column share the same first digit; then subsequent columns give the second digit in ascending order.
In depth.
While there is a general geographic grouping to the zones, many exceptions exist for various political and historical reasons. Thus, the geographical indicators below are approximations only.
Zone 1 – North American Numbering Plan Area.
Countries within NANP (North American Numbering Plan) administered areas are assigned area codes as if they were all within one country. The codes below in format +1 XXX represent area code XXX within the +1 NANP zone – not a separate country code.
Zones 3/4 – Europe.
Originally larger countries, such as the United Kingdom or France, were assigned two-digit codes (to compensate for their usually longer domestic numbers) and small countries, such as Iceland, were assigned three-digit codes; however, since the 1980s, all new assignments have been three-digit regardless of countries’ populations.
History.
CCITT, the predecessor of the ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T), developed the first formal list of telephone country codes. This list was included in the "1964 CCITT Blue Book", among other international telecommunication recommendations, which would eventually become ITU-T recommendation E.164.
An earlier system of country codes for European use was mentioned in the "1960 CCITT Red Book". Some of these country codes were retained in the CCITT country code assignments and remain in effect (for example, France +33, United Kingdom +44).
For further details on country code history and development, see "History of Country Codes" (WTNG).
