Last Resort is an American military drama television series, that aired on ABC from September 27, 2012 to January 24, 2013. The series was created by Shawn Ryan and Karl Gajdusek and produced by Sony Pictures Television. On November 16, 2012, ABC announced that the series would not be picked up for a full season but finished its original thirteen-episode run.
Plot.
When the crew of the fictional U.S. Navy "Ohio"-class ballistic missile submarine, the USS "Colorado" (SSBN-753) pick up a U.S. Navy SEAL team off Pakistan's coast, the "Colorado" receives an order to launch nuclear ballistic missiles at Pakistan. "Colorado"s Commanding Officer, Captain Marcus Chaplin (Andre Braugher), asks for confirmation of the firing order because the orders were received through a legacy Cold War secondary communication channel, only to be used in the event that Washington, D.C. has already been destroyed. After confirming Washington's continued existence and refusing to fire the missiles until the command is sent through the proper system, Chaplin is relieved of command by the then-Deputy Secretary of Defense William Curry, and the "Colorado"s second in command, Lieutenant Commander Sam Kendal (Scott Speedman), is given command instead. When Kendal also questions the orders and asks for confirmation, the vessel is fired upon by the "Virginia"-class submarine USS "Illinois" (SSN-786). Two nuclear missile strikes are subsequently made on Pakistan by other U.S. forces.
Realizing that they've been declared enemies of their own country, the "Colorado" seeks refuge on the island of Sainte Marina (a fictional French island located in the Indian Ocean) and commandeer a NATO communications and missile warning facility. When a pair of B-1 bombers are sent to attack the submarine and island, Chaplin launches a Trident nuclear missile towards Washington, D.C. to impress upon the national leadership that he's serious. The B-1s turn away at the last minute, but Chaplin (who has altered the missile's final target coordinates) allows the missile to visibly overfly Washington, D.C. and explode 200 miles beyond in the open Atlantic, the explosion clearly visible from both Washington and New York City. Via a television feed to the media, he then declares a 200-mile exclusion zone around Sainte Marina.
Now the crew must find a way to prove their innocence and find out who in the U.S. government has set them up so that they can finally return home.
As the series progresses, Chaplin finds himself having to make reluctant allies with China, while trying to keep his own crew, led by Chief of the Boat Joseph Prosser (Robert Patrick), from rebelling against him and while combating the schemes of the local drug lord Julian Serrat (Sahr Ngaujah). The series also follows the efforts of Kylie Sinclair (Autumn Reeser), a female weapons designer back home who allies with Christine Kendal (Jessy Schram), the wife of the "Colorado"s XO to find out the truth behind the nuclear attack on Pakistan and the "Colorado"s fugitive status. An ongoing subplot involves a Navy SEAL named James King (Daniel Lissing) who, wracked with guilt over his role in the events leading to the nuking of Pakistan, cultivates a romance with one of the island residents (Dichen Lachman) while surreptitiously aiding the XO.
The series concludes with a series of mutinies, ending with the "Colorado" destroyed with Chaplin still on board, the surviving crew returning home to the United States, the President assassinated and the full story made public when Kylie Sinclair arranges for proof of the President and his administration's traitorous activities to be handed over to the press.
Production.
ABC greenlit the pilot in January 2012, allowing filming to begin. The show was filmed in Oahu, Hawaii and produced by Sony Pictures Television. Thirteen episodes were ordered, and on October 19, 2012, ABC ordered two additional scripts for the series.
On November 16, 2012, ABC announced that they would not be taking on "Last Resort" for a full season, but aired the thirteen episodes that were produced, and also passed on producing the two additional scripts that were ordered.
On November 21, 2012, the producers revealed they had been given enough notice of the network's cancellation plans so they could "tweak" the final episode to function as a series finale and give the fans some closure.
Critical reception.
The initial episode was met with positive reviews from critics, with a score of 74 out of 100 based on 30 reviews from Metacritic.
International broadcast.
In Canada, the show aired simultaneously with the American broadcast on Global on Thursdays at 8:00 pm.
The series premiered in the Asia-Pacific region on AXN Asia on October 2, 2012, and premiered in Latin America on AXN Latin America on November 7, 2012. It premiered in Italy on Fox Italia on October 8, 2012. The series has been picked up in the United Kingdom and Ireland by Sky1 and premiered on October 30, 2012. The series has also been picked up in Denmark by TV3 and premiered on November 6, 2012. It premiered in Bulgaria on January 15, 2013 on Fox Bulgaria. It premiered in Australia on the Seven Network on February 20, 2013.
