Joseph Vijay Chandrasekhar (born on 22 June 1974), popularly known by his stage name Vijay, is an Indian actor, playback singer and producer, who works predominantly in the Tamil film industry. Son of film director and producer S. A. Chandrasekhar, Vijay made his debut as a lead actor in the 1992 film "Naalaya Theerpu", and has since then starred in numerous commercially successful and acclaimed films in various genres, the most recent one being "Thuppakki". To date, he has acted in 54 films as a lead actor.
Vijay has been widely referred as "Ilayathalapathy" ("Young Commander") since the early period of his career. He has been awarded two Tamil Nadu State Film Awards, nominated for one Filmfare Award and conferred honorary doctorate by MGR University for his extensive philanthropic works in 2007. He launched the Vijay Makkal Iyakkam, a social welfare organisation in 2009. He is also involved in politics, aligning with the currently ruling All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) in the 2011 Tamil Nadu assembly election.
Early life.
Joseph Vijay Chandrasekhar was born on June 22, 1974, to film producer and director S. A. Chandrasekhar and Shoba Chandrasekhar, a playback singer. He had a sister named Vidhya Chandrasekhar who died at the age of two. Vijay went on to do Visual Communications at Loyola College, Chennai. He was interestingly classmates with present-day film artistes Surya Sivakumar, Yuvan Shankar Raja, Karthik Raja, and Vishnuvardhan. He entered film industry in 1992 at the age of 18 against the wishes of his parents who initially wanted him to become doctor.
Career.
Early career (1992–96).
During his childhood, Vijay performed in uncredited roles in films produced by his father. Vijay debuted as a lead role actor in the 1992 film "Naalaya Theerpu", produced by his father. After a few other films, he co-stared with Vijayakanth in the film "Sendhoorapandi". After films like "Rasigan" and "Deva", In his fifth film "Rajavin Parvaiyile" in 1993, he co-starred with another leading actor Ajith Kumar, who played supporting role in that film. He further went on to act in the romantic comedy "Vishnu" and romantic tragedy "Chandralekha" later. In early 1996, he starred in "Coimbatore Mappillai" a romantic comedy film.
Breakthrough (1996–03).
His next flim was the Vikraman-directed "Poove Unakkaga" which was his first commercial success and made Vijay a recognizable star. Vijay's tenth film "Vasantha Vasal" was followed by the action flicks "Maanbumigu Maanavan" and "Selva" and the romantic film "Kaalamellam Kaathiruppen". In 1997 Vijay acted in the commercially successful movies "Love Today","Once More", where he co-starred with the legendary Tamil film actor Sivaji Ganesan and leading actress Simran, the Mani Ratnam-produced "Nerukku Ner", directed by Vasanth, where he co-starred with another leading actor Suriya who made his debut in that film and the romantic drama "Kadhalukku Mariyadhai",co-starring Shalini Kumar which was directed by Fazil and earned him a Tamil Nadu State Film Award for Best Actor. In 1998, Vijay worked in romantic films "Ninaithen Vandhai", "Priyamudan" which was his first negative role, and "Nilaave Vaa". In 1999 Vijay acted in the successful "Thulladha Manamum Thullum" again with Simran. This was followed by "Endrendrum Kadhal", "Nenjinile" and the K.S.Ravikumar directed "Minsara Kanna". 
From the start of the new millennium Vijay began to commit to entertaining and commercial ventures, which marked a change in his trend. In 2000 he did "Kannukkul Nilavu" with Fazil. His next venture "Kushi", a romantic comedy co-starring Jyothika was directed by S. J. Suryah and became a box office hit. At the end of the year, he acted in a romantic drama, "Priyamanavale", which was also a box office hit. His 2001 romantic comedy film "Friends" was directed by Siddique and featured him in the leading role alongside Suriya again, this film topped the years box office and became a blockbuster. Followed by "Badri" an action–drama film which was the remake of the Telugu film "Thammudu" a super hit and "Shahjahan", a romantic drama film which was moderately successful at the box office. In 2002, he starred in "Thamizhan" alongside Priyanka Chopra who made her acting debut in that film before her establishment as the leading Bollywood actress. The film was a box office hit, giving Vijay his only hit film of the that time. Later, he featured in the romantic drama "Youth" and action drama "Bagavathi" there by rounded off the year with 1 hit and 2 failures. Vijay began 2003 with the films "Vaseegara" and "Pudhiya Geethai", both failures at the box office.
Commercial stardom (2003–07).
In late 2003, Vijay transformed from a romantic hero to an action hero, with the action-romance flick, "Thirumalai" directed by debutant Ramana and produced by K.Balachander's Kavithalaya Productions, which featured him in a new look and was a box office hit. "Thirumalai" was a turning point in Vijay's career. His new commercial mass acting style and punch dialogue delivery coupled with his comic timing endeared him to all types of audiences and he soon achieved leading status in Kollywood. "Udhaya", a film which began filming in 2002 but became delayed, finally released at the start of 2004. "Ghilli",a remake of the Telugu film "Okkadu" released next in 2004, and became Vijay's biggest blockbuster at the time completing 200 days in theatres in Tamil Nadu. Directed by S. Dharani and produced by A. M. Rathnam, it co-starred Trisha and Prakash Raj, and was the biggest hit for Vijay at that period.
It was followed by "Madhurey", another hit which was directed by R.Madesh. In 2005, he starred in the Perarasu-directed action film "Thirupaachi" which became a blockbuster hit, followed by a guest appearance in "Sukran",the romantic comedy "Sachien" co-starring Genelia which became a decent hit, and the successful commercial film "Sivakasi" co-starring Asin, which was directed again by Perarasu. His next film "Aadhi" was produced by his father S.A.Chandrashekar and directed by Ramana again released in 2006, and was not well received despite its huge expectations.In early 2007, Vijay starred in the gangster film "Pokkiri", the remake of the another Telugu film of the same name. Directed by Prabhu Deva, it became a box office blockbuster and the second highest grossing Tamil film of 2007. Vijay's character in the film, a reprisal of Mahesh Babu's role in the original, was well praised by critics.
Career slump (2007–10).
In late 2007, Vijay starred in the extrasensory perception thriller film "Azhagiya Thamizh Magan", and for the first time in his career, he appeared in dual roles as both the antagonist and protagonist, and was a box office failure, despite the initial hype and expectations. In 2008, he starred in the action film "Kuruvi", again under Dharani's direction, which also failed at the box office.
The year 2009 started off with the action masala film "Villu", which was directed by Prabhu Deva who was keen on working with him again after "Pokkiri". Vijay's next film "Vettaikaaran" which was directed by Babu Sivan, produced by AVM Productions and distributed by Sun Pictures was a hit,his first since "Pokkiri". In 2010, he acted in his 50th film, "Sura" also distributed by Sun Pictures. "Sura" released admist huge fanfare and expectations, but was a box office disaster. Vijay was forced to give a compensation of to the theatre owners who had suffered losses due to the screening of his recent films. Most of his films during this period did not do well at the box office and Vijay's status as a leading star was questioned by critics. In late 2010 Vijay even fell out with the ruling Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam, which was virtually controlling the film industry at the time, following which he aligned with the All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam and featured in its success in the 2011 assembly election.
Resurgence (2011–present).
In the start of 2011 he associated with director Siddique again, for the romantic drama "Kaavalan", the Tamil remake of the Malayalam film "Bodyguard" also co-starring Asin. It received a positive response from both viewers and critics and was deemed to be a box office hit, in spite of the ruling DMK stalling its release in many theatres which forced Vijay to shell out his salary and spend an extra for the release of the film. During Diwali the same year, his next film, the action film "Velayudham" directed by M. Raja and produced by Venu Ravichandran released and was a box office blockbuster. "Velayudham" became one of the top grossing films of 2011.
His next release was "Nanban", the Tamil remake of the Bollywood blockbuster "3 Idiots", where he essayed the role played by Aamir Khan in the original. Directed by acclaimed director S. Shankar, it released during the Pongal weekend of 2012 and was a box office blockbuster. Vijay's performance in the film was praised by critics, including leading Indian actor Kamal Haasan. "Nanban" went on to complete its 100th day theatrical run. "Nanban" was the biggest hit for Vijay at the time of release.He made a special appearance in the 2012 Bollywood film "Rowdy Rathore" starring Akshay Kumar, directed by Prabhu Deva. 
His next action thriller film "Thuppakki", directed by A. R. Murugadoss and produced by S. Dhanu, released on Diwali 2012 to highly positive reviews and was a commercial success across the globe. "Thuppaki" was declared as a blockbuster. The film officially entered into the club in kollywood and made Vijay only the second actor after Rajnikanth to cross this mark.
His next flim "Thalaivaa" co-starring Amala Paul and directed by A. L. Vijay is under production Following which he will star in "Jilla" co-starring Kajal Aggarwal alongside Mohanlal, directed by debutante Nesan who was an assistant director in "Velayudham".
Discography.
Vijay is also a successful playback singer. He sang most of his songs in films he acted and a few for fellow actors. His first song was "Bombay City" from "Rasigan". Later on he sang "Naa Dhum Adhikkura" for actor Suriya for the film "Periyanna". He then sang "Vaadi Vaadi" in the film "Sachein". After 7 years he sang "Google Google" for Harris Jayaraj for his film "Thuppakki". He recently sung his 25th song in "Thalaivaa" with G. V. Prakash Kumar composing the music.
Personal life.
Family.
Vijay married Sangeetha Sornalingam of Sri Lankan Tamil descent on August 25, 1999. They have two children, a son Jason Sanjay born in 2000 in London, and a daughter Divya Saasha born in 2005 in Chennai.
Brand endorsement.
In the year 2002, Vijay appeared as Coca Cola's brand ambassador in Tamil Nadu. He acted in a variety of South Indian Coca Cola advertisements, along with Katrina Kaif. In 2008, Vijay was signed up as the star ambassador for the Indian Premier League cricket team Chennai Super Kings, along with actress Nayanthara. In January 2009, Vijay was approached as the brand ambassador for Coca Cola products. As of August 2010, Vijay was signed by Jos Alukkas as their brand ambassador for Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Vijay also signed for Tata Docomo, who will be seen for the first time for an Ad with Tata Docomo who are known for their innovative promotions all over.
Political and social activism.
In 2009, Vijay was speculated joining the Indian National Congress after he met with Rahul Gandhi. In 2010, he fell out with then ruling DMK party owing to the delay of the release of his film Kaavalan in order to release the Kamal Hassan starrer Manmadhan Ambu, which was produced by DMK leader and the then Deputy Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu M. K. Stalin's son Udhayanidhi Stalin.
In early 2011, Vijay openly expressed his desire to enter politics and his father S.A. Chandrasekhar confirmed it, saying that Vijay will officially enter politics at the age of 40.
Following which he declared his support for the AIADMK led alliance in the 2011 state assembly election, and the AIADMK welcomed him by providing 3 seats to his fan club, "Vijay Makkal Iyakkam" He campaigned extensively for the AIADMK during the election campaign. He made a speech in Nagapattinam, condemning the attack on the fishermen by the Sri Lankan Government, thus marking his political visionnage.
On 25 August 2011, Vijay went to the Ramlila Maidan to meet Anna Hazare and expressed support to the anti-corruption movement for the Lokpal. He lauded that the movement is getting public support without any political background and said that "the Gandhian's stir has triggered a nationwide debate on uprooting corruption".
The film Thalaivaa (2013) was speculated to be a political film, but this was denied by Vijay in an interview with a Tamil daily.
Philanthropy.
Vijay converted his fan clubs into a people's movement called Vijay Makkal Iyakkam which was officially launched at Pudukottai on 26 July 2009. His Makkal Iyakkam is responsible for most of the philanthropic activities conducted by the star. After Cyclone Thane his Makkal Mandram administrators arranged for a function at Kammiyampettai, Cuddalore where the star distributed five kilos of rice to the affected people. Cuddalore was the worst affected area in floods and Vijay reached out to help these people out by rendering some assistance. The area in which the function happened soon wore a festive look with thousands of people gathering to catch a glimpse of their favorite star. Vijay has appeared along with Suriya, R. Madhavan and Jyothika in a short commercial video about child poverty, labour and lack of education, titled "Herova? Zerova?" produced by Surya in an effort to eliminate children who drop out of school at an early age, made in association with Vishnuvardhan Induri the founder of CCL and the Ministry of Education of Tamil Nadu". "The Ilayathalapathy Vijay Educational Awards 2012 was conducted at JS Kalyana Mandapam in Chennai on 8 July 2012 by his Vijay Makkal Iyakkam to honour the students topped in 2012 SSLC and 12th board exams and the awards were distributed by Vijay himself. On his every birthday, Vijay presents golden rings to the new born babies at the Egmore Government General Hospital.
