Helen Elizabeth Hunt (born June 15, 1963) is an American actress, film director, and screenwriter. She starred in the sitcom, "Mad About You", for seven years before being cast in the 1997 romantic comedy film, "As Good as It Gets" for which she won the Academy Award for Best Actress. Some of her other notable films include "Twister", "Cast Away", "What Women Want", "Pay It Forward", "Soul Surfer" and "The Sessions". She made her directorial debut in 2007 with "Then She Found Me". She has won four Emmy awards, four Golden Globe awards, two Screen Actors Guild awards, and an Oscar.
Early life.
Hunt was born in Culver City, California. Her mother, Jane Elizabeth (née Novis), worked as a photographer, and her father, Gordon E. Hunt, is a film director and acting coach. Her uncle, Peter H. Hunt, is also a director. Her Iowa-born maternal grandmother, Dorothy (Anderson) Fries, was a voice coach. Hunt's paternal grandmother was from a German Jewish family, while Hunt's other grandparents were of English descent (her maternal grandfather was born in England).
When she was three, Hunt's family moved to New York City, where her father directed theatre (Hunt attended plays as a child several times a week). Hunt studied ballet, and attended UCLA.
Career.
Hunt began working as a child actress in the 1970s. Her early roles included an appearance as Murray Slaughter's daughter on "The Mary Tyler Moore Show", alongside Lindsay Wagner in an episode of "The Bionic Woman", an appearance in an episode of "Ark II" called Omega, and a regular role in the television series "The Swiss Family Robinson". She appeared as a marijuana-smoking classmate on an episode of "The Facts of Life". Hunt also played a young woman who, while on PCP, jumps out of a second-storey window, in a 1982 after school special called "Desperate Lives" (a scene which she mocked during a "Saturday Night Live" monologue in 1994). That same year, Hunt was cast on the ABC sitcom "It Takes Two", which lasted a single season. In the mid-1980s, she had a recurring role on "St. Elsewhere" as Clancy Williams, the girlfriend of Dr. Jack "Boomer" Morrison. She played Jennie in the television movie "", co-starring Mickey Rooney. She also starred in the 1985 film "Girls Just Wanna Have Fun", with Sarah Jessica Parker and Shannen Doherty.
In the 1990s, after playing the lead female role in the short-lived "My Life and Times", Hunt starred in the series "Mad About You", winning Emmy Awards for her performances in 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999. In 1998, Hunt won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of Carol Connelly in the movie "As Good as It Gets"; the character is a waitress and single mother who finds herself falling in love with Melvin Udall, an obsessive-compulsive romance novelist played by Jack Nicholson. After winning the Academy Award, she took time off from movie work to play Viola in Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night", at Lincoln Center in New York.
In 2000, Hunt starred in four films: "Dr. T & the Women", with Richard Gere; "Pay It Forward", with Kevin Spacey and Haley Joel Osment; "What Women Want", with Mel Gibson; and "Cast Away", with Tom Hanks. In 2003, she returned to Broadway in Yasmina Reza's "Life x 3". In 2006, Hunt appeared in the ensemble cast film "Bobby" alongside Demi Moore, Anthony Hopkins, Sharon Stone and William H. Macy.
Hunt directed several episodes of "Mad About You", including the series finale. Her big-screen directorial debut came with the film "Then She Found Me", in which she also starred, with Colin Firth and Matthew Broderick.
She currently owns a production company with Connie Tavel, Hunt/Tavel Productions under Sony Pictures Entertainment.
Personal life.
Hunt was married to actor Hank Azaria from 1999 until 2000. She has been in a relationship with producer/writer/director Matthew Carnahan since 2001. They have a daughter, Makena Lei Gordon Carnahan, born on May 13, 2004.
Filmography and awards.
Hunt has been recognized extensively in her career. In 1998 she won a Golden Globe Award, an Academy Award and an Emmy Award in the same year. Hunt was nominated for an Emmy Award for lead actress in a comedy seven years in a row, from 1993 through 1999, winning in the last four years.
