Tomb Raider is an upcoming action-adventure platform video game. Published by Square Enix, "Tomb Raider" is the fifth title developed by Crystal Dynamics in the "Tomb Raider" franchise. As the first entry in a new "Tomb Raider" continuity, the game is a reboot that emphasizes the reconstructed origins of the culturally influential lead character Lara Croft. "Tomb Raider" is scheduled for release on 5 March 2013 for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows. It has become the first "Tomb Raider" game to be given an "M" (Mature) rating by the Entertainment Software Rating Board, and also the first "Tomb Raider" game to be rated "18+" by Pan European Game Information.
Synopsis.
"Tomb Raider" explores the origin story of Lara Croft and her ascent from a frightened young woman to a hardened survivor. 
Plot.
Setting out to "make mark", Lara travels on the ship "Endurance" commanded by Conrad Roth. When the ship is struck by a violent storm and split in two, Lara and many other survivors are stranded on an isolated tropical island in the Dragon's Triangle. Lara has to find food and water to survive, fighting off the more dangerous animal inhabitants and trying to trace the other survivors. But a darker threat awaits as she is forced to harden herself against killing people in order to fight a group of malevolent mercenaries who seek to kill her and her companions.
Gameplay.
"Tomb Raider" is a hub-based game that combines action-adventure, role-playing elements, platforming, exploration, and survival mechanics.
During a Twitter session with fans, Karl Stewart said that the game's campaign will last between 12-15 hours. Along with the main story, players will have the chance to do multiple side quests, explore the island, revisit places, and search for challenge tombs. It has also been confirmed that fire will be a major tool in the game along with a bow and arrow and a gun.
Multiplayer.
The fourth episode of "The Final Hours of Tomb Raider", which went live on YouTube on 8 January 2013, announced that the game would have multiplayer features. The multiplayer mode was created by Canadian video game development studio Eidos Montreal, known for making "". According to the game's developers, there will be three types of games for multiplayer, played in five different maps. Many things available for the single-player campaign, are also added into multiplayer. In each game, there are two enemy teams: Four survivors and four scavengers, and they either try to eliminate the opposite team or attempt to bring medical supplies to certain points in the map. The player can also set traps or activate special features, according to the map the game is set in.
Development.
Following "", Crystal Dynamics was split into two teams; the first beginning work on the next sequential pillar of the "Tomb Raider" franchise, while the second focusing on the newly created spin-off "Lara Croft" series (debuting with "Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light" in 2010). Following pre-announcement media hype while the game's title was under embargo, in November, 2010, Square Enix filed for trademark of the slogan for the new "Tomb Raider" game; "A Survivor is Born". On 6 December 2010, Square Enix announced "Tomb Raider" had been in production for nearly 2 years; "Square Enix Ltd. is excited today to announce "Tomb Raider", the new game from Redwood City based studio Crystal Dynamics". Studio head Darrell Gallagher said, "Forget everything you knew about "Tomb Raider", this is an origins story that creates Lara Croft and takes her on a character defining journey like no other". "Game Informer" website and magazine ran a world exclusive cover reveal in its January 2011 issue, as well as exclusive coverage of emerging details directly from Crystal Dynamics from 12 December 2010. "Tomb Raider" will be the first game in the series expected to receive a M rating in the United States. 
In January 2012, when asked if the game would be available on Nintendo's Wii U console, Crystal Dynamics global brand director Karl Stewart responded there are no plans to have the game available on that platform. According to Stewart, the reason for this is that "it would not be right" for the game to simply be ported, as the developers built the game to be platform-specific before the Wii U was announced, and goes on to mention that if they started building the game for the platform "would build it very differently and [they would build it with unique functionality." In May 2012, it was announced by Darrell Gallagher, the studio head of Crystal Dynamics, that the game has been delayed and is now due to be released in the first quarter of 2013. He said: "We're doing things that are completely new to Tomb Raider in this game, and the additional development time will allow us to put the finishing touches into the game and polish it to a level that you deserve. We believe this is the right choice, and I guarantee it will be worth the wait."
Animated model.
Lara Croft's model is animated using compiled performance capture, a technique used in the previous installment "Tomb Raider: Underworld". The game will be the built on Crystal Dynamics's game engine called the "Crystal Engine". On 3 June 2011, the "Turning Point" CGI teaser trailer premiered at the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2011, emphasising the release date will be the third quarter of 2012. The trailer was produced by Square Enix's CGI studio Visual Works.
Voice cast.
Keeley Hawes will not be returning as Lara Croft for 2013's "Tomb Raider", after completing ', ', "" and "Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light". Her contribution spanned four years; the longest role of any of Croft's voice actresses in English. In December 2010, Crystal Dynamics was said to be trialling dozens of voice actresses. On 26 June 2012, the voice actress of Lara Croft was revealed to be Camilla Luddington. Nadine Njeim has been confirmed to be the Arabic voice actress.
Gameplay showcasings.
On 31 May 2012, a new gameplay trailer was released online, showcasing more action-based gameplay along with plot elements. The trailer also confirms the presence of several other non-playable characters besides Lara on the island, many of which appear to be in a menacing organization, much like in previous instalments in the franchise. On 4 June 2012, at Microsoft's E3 2012 press conference, a new gameplay demonstration was shown, depicting environmental destruction and other interactivity, mild stealth combat using a bow and arrow, quick-time events and parachuting. During Summer 2012, also other gameplays were shown: they are gameplays that show Lara hunting, exploring the island and killing for the first time. They were shown all together in a half-hour length gameplay without commentary at EuroGamer Expo 2012 at London on 27 September 2012. On 8 December 2012, a new trailer was shown during Spike Video Game Awards. At the beginning, an introduction was made by Camilla Luddington and during the event, the trailer was followed by a musical orchestra, led by the music composer, Jason Graves. The next week, IGN presented: "Tomb Raider Week". Each day from Monday to Friday, exclusive previews, features and trailers were released, showing more details for the upgrading system, survival tools and challenge tombs. "Tomb Raider" officially went gold on 8 February 2013.
Music.
A podcast was released by "Game Informer" on 21 December 2010, featuring a "sneak peek at a track from the game itself" composed by Aleksandar Dimitrijevic. However, 6 days later, tweets from Crystal Dynamics Global Brand Director, Karl Stewart, clarified Game Informer's statement; confirming that "Alex Dimitrijevic is scoring the trailer. We officially haven't announced the composer for the game". On 8 June 2011, after the trailer's première, Stewart stated in regard to the final "Turning Point" score that "...this piece is not a piece that Dimitrijevic's worked on". On 7 June 2011, Meagan Marie, community manager at Crystal Dynamics, expressed on the official "Tomb Raider" blog that "Our goal to make sure that we release a soundtrack". Stewart added "this is a complete new composer and somebody who we' ve brought in to work on the game as well as this [trailer piece" and that "we're going to make a bigger announcement later in the year".
In the "Making of Turning Point", sound designer Alex Wilmer explained that the unannounced composer had remotely directed an in-house concert violinist to perform the "very intimate" piece. In the fourth Crystal Habit podcast which premiered at the "Tomb Raider" blog on 17 October 2011, Marie spoke to Wilmer and lead sound designer Jack Grillo about their collaboration(s) with the unannounced composer. Grillo stated that "We're doing this overture... where we're taking an outline of the narrative structure and having our composer create different themes and textures that would span the entire game" while Wilmer emphasised that the composer's music will dynamically adapt in-game; scored "...emotionally so that it reacts instantly to what happens".
In an episode of "The Final Hours of Tomb Raider" on YouTube, the composer was revealed to be Jason Graves. On this episodes he affirms that his musical style is shaped by two classical composers Prokofiev and Tchaikovsky, and a more recent one: Krzysztof Penderecki. Penderecki's music is mostly industrial orchestral in style. Jason's new approach will remind a lot of his music, especially during the chasing scenes when Lara is under high stress and fear. During this reboot, the new Lara gets emotionally reshaped, while Jason underlines the action with deep music, recreating the original "Tomb Raider" theme that hasn't been so drastically changed during the past games, until now. He scores Lara's critical emotional moments (pain, worry, remorse, etc.), in a film music manner, combining these emotional feelings with industrial orchestral "horror" sounds that he specially designed for Lara. A custom-made instrument of glass and different metals was specially made for this score in collaboration with McConnell Studios from Raleigh, North Carolina. This instrument provides most of the horror sounds for the running and escaping scenes.
Release.
"Tomb Raider" is scheduled for release on 5 March 2013 for PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows.
Pre-order incentives.
In North America, GameStop offers the in-game Challenge Tomb as a pre-order. Best Buy orders will get the "Tomb Raider: The Beginnings", a 48-page hardcover graphic novel, written by the game's lead writer Rhianna Pratchett, and telling the story of "how the ill-fated voyage of the Endurance came to be". These orders will also come with the "Aviatrix Skin" as well as the "Shanty Town" multiplayer map. Walmart orders will receive a free digital download of "Lara Croft and the Guardian of Light", access to a real-life scavenger hunt, the "Shanty Town" multiplayer map and an exclusive "Guerrilla Skin" outfit. Pre-orders from Microsoft Store also receive 1600 Microsoft Points for Xbox Live. 
Exclusive to Amazon, pre-order customers will get access to the "Tomb Raider: The Final Hours Edition", which comes with a 32-page art book, an in-game "Hunter Skin" for Lara, and a digital copy of Geoff Keighley's "The Final Hours of Tomb Raider" for the Kindle Fire. Customers also receive the "Shanty Town" multiplayer map and an access code to a real-life scavenger hunt. Customers that pre-purchase from Steam also receive a free copy of "Lara Croft and the Guardian of the Light", a new Challenge Tomb entitled "Tomb of the Lost Adventurer", and the "Shanty Town" multiplayer map.
In the United Kingdom, ShopTo.net offers a digitised graphic novel, entitled "Tomb Raider: The Beginnings", along with pre-orders. Pre-orders from Amazon.co.uk receive the "Shanty Town" multiplayer map.
Retail editions.
Exclusive for Europe is the "Survival Edition". The "Survival Edition" comes with a mini art book, double sided map of the in-game island, CD soundtrack, a code for the weapon pack, and a survival pouch. The "Collector's Edition" for Europe contains everything from the "Survival Edition" along with an 8" Play Arts Kai Lara Croft figurine in a metal box. The "Collector's Edition" for North America is similar to the European one, however instead of a mini art book and a survival pouch it contains three iron-on badges and a lithograph.
The "Survival Edition" from Steam includes a digital 32-page art book, 10 downloadable tracks from the "Tomb Raider" soundtrack, a digital double sided map of the game's island, a digital comic, the "Guerilla Skin" outfit and three in-game weapons from "".
In the United Kingdom, Game offers the exclusive "Explorer Edition" bundle, which includes an exploration themed Challenge Tomb and a skill upgrade. Exclusive to Tesco is the "Combat Strike Pack", which includes three weaponry upgrades and a skill upgrade.
A limited edition wireless controller for the Xbox 360 will also be released on 5 March 2013. A download code for an Xbox exclusive playable "Tomb Raider" multiplayer character is also included.
Downloadable content.
At E3 2012, during Microsoft's press conference, Crystal Dynamics' Darrell Gallagher announced that Xbox 360 users will get early access to downloadable content (DLC).
Reception.
Critical.
Early reviews saw the game receive high praise and acclaim. In a 'world exclusive' review, GamesMaster Magazine gave the game a score of 90%, as well as the coveted 'GamesMaster Gold award' (awarded to games that manage a score of 90% or above). The editor regarded the quality of the visuals, the length and depth of the gameplay, and the 'spectacular' last third of the game as the highlights. The summary said 'sitting back exhausted we were left with just one question dribbling forth from our gaping jaws. How on earth are they going to top this in the sequel? Because of one thing there can be no doubt. Lara is back.'
Controversy.
During an interview with Kotaku, executive producer Ron Rosenberg stated that during the game, Lara Croft "gets taken prisoner by scavengers on the island. They try to rape her, and- [...] She's literally turned into a cornered animal. And that's a huge step in her evolution: she's either forced to fight back or die and that's what we're showing today." The suggestion of a possible 'attempted rape' in the game soon caused outrage and controversy.
The game's designer Darrell Gallagher later denied the 'attempted rape' suggestions, stating that one of "the character defining moments for Lara in the game, which has incorrectly been referred to as an 'attempted rape' scene is the content we showed" where "Lara is forced to kill another human for the first time. In this particular selection, while there is a threatening undertone in the sequence and surrounding drama, it never goes any further than the scenes that we have already shown publicly. Sexual assault of any kind is categorically not a theme that we cover in this game." The creative director Noah Hughes later further clarified that they "wanted to create an emotional investment, to draw people into Lara and her point of view [...] We wanted to draw you in, make you care, put you in Lara's shoes and have this be an intense moment you were experiencing with Lara, not from an outsider looking in perspective."
In an interview with story writer, Rhianna Pratchett, she explained that the scene, wanted to show Lara's reactions, rather than the guy's actions. "One of the problems with the trailer is that it cut out Lara's reactions," says Pratchett. "When you see the scene in context, you see the light leave the guy's eyes [...]. She just can't believe what she's done. "She's not thinking, 'Oh my God, I was almost raped.' She's thinking, 'Oh my God, I've just taken a human life.' It's unfortunate that if you have a female protagonist and male antagonists, and they're coming after her, people see that vibe.
