Amoxicillin (INN), formerly amoxycillin (BAN) in some markets, and abbreviated amox, is a moderate-spectrum, bacteriolytic, β-lactam antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections caused by susceptible microorganisms. It is usually the drug of choice within the class because it is better absorbed, following oral administration, than other β-lactam antibiotics. Amoxicillin is one of the most common antibiotics prescribed for children. 
Amoxicillin is susceptible to degradation by β-lactamase-producing bacteria, which are resistant to a broad spectrum of β-lactam antibiotics, such as penicillin. For this reason, it is often combined with clavulanic acid, a β-lactamase inhibitor. This increases effectiveness by reducing its susceptibility to β-lactamase resistance.
Medical uses.
Amoxicillin is used in the treatment of a number of infections including: acute otitis media, Streptococcal pharyngitis, pneumonia, skin infections, urinary tract infections, "Salmonella", lyme disease, and chlamydia infections. It is also used to prevent bacterial endocarditis in high risk people who are having dental work done, to prevent "strep pneumococus" infections in those without a spleen, and for both the prevention and the treatment of anthrax. The UK however does not recommend its use for infectious endocarditis prophylaxis. These recommendations have not appeared to have changed the rates of infection. 
Amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanate are recommended by guidelines as the first-choice drug for bacterial sinusitis. However, most sinusitis is caused by viruses, for which it is ineffective. Amoxicillin is occasionally used for the treatment of skin infections, such as acne vulgaris. Amoxicillin is often an effective treatment for cases of acne vulgaris that have responded poorly to other antibiotics, like doxycycline and minocycline.
Adverse effects.
Side-effects are as those for other beta-lactam antibiotics.
Side-effects include nausea, vomiting, rashes, and antibiotic-associated colitis. Loose bowel movements (diarrhea) may also occur. Rarer side-effects include mental changes, lightheadedness, insomnia, confusion, anxiety, sensitivity to lights and sounds, and unclear thinking. Immediate medical care is required upon the first signs of these side-effects.
The onset of an allergic reaction to amoxicillin can be very sudden and intense - emergency medical attention must be sought as quickly as possible. The initial onset of such a reaction often starts with a change in mental state, skin rash with intense itching (often beginning in fingertips and around groin area and rapidly spreading), and sensations of fever, nausea, and vomiting. Any other symptoms that seem even remotely suspicious must be taken very seriously. However, more mild allergy symptoms, such as a rash, can occur at any time during treatment, even up to a week after treatment has ceased. For some people who are allergic to amoxicillin the side-effects can be deadly.
Use of the amoxicillin/clavulanic acid combination for more than one week has caused mild hepatitis in some patients. Young children having ingested acute overdoses of amoxicillin manifested lethargy, vomiting and renal dysfunction.
Nonallergic amoxicillin rash.
Somewhere between 3% and 10% of children taking amoxicillin (or ampicillin) show a late-developing (>72 hours after beginning medication and having never taken penicillin-like medication previously) rash, which is sometimes referred to as the "amoxicillin rash." The rash can also occur in adults.
The rash is described as maculopapular or morbilliform (measles-like; therefore, in medical literature, it is called "amoxicillin-induced morbilliform rash"). It starts on the trunk and can spread from there. This rash is unlikely to be a true allergic reaction, and is not a contraindication for future amoxicillin usage, nor should the current regimen necessarily be stopped. However, this common amoxicillin rash and a dangerous allergic reaction cannot easily be distinguished by inexperienced persons, and therefore a healthcare professional is often required to distinguish between the two.
A nonallergic amoxicillin rash may also be an indicator of infectious mononucleosis: Some studies indicate approximately 80-90% of patients with acute Epstein Barr virus infection treated with amoxicillin or ampicillin develop such a rash.
Mechanism of action.
This drug acts by inhibiting the synthesis of bacterial cell walls. It inhibits cross-linkage between the linear peptidoglycan polymer chains that make up a major component of the cell walls of both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria.
It has two ionizable groups in the physiological range (the amino group in alpha-position to the amide carbonyl group and the carboxyl group).
Spectrum of bacterial susceptibility and resistance.
"Streptococcus", Bacillus subtilis", "Enterococcus", "Haemophilus", "Helicobacter" and "Moraxella" species are generally susceptible to amoxicillin, while "Citrobacter", "Klebsiella" and "Pseudomonas aeruginosa" are resistant to amoxicillin. Some "E. coli" and most clinical isolates of "Staphylococcus aureus" have developed resistance to amoxicillin to varying degrees.
Formulations.
Modes of delivery.
Pharmaceutical manufacturers make amoxicillin in trihydrate form available as capsules, chewable and dispersible tablets plus syrup and pediatric suspension for oral use, and as the sodium salt for intravenous administration, although the IV formulation is not available in the United States.
Amoxicillin is most commonly taken orally. The liquid forms are helpful where the patient might find it difficult to take tablets or capsules. 
Research with mice (published in 2010) indicates successful delivery using intraperitoneally injected amoxicillin-bearing microparticles.
