Rebel Wilson (born 3 February 1986) is an Australian actress, writer, and stand-up comedian. She began appearing as Toula in the SBS comedy series "Pizza" from 2003 and made several appearances in the sketch comedy series "The Wedge". In 2008, Wilson wrote, produced and starred in the musical comedy series "Bogan Pride". The following year, she won the Tropfest Best Actress award for her role in "Bargain" and made a guest appearance in "City Homicide". Shortly after moving to the United States, Wilson was cast as Brynn in the feature film "Bridesmaids". The actress went on to star in "A Few Best Men", "What to Expect When You're Expecting" and "Struck by Lightning", leading "Variety" to name her one of their "Top Ten Comics to Watch for 2011". Wilson also appeared as Becky in "Bachelorette" and became the first actress to be cast in "Pitch Perfect". Her role as Fat Amy earned her three award nominations. Wilson is writing a comedy called "Super Fun Night" for the ABC network. 
Early life.
Wilson was born and raised in Sydney, Australia. Her parents named her after a girl who sang at their wedding. Wilson has three siblings; Liberty, Ryot and Annachi. Liberty and Ryot appeared on the first season of "The Amazing Race Australia". Her parents were professional dog handlers. Throughout high school Wilson's first career choice was mathematics. Wilson told "The Sydney Morning Herald", "I was very academic at high school and was always good with numbers." Wilson attended the University of New South Wales, where she studied Law and Arts (Theatre and Performance Studies). She is a former Rotary International Youth Ambassador for Australia and was based in South Africa for one year, where she contracted malaria. Wilson had hallucinations in which she saw herself as an actress who had won an Oscar. This then convinced her to pursue an acting career.
Career.
Wilson studied at the Australian Theatre for Young People (ATYP). In 2003, she went to New York after winning the ATYP International scholarship to train with The Second City. Wilson is a writer, producer and stand-up comedian, and has appeared with the Sydney Theatre Company and performed at the Melbourne Comedy Festival. She first came to the public's attention with her stage musical "The Westie Monologues" which she wrote, starred in and produced in Sydney. Her follow-up stage productions which she wrote, produced and starred in include "Spunks" and "Confessions of an Exchange Student". 
In Australia, Wilson is most known for her roles as Toula on SBS comedy series "Pizza" and as various characters including Lucy, Fat Mandi and Karla Bangs on the sketch comedy series "The Wedge". Wilson played an "Australian Idol" mad schoolgirl in a series of Telstra advertisements shown during "Australian Idol" from 2004 to 2005. She also had roles in the feature films "Fat Pizza" and "Ghost Rider". In 2008, Wilson created, wrote, produced and starred in the musical comedy series "Bogan Pride" on SBS One and also starred in the improvisational Nine Network series "Monster House". In 2009, Wilson won the Tropfest Best Actress award for her role in the film "Bargain". She has made appearances on the improvisational comedy show "Thank God You're Here" and the comedy game show "Talkin' 'Bout Your Generation". She also performed stand-up on the television special "The Breast Darn Show In Town". Wilson guest starred in the Seven Network drama "City Homicide" and performed improv at the "Upright Citizens Brigade" in Los Angeles.
Upon moving to the United States, Wilson signed to talent and literary agents William Morris Endeavor. Her next film role came in the Judd Apatow film "Bridesmaids", where she played Brynn, the sister of Matt Lucas' character. Wilson then appeared in the CBS sitcom "Rules of Engagement" and on the Comedy Central series, "Workaholics". She co-hosted the 2010 ARIA Music Awards and performed at the inaugural "Variety's" Power of Comedy event in Los Angeles with Lucas and Russell Brand. In early 2011, Wilson filmed "A Few Best Men" at Fox Studios Australia. She also filmed a role in "Small Apartments". On 11 July 2011, it was announced Wilson had joined the ensemble comedy "What to Expect When You're Expecting" as Janice. She has also joined the upcoming Indie film, "Struck By Lightning". Wilson was named one of "Variety" magazine's "Top Ten Comics to Watch for 2011".
On 19 August 2011, Borys Kit of "The Hollywood Reporter" reported Wilson had replaced Casey Wilson in "Bachelorette". Borys also reported Wilson has become the first person to be cast in the romantic comedy "Pitch Perfect" and she would voice a character in "". For her performance as Fat Amy in "Pitch Perfect", Wilson received various award nominations, including Best Supporting Actress from the San Diego Film Critics Society and Best Actress in a Comedy from the Broadcast Film Critics Association.
In January 2012, Michael Ausiello of TVLine announced Wilson would be writing and starring in "Super Fun Night", a comedy which follows three friends on a quest to have fun every Friday night. The pilot was picked up by CBS and Conan O'Brien became one of the executive producers. The pilot was later turned down by CBS, but Nellie Andreeva of Deadline.com reported that the ABC network was close to a deal to re-pilot the project. Andreeva revealed "Super Fun Night" would become a single-camera set up instead of multi-camera. On 27 March 2012, Adam B. Vary of "Entertainment Weekly" reported Wilson had joined the cast of Michael Bay's "Pain & Gain" as Ramona Eldridge. Wilson will host the 2013 MTV Movie Awards.
Personal life.
In July 2011, Wilson became a spokesperson for weight loss and nutrition company Jenny Craig in Australia. In January 2012, Wilson revealed to James Wigney and Elle Halliwell of "The Daily Telegraph" that she had lost since signing up to the program. She also revealed the producers of "Pitch Perfect" had refused to let her lose any more weight during filming, as her contract stated she must stay the same size. Wilson said once her film commitments were over, she would start her diet again to reach her target weight of . In February 2013, Wilson confirmed that she had ended her agreement with Jenny Craig the previous year.
As of September 2012, Wilson lives with her "Bridesmaids" co-star Matt Lucas in West Hollywood.
