The New Normal is an American television comedy series created by Ryan Murphy and Ali Adler for NBC. The network placed a series order in May 2012. The pilot episode had an early release on NBC.com, before the series' premiere on television. The series premiered on September 10, 2012, before moving to its regular time slot on September 11, 2012. It airs Tuesdays at 9:30 pm Eastern/8:30 pm Central after the new comedy series "Go On", as part of the 2012-13 United States network television schedule.
On October 2, 2012, NBC ordered a full season of "The New Normal".
Premise.
Bryan (Andrew Rannells) and David (Justin Bartha) are a happy gay couple living in Los Angeles, with successful careers. The only thing missing in their relationship is a baby. They meet Goldie Clemmons, (Georgia King), a single mother and waitress from Ohio. Goldie left her adulterous husband and moved to L.A. with her nine-year-old daughter Shania (Bebe Wood) to escape their former life and start over. Jane (Ellen Barkin), Goldie's conservative and very bigoted grandmother, follows her family to the city against her granddaughter's wishes, thus causing havoc for her granddaughter and the hopeful couple. Goldie decides to become Bryan and David's gestational surrogate, and naturally, her family gets involved.
Cast.
Recurring actors on the show have included Jackie Hoffman and Barry Bostwick as David's divorced parents Frances and Marty, Marlo Thomas as Jane's boss, Cheri Oteri as Bryan and David's "Baby Consultant" and Michael Hitchcock as Gary, the head of the surrogacy firm.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude>
Production.
On January 27, 2012, NBC officially ordered the project to pilot, which was co-written by co-creators/executive producers Ryan Murphy and Ali Adler, while being directed by Murphy.
Casting announcements began in January 2012, with Andrew Rannells first cast in the role of Bryan Collins, one half of the gay couple who decides to use a surrogate to have a baby. Ellen Barkin was next cast in the series as Jane Forrest, Goldie's Republican grandmother. Justin Bartha and Georgia King both then joined the series. Bartha signed on to play David Bartholomew Sawyer, the other half of the aforementioned gay couple; and King joined the series as Goldie Clemmons, a cash-strapped waitress and mother, that becomes Bryan and David's surrogate. Bebe Wood followed with her cast in the role of Shania Clemmons, Goldie and Clay's daughter. NeNe Leakes was the last actor cast in the series as Rocky, Bryan's assistant.
On May 7, 2012, the show was picked up to series. It premiered on September 11, 2012. Jayson Blair originally signed on to the series as Clay Clemmons, in a recurring role. However, after the pilot was ordered to series, Blair was then upped to series regular.
Marketing.
On August 29, 2012, NBC released the pilot episode online as a "preview", prior to the official premiere on September 11, 2012. A similar marketing strategy was made with "The New Normal"'s time-slot companion "Go On", which aired its first episode on August 8, 2012, post the 2012 Summer Olympics.
Critical reception.
"The New Normal" received a 60 out of 100 aggregate score, based on 32 critics' responses, indicating "mixed or average" reception at Metacritic. Robert Bianco of "USA Today" called it a "surprisingly touching comedy," adding "For the most part, "Normal" plays like a lovely, small movie, mixing humorous moments with sweet, gentle grace notes. At its best, it plays like a Woody Allen film, something you may notice most when secondary characters stop and explain themselves to the camera." Linda Stasi of the "New York Post" thought the series was "pretty darned good," adding ""The New Normal" finds its game when it's funny without trying so hard and sweet when it should be. At times "Normal" is so touching you might pull out a tissue, or maybe a diaper." Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the series a B grade, saying it contains "a mixture of sarcasm and sentimentality that isn't remotely realistic, but can be funny." David Hinckley of the "New York Daily News" called the series "a bumpy ride," adding ""The New Normal" wants what "Modern Family" is having. But if we're going to catapult from "South Park" to a Hallmark movie, we need a smoother ride."
Refusal to broadcast.
On August 24, 2012, representatives from KSL-TV, the NBC affiliate in Salt Lake City, Utah, announced the station, which is owned by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, would not carry "The New Normal", citing content they believed to be inappropriate for broadcast during the family hour. KUCW, the state's CW affiliate, picked up the series and currently airs it on weekends.
