The Hobbit is a series of three epic fantasy adventure films directed, co-written and produced by Peter Jackson and based on J. R. R. Tolkien's 1937 fantasy novel "The Hobbit". The films are, by subtitle, "" (2012), The Desolation of Smaug (2013), and There and Back Again (2014). "The Lord of the Rings" is originally a sequel to the novel, thus the series acts as a prequel to Jackson's film trilogy.
Several actors will reprise their roles from "The Lord of the Rings", including Ian McKellen, Andy Serkis, Ian Holm, Hugo Weaving, and actors whose characters did not appear in the novel, such as Cate Blanchett, Christopher Lee, Elijah Wood, and Orlando Bloom. Also returning for the production, among others, were co-writers Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens, illustrators John Howe and Alan Lee, art director Dan Hennah, cinematographer Andrew Lesnie, and composer Howard Shore. As with the original trilogy, props will generally be crafted by Weta Workshop and visual effects managed by Weta Digital. The most significant new involvement in the series is the participation of Guillermo del Toro, originally chosen to direct the films, as co-writer.
Set in the fictional world of Middle-earth, the three films follow the hobbit Bilbo Baggins (Martin Freeman), hired by the wizard Gandalf (Ian McKellen), to accompany thirteen dwarves led by Thorin Oakenshield (Richard Armitage) on a quest to reclaim the Lonely Mountain from the dragon Smaug (Benedict Cumberbatch).
The first film in the series premiered at the Embassy Theatre in Wellington, New Zealand on 28 November 2012. Around 100,000 people were expected to line the red carpet on Courtenay Place, and the entire event was broadcast live on TV in New Zealand, as well as streaming over the Internet.
Development.
First stages of development.
Peter Jackson and Fran Walsh originally expressed interest in filming "The Hobbit" in 1995, then envisaging it as part one of a trilogy (the other two would have been based on "The Lord of the Rings"). Frustration arose when Jackson's producer, Harvey Weinstein, discovered that Saul Zaentz had production rights to "The Hobbit", but that distribution rights still belonged to United Artists (which had kept those rights, believing that filmmakers would prefer to adapt "The Hobbit" rather than "The Lord of the Rings"). The studio was on the market, but Weinstein's attempts to buy those rights were unsuccessful. Weinstein asked Jackson to press on with adapting "The Lord of the Rings". Ultimately, "The Lord of the Rings" was produced by New Line Cinema, not the Weinsteins, and their rights to film "The Hobbit" were set to expire in 2010. In September 2006, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, now the owner of UA, expressed interest in teaming up with New Line and Jackson to make "The Hobbit".
In March 2005, Jackson launched a lawsuit against New Line, claiming he had lost revenue from merchandising, video and computer games releases associated with "". He did not seek a specific settlement, but requested an audit to see whether New Line had withheld money owed him. Although Jackson wanted it settled before he would make the film, he felt the lawsuit was minor and that New Line would still let him make "The Hobbit". New Line co-founder Robert Shaye was annoyed with the lawsuit and said in January 2007 that Jackson would never again direct a film for New Line, accusing him of being greedy. MGM boss Harry Sloan halted development, as he wanted Jackson to be involved. By August, after a string of flops, Shaye tried to repair his relationship with the director. He said, "I really respect and admire Peter and would love for him to be creatively involved in some way in "The Hobbit"." The following month, New Line was fined $125,000 for failing to provide requested accounting documents.
On 16 December 2007, New Line and MGM announced that Jackson would be executive producer of "The Hobbit" and its sequel. The two studios would co-finance the film and the latter studio (via 20th Century Fox) would distribute the film outside North America—New Line's first ever such deal with another major studio. Each film's budget was estimated at US$150 million, which compares to the US$94 million budget for each of the films in Jackson's "Lord of the Rings" trilogy. After completion of the merger of New Line Cinema with Warner Bros. in February 2008, the two parts were announced as scheduled for release in Decembers 2011 and 2012. Producer Mark Ordesky, the executive producer of "The Lord of the Rings", planned to return to supervise the prequels. Jackson explained he chose not to direct because it would have been unsatisfying to compete with his previous films.
In February 2008, the Tolkien Estate (through The Tolkien Trust, a British charity) and HarperCollins Publishers filed a suit against New Line for breach of contract and fraud and demanded $220 million in compensation for "The Lord of the Rings" trilogy. The suit claimed New Line had only paid the Estate an upfront fee of $62,500, despite the trilogy earning an estimated $6 billion worldwide from box office receipts and merchandise sales. The suit claimed the Estate was entitled to 7.5% of all profits made by any Tolkien films, as established by prior deals. The suit also sought to block the filming of "The Hobbit". The suit was settled in September 2009 for an undisclosed amount. However the Tolkien Trust's 2009 accounts show that it received a payment of £24 million, (a little over US$38 million), in respect of a 'film rights settlement'. Christopher Tolkien said: "The trustees regret that legal action was necessary but are glad that this dispute has been settled on satisfactory terms that will allow the Tolkien Trust properly to pursue its charitable objectives. The trustees acknowledge that New Line may now proceed with its proposed film of The Hobbit."
Development with del Toro.
Despite the legal suits, development proceeded and in April 2008, Guillermo del Toro was hired to direct the film. Del Toro has said he was a fan of Jackson's trilogy and had discussed directing a film adaptation of "Halo" with him in 2005. Though that project stalled, they kept in contact. In a 2006 interview, del Toro was quoted saying "I don't like little guys and dragons, hairy feet, hobbits, [...] I don't like sword and sorcery, I hate all that stuff". After he signed on to direct in April 2008, Del Toro posted on TheOneRing.net forums that he had been enchanted by "The Hobbit" as a child, but found that Tolkien's other books "contain geography and genealogy too complex for my prepubescent brain". In taking the job of director, del Toro was now "reading like a madman to catch up with a whole new land, a continent of sorts—a cosmology created by brilliant philologist turned Shaman". He also posted that his appreciation of Tolkien was enhanced by his knowledge of the fantasy genre and the folklore research he had undertaken while making his own fantasy films.
Pre-production began around August 2008, with del Toro, Jackson, Walsh and Philippa Boyens writing the scripts. Del Toro collaborated with Jackson, Walsh and Boyens via videoconferencing and flew every three weeks, back and forth from Los Angeles (where some of the designs were done) to New Zealand to visit them. Del Toro spent his mornings writing and afternoons looking at material related to Tolkien to help him understand the writer's work. He watched World War I documentaries and asked for book recommendations from Jackson, who is a collector of World War I memorabilia. Del Toro felt Tolkien's experiences in that war influenced his stories.
By November 2008, del Toro had said that he, Jackson, Walsh and Boyens would realise something new about the story every week and the script was continually changing. The writing hours increased to twelve each day, as they dedicated three weeks to finally deciding the films' structures. During the first few months of 2009, writing would start from 8:30 am and end at 3:00 pm when del Toro would meet with Weta (i.e., Weta Workshop and Weta Digital film effects companies). Completion of the story outlines and treatments ended in March 2009 and the studios approved the start of writing the screenplay. Filming was expected to take place throughout 2010 in New Zealand, with del Toro renovating the Hobbiton sets in Matamata. For his part, Jackson had kept the Rivendell scale model and the Bag End set (which he has used as a guest house) from the trilogy. During the middle of the shoot, there was expected to be a break which would have allowed del Toro to edit "The Hobbit" while sets would be altered for the second film. The director expected the shoot to last 370 days.
Jackson revealed in late November 2009 that he anticipated that the script for "The Hobbit" would not be finished until the beginning of 2010, delaying the start of production until the middle of that summer (several months later than previously anticipated). The announcement created doubts about whether the film would make its previously-announced release dates of December 2011 and December 2012. Jackson reiterated that no casting decisions had been made. On 22 January 2010, Alan Horn said the first film would likely not be released until the fourth quarter of 2012.
Del Toro's interpretation.
Del Toro and Jackson had a positive working relationship, in which they compromised on disagreements for the benefit of the film. Del Toro believed he would be able to shoot the film himself, although Jackson noted he had similar hopes for filming all of his trilogy and offered to help as second unit director. Del Toro planned on shooting the film in the trilogy's 2.35:1 aspect ratio, rather than his signature 1.85:1 ratio. He hoped to collaborate again with cinematographer Guillermo Navarro.
Del Toro shares Jackson's passion for scale models and background paintings, though he wanted to increase the use of animatronics; "We really want to take the state-of-the-art animatronics and take a leap ten years into the future with the technology we will develop for the creatures in the movie. We have every intention to do for animatronics and special effects what the other films did for virtual reality." Spectral Motion ("Hellboy", "Fantastic Four") was among those del Toro wanted to work with again. Some characters would have been created by mixing computer-generated imagery with animatronics and some would have been created solely with animatronics or animation. Gollum would be entirely digital again; as del Toro noted, "if it ain't broke, why fix it?"
Del Toro said that he interpreted "The Hobbit" as being set in a "world that is slightly more golden at the beginning, a very innocent environment" and the film would need to "you from a time of more purity to a darker reality throughout the film, but [in a manner in the spirit of the book". He perceived the main themes as loss of innocence, which he likened to the experience of England after World War I, and greed, which he said Smaug and Thorin Oakenshield represent. Bilbo Baggins reaffirms his personal morality during the story's third act as he encounters Smaug and the Dwarves' greed. He added, "The humble, sort of a sturdy moral fibre that Bilbo has very much represents the idea that Tolkien had about the little English man, the average English man", and the relationship between Bilbo and Thorin would be the heart of the film. The Elves will also be less solemn.
Del Toro met concept artists John Howe and Alan Lee, Weta Workshop head Richard Taylor, and make-up artist Gino Acevedo in order to keep continuity with the previous films, and he also hired comic book artists to complement Howe's and Lee's style on the trilogy, including Mike Mignola and Wayne Barlowe, who began work around April 2009. He has also considered looking at Tolkien's drawings and using elements of those not used in the trilogy. As Tolkien did not originally intend for the magic ring Bilbo finds to be the all-powerful talisman of evil it is revealed to be in "The Lord of the Rings", del Toro said he would address its different nature in the story, but not so much as to draw away from the story's spirit. Each Dwarf would need to look different from the others. Del Toro would have redesigned the Goblins and Wargs and the Mirkwood spiders would also have looked different from Shelob. Del Toro felt the Wargs had to be changed because "the classical incarnation of the demonic wolf in Nordic mythology is not a hyena-shaped creature".
Del Toro also wanted the animals to speak so that Smaug's speech would not be incongruous, though he explained portraying the talking animals would be more about showing people can understand them. Smaug would not have a "snub Simian in order to achieve a dubious lip-synch", and del Toro stated that such attention is being given to him that he would be the first design begun and the last to be approved. Del Toro, whose Chinese zodiac sign is the Dragon, is fascinated by the mythological species and attempted to include one in "Pan's Labyrinth", but was unable to do so for budgetary reasons. His favourite cinematic dragons are Maleficent in "Sleeping Beauty" and Vermithrax Pejorative from "Dragonslayer". He has also provided a foreword to Howe's portfolio book "Forging Dragons", where he discussed the dragon's differing symbolism and roles in various cultures and legends.
Del Toro and Jackson considered the sudden introduction of Bard the Bowman and Bilbo's unconsciousness during the Battle of Five Armies to be "less cinematic moments" reminiscent of the novel's more "fairy tale world" than "The Lord of the Rings", and they would change them to make "The Hobbit" feel more like the trilogy. However, del Toro did say he considered some of these moments iconic and would require the "fairy tale logic work as is".
Several actors were considered by del Toro for roles in the film. He wrote the part of Beorn specifically for American actor Ron Perlman. Del Toro had originally considered asking Perlman to voice the dragon Smaug, but decided against this. Del Toro met with English actor Brian Blessed to discuss the possibility of him playing Thorin Oakenshield. The director later stated that he thought Ian McShane "would make the most perfect dwarf". Frequent del Toro collaborator Doug Jones said that he would love to play the Elvenking Thranduil, but del Toro later stated that he had another role (or roles) in mind for the actor. Del Toro was the one who originally pushed to cast Sylvester McCoy as Radagast the Brown, a choice Peter Jackson later followed. While del Toro initially wanted Ian Holm to reprise the role of Bilbo Baggins, he also said that he "absolutely" supported the casting of Martin Freeman as the character, and wanted all other returning "Lord of the Rings" characters to be played by the original actors where possible.
In December 2012, Philippa Boyens expressed regret that del Toro's version of the film remained unmade. She revealed that it would have had a different script and visual elements, and would more closely have resembled a fairy tale. Boyens stated that the most significant script change was to Bilbo's characterisation: "It shifted and changed into someone who, rather than being slightly younger and more innocent in the world, once had a sense of longing for adventure and has lost it and become fussy and fusty."
Del Toro's departure.
In 2010, del Toro left the project because of ongoing delays. On 28 May he explained at a press conference that owing to MGM's financial troubles the "Hobbit" project had then not been officially greenlit at the time. "There cannot be any start dates until the MGM situation gets resolved... We have designed all the creatures. We've designed the sets and the wardrobe. We have done animatics and planned very lengthy action sequences. We have scary sequences and funny sequences and we are very, very prepared for when it's finally triggered, but we don't know anything until MGM is solved." Two days later, del Toro announced at TheOneRing.net that "In light of ongoing delays in the setting of a start date for filming", he would "take leave from helming", further stating that "the mounting pressures of conflicting schedules have overwhelmed the time slot originally allocated for the project. [...] I remain an ally to it and its makers, present and future, and fully support a smooth transition to a new director". Reports began to surface around the Internet about possible directors; apparently the studios wanted Jackson, but such names as Neill Blomkamp, Brett Ratner, David Yates and David Dobkin were mentioned.
However, this incident received negative reaction from many "Hobbit" fans, who were angry at MGM for delaying the project. They also tried willing the studio to sell their rights to Warner Bros. On 27 July, del Toro responded to these angry fans, saying that "it wasn't just MGM. These are very complicated movies, economically and politically."
On 25 June 2010, Jackson was reported to be in negotiations to direct the two-part film. On 15 October 2010, New Line Cinema and Warner Bros. confirmed that "The Hobbit" was to proceed filming with Jackson as director and that the film will be in 3-D. As well as confirming Jackson as director, the film was reported to be greenlit, with principal photography to begin in February 2011. Jackson stated that "Exploring Tolkien's Middle-earth goes way beyond a normal film-making experience. It's an all-immersive journey into a very special place of imagination, beauty and drama."
Industrial dispute in New Zealand.
On 24 September 2010, the International Federation of Actors issued a Do Not Work order, advising members of its member unions (including the Screen Actors Guild) that "The producers... have refused to engage performers on union-negotiated agreements." This would subject actors who work on the film to possible expulsion from the union. In response, Warner Bros and New Line Cinema considered taking the production elsewhere, with Jackson mentioning the possibility of filming in Eastern Europe.
Partly out of fear for the Tolkien tourism effect, on 25 October 2010, thousands of New Zealanders organised protest rallies imploring that production remain in New Zealand, arguing that shifting production to locations outside New Zealand would potentially cost the country's economy up to $1.5 billion. After two days of talks with the New Zealand government (including involvement by Prime Minister John Key), Warner Bros. executives decided on 27 October to film "The Hobbit" in New Zealand as originally planned. In return, the National government of New Zealand agreed to introduce legislation to remove the right of workers to organise trade unions in the film production industry, and to give money to big budget films made in New Zealand. The legislation reversed a decision by the New Zealand Supreme Court called "Bryson v Three Foot Six Ltd" holding that under the Employment Relations Act 2000, a model maker named Mr Bryson was an "employee" who could organise a union to defend his interests. The Key government's legislation has been criticised as breaching the International Labour Organization's core ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association, and giving an unfair subsidy to protect multinational business interests.
Some have subsequently called the price (further financial subsidies and specific laws made for the producers' benefit) that New Zealand had to pay to retain the movie 'extortionate'. It was also argued that the discussion had occurred in a climate of 'hyperbole and hysteria'.
Third film.
The project had been envisaged as two parts since 2006, but the proposed contents of the parts changed during development. MGM expressed interest in a second film in 2006, set between "The Hobbit" and "The Lord of the Rings". Jackson concurred, stating that "one of the drawbacks of "The Hobbit" is it's relatively lightweight compared to "LOTR" of the Rings... There's a lot of sections in which a character like Gandalf disappears for a while. – he references going off to meet with the White Council, who are actually characters like Galadriel and Saruman and people that we see in "Lord of the Rings". He mysteriously vanishes for a while and then comes back, but we don't really know what goes on." Jackson was also interested in showing Gollum's journey to Mordor and Aragorn setting a watch on the Shire.
Del Toro said that he was faced with two possible places to split the story, including Smaug's defeat. He noted the second film would need to end by leading directly into "". In June 2009, del Toro revealed he had decided where to divide the story based on comments from fans about signifying a change in Bilbo's relationship with the dwarves. The second film's story would also have depended on how many actors could have reprised their roles.
Although "The Hobbit" was originally made as a two-part film, on 30 July 2012, Jackson confirmed plans for a third film, turning his adaptation of "The Hobbit" into a trilogy. According to Jackson, the third film would make extensive use of the appendices that Tolkien wrote to expand the story of Middle-Earth (published in the back of "The Return of the King"). While the third film will largely make use of footage originally shot for the first and second films, it will require additional filming as well. The second film was retitled "The Desolation of Smaug" and the third film was titled "There and Back Again" in August 2012.
Filming.
Principal photography began on 21 March 2011 in Wellington, New Zealand. Filming took place at Wellington Stone Street Studios, the town of Matamata and at other undisclosed locations around New Zealand.
The costumes for each of the Dwarves included six wigs and eight beards, which were worn by the actors, stunt doubles, and stand-ins.
During July 2011, scenes from "The Hobbit" were filmed at Pinewood Studios, England. Sets were constructed on the F Stage and N&P Stages for the shoot. Jackson recorded a video blog from the set, which featured Christopher Lee in full makeup and costume as Saruman.
The second block of shooting in New Zealand began at the end of August and was completed in December 2011.
Principal photography ended on 6 July 2012, after 266 days of filming.
Technology.
The films were filmed in 3D using Red Epic cameras. A speciality rig designed by 3ality Technica was in the filming of the films; here two cameras and a mirror are used in order to achieve an intraocular effect similar to that of a human's (the distance between the eyes). This is how the depth required for 3D film is achieved.
"The Hobbit" will likely be the highest-budgeted film so far to be shot on Red Digital Cinema Camera Company's Epic camera of which Peter Jackson received one of the very first shipments. In a production video, it was revealed that 48 Epic cameras are being used.
In April 2011, Jackson revealed through his Facebook page that he is filming "The Hobbit" at 48 fps (frames per second) instead of the normal 24 fps.
Additionally, the films are being filmed at a 5K resolution. This is substantially larger than the conventional 1080 HD resolution. The films are being filmed digitally onto 128 GB memory cards that fit into the RED Epic camera.
Alleged animal abuse.
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) is asking the New Zealand government to investigate that 27 animals used for the film died due to poor living conditions. Claims also include sheep falling into sinkholes, chickens being mauled by unsupervised dogs, a horse falling over a steep embankment, and another one being left on the ground for three hours after being hobbled. PETA says that instead of "vainly defending himself", Peter Jackson should be giving a "firm assurance that this will never happen again". They also called Jackson a "CGI master", stating that he could easily make convincing CGI animals, instead of using actual ones.
Post-production.
Music.
The music of "The Hobbit" film series is being composed, orchestrated, conducted and produced by Howard Shore, who scored all three "The Lord of the Rings" films. The music will once again be performed by the London Philharmonic Orchestra as it was for "The Lord of the Rings". Recording sessions for the films began on 20 August 2012 at Abbey Road Studios. The soundtrack for "" was released on 11 December 2012 through WaterTower Music label.
Musician Neil Finn as well as some actors including Richard Armitage and the cast of dwarves will contribute to the score.
Special effects.
Unlike the orcs in "The Lord of the Rings" films who wore full-body makeup and prosthetics, many of those in "The Hobbit" will have computer-generated faces.
Release.
Theatrical.
"The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey" was scheduled to have its world premiere take place on 28 November 2012 in Wellington, New Zealand, with a wide release in New Zealand on 12 December.
Tickets to the film's midnight screenings in New Zealand sold out within minutes of going on sale, prompting director Peter Jackson to say that the fans who missed out "may get something special" which could include getting to see the film "possibly even a minute or two before anyone else". The film was released on 13 December 2012 in the U.K. and 14 December 2012 for some other parts of the world. It has a runtime of 169 minutes (2 hours and 49 minutes).
Around 100,000 people were expected to line the red carpet on Wellington's Courtenay Place for the premiere. The entire event was broadcast live on TV3 and streamed over the Internet.
"The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug" is set to be released worldwide on 13th December, 2013 with the final film "The Hobbit: There and Back Again" scheduled for release the following summer, on 18th July, 2014.
Home media.
"The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey" will be released on Blu-ray and DVD in the US on March 19, 2013, with a scheduled release for the UK a month later in April. An extended edition containing 20 to 25 minutes of additional footage is expected to be available by the third quarter of 2013.
Reception.
Accolades.
"An Unexpected Journey" has been nominated for three Acadamy Awards in Best Visual Effects, Best Production Design, and Best Makeup and Hairstyling.
Reaction to high frame rate.
At an industry event screening in April 2012, Peter Jackson showed a ten minute clip of the film, and the new High Frame Rate, 48 fps format was described as receiving "an underwhelming reaction at best". While "Variety" stated that the footage "looked distinctively sharper and more immediate than everything shown before it, giving the 3D smoother movement and crisp sharpness", it also reported that it lost "the cinematic glow of the industry-standard 24 fps" and that "human actors seemed overlit and amplified in a way that many compared to modern sports broadcasts... and daytime television". One projectionist complained that "it looked like a made-for-TV movie".
Peter Jackson claimed that the poor reception "wasn't particularly surprising" because "it does take you a while to get used to it. Ten minutes is sort of marginal, it probably needed a little bit more". However, once the entire film was released, many critics retained their complaints. While many noted the clarity and immediacy of the action scenes, they also criticized the picture quality as "hyper-real," clear enough to detect "painted sets" and "prosthetic noses." Some critics did respond positively to the overall effect of the faster frame rate, saying it just takes a while to get used to – still allowing that the extra clarity can make some scenes look like "actors on a set rather than a scene in a movie".
"The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey" was also released in the current 24 fps standard in many theatres, some of which had not yet switched from film to digital projection.
Derivative works.
Toys.
On 6 October 2011, Warner Bros. Consumer Products and U.S. toy company The Bridge Direct announced their partnership on worldwide master toy rights for "The Hobbit" films. The toy line will include action figures, playsets and role-play accessories like swords and battle axes representing the characters and weapons in the films.
The first wave of toy product will hit store shelves in October 2012, ahead of the release of "The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey". U.S. retailers that will carry the toy line include Toys "R" Us, Kmart, and Walmart. Games Workshop will release miniatures from "The Hobbit" as part of The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game. The company has had rights to produce miniatures from the original book for some years but has not released any lines, save for a stand alone game based on the Battle of Five Armies, with original designs not related to "The Lord of the Rings" films.
While a number of companies were vying for "The Hobbit" deal, Warner Bros. Consumer Products awarded the license to Bridge Direct partly because some of its execs and staffers had worked on "The Lord of the Rings" toy line during their tenure at other toy companies, including Toy Biz and Play Along. The Bridge Direct, run by toy business veteran Jay Foreman, is best known for toys such as Inkoos activity plush, and the Zhu Zhu Pets plush line.
On 16 December 2011, Warner Bros. Consumer Products and Lego announced the development of figures and play sets based on the upcoming adaptations of "The Hobbit" as well as "The Lord of the Rings". The launch of the "Lego The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey" was released to coincide with the release of the film adaptation's first part in December 2012.
Video games.
Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment now has the rights to develop a video game based on "The Hobbit" following the expiration in 2008 of Electronic Arts' license to "The Lord of the Rings". When Guillermo del Toro was set to direct he had stated that a video game, if it were to be made, would not be released to tie-in with "The Hobbit" film, but rather after their release. Del Toro had stated that while he would like to be involved in the video game's creation, making it at the same time as the film would complicate things due to a "tight schedule". In October 2011, Warner Bros. confirmed that a "Hobbit" video game would be released in 2012, before the first film's release. However, the studio did not confirm whether or not the game would be a tie-in with the film.
Warner Brothers is developing two free online games promoting the film series. The company will collaborate with Kabam to develop the two games.
Monolith Productions developed "Guardians of Middle-earth", which was released on 4 December 2012 for PlayStation 3 via the PlayStation Network, and 5 December 2012 for Xbox 360 via Xbox LIVE Arcade. "Guardians of Middle-earth" delivers a multiplayer online battle arena (MOBA) game set in Middle-earth and crafted specifically for the console systems. Gamers team up as the most powerful heroes from the greatest fantasy epic of all time, bringing up to 10 players together in strategic five versus five competitive multiplayer battle arenas in the epic setting of Middle-earth. Players can develop and master more than 20 iconic guardians, including Gandalf, Sauron, Gollum and many more, forming memorable and unlikely alliances with and against friends. Gamers can connect via an in-game voice communication system, as well as access a comprehensive online stat and leader board system where they can track friends’ victories and defeats. The game featured tie-ins to the released "The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey" motion picture which released on 14 December 2012.
