Grand Theft Auto (commonly abbreviated GTA) is a video game series created by David Jones and Mike Dailly then later by brothers Dan and Sam Houser, and game designer Zachary Clarke. It is primarily developed by Rockstar North (formerly DMA Design) and published by Rockstar Games. The name of the series is derived from "grand theft auto", a term referring to motor vehicle theft. The series has won multiple awards.
The series is set in fictional locales heavily modelled on American cities, while an expansion for the original was based in London. Gameplay focuses on an open world where the player can choose missions to progress an overall story, as well as engaging in side activities, all consisting of action-adventure, driving, occasional role-playing, stealth, and racing elements. The subject of the games is usually a comedic satire of American culture, but the series has gained controversy for its adult nature and violent themes. The series focuses around many different protagonists who attempt to rise through the ranks of the criminal underworld, although their motives for doing so vary in each game. The antagonists are commonly characters who have betrayed the protagonist or his organisation, or characters who have the most impact impeding the protagonist's progress.
Video game developer DMA Design began the series in , and it currently has ten stand-alone games and four expansion packs. The third chronological title, "Grand Theft Auto III", was widely acclaimed, as it brought the series to a 3D setting and more immersive experience, and is considered a landmark title that has subsequently influenced many other open world action games and led to the label ""Grand Theft Auto" clone" on similar games. Subsequent titles would follow and build upon the concept established in "Grand Theft Auto III". Film veterans such as Michael Madsen, Ray Liotta, Burt Reynolds, Dennis Hopper, Danny Trejo, Gary Busey, Samuel L. Jackson, Chris Penn, James Woods, Joe Pantoliano, Debi Mazar, Jenna Jameson, Frank Vincent, Robert Loggia, Kyle MacLachlan, Phil Collins and Peter Fonda have all voiced major characters, and the series is critically acclaimed and commercially successful, having sold more than 114 million units, . The fourth era of "Grand Theft Auto" included lesser known actors, such as Michael Hollick, Jason Zumwalt, and Scott Hill.
Overview.
Each game in this series allows players to take on the role of a criminal or a in a big city, typically an individual who rises through the ranks of organized crime through the course of the game. The player is given various missions by kingpins and major idols in the city underworld which must be completed to progress through the storyline. Assassinations and other crimes feature regularly, but occasionally taxi driving, firefighting, street racing, bus driving, or learning to fly helicopters and fixed-wing aircraft are also involved.
In later titles, notably those released after "Grand Theft Auto 2", the player is given a more developed storyline in which he is forced to overcome an unfortunate event (e.g., being betrayed and left for dead), which serves as motivation for the character to advance up the criminal ladder and ultimately leads to the triumph of the character by the end of the storyline.
The "Grand Theft Auto" series belongs to a genre of free-roaming video games called sandbox games, and grants a large amount of freedom to the player. Traditional action games are structured as a single track series of levels with linear gameplay, but in "GTA" the player can determine the missions that he wants to undertake, and his relationships with various characters are changed based on these choices. Influenced by the earlier game "Turbo Esprit", the cities of the games can be roamed freely at any point in the game, and are examples of open world video game environments which offer accessible buildings with minor missions in addition to the main storyline. There are exceptions: missions follow a linear, overarching plot, and some city areas must be unlocked over the course of the game.
"Grand Theft Auto III" and subsequent games have more voice acting and radio stations, which simulate driving to music with disc jockeys, radio personalities, commercials, talk radio, pop music, and American culture.
The use of vehicles in an explorable urban environment provides a basic simulation of a working city, complete with pedestrians who generally obey traffic signals. Further details are used to flesh out an open-ended atmosphere that has been used in several other games, such as "The Simpsons Hit & Run", which has less emphasis on crime or violence.
Setting.
The "Grand Theft Auto" series is set in a fictional version of the world, in a number of different time periods. The original "Grand Theft Auto" introduced three main cities: Liberty City, based upon New York City, Vice City, based upon Miami, and San Andreas, based upon California and Nevada.
Subsequent games in the series have re-imagined and expanded upon the original locales. "Grand Theft Auto III" is set in a different rendition of Liberty City only loosely based on New York City. A revised Vice City is depicted in '. In ', the location of San Andreas takes the form of an entire state, instead of a single city. The state of San Andreas is based on the states of California and Nevada, and consists of three major cities: Los Santos (Los Angeles), San Fierro (San Francisco) and Las Venturas (Las Vegas). Surrounding towns and areas of desert, water, woodland and countryside lie between the three cities.
' and ', originally released on the PlayStation Portable handheld console, are set in the previous depictions of their respective eponymous cities.
"Grand Theft Auto IV" and its subsequent expansion packs ' and ' are set in a third revision of Liberty City, set in 2008. A version of New Jersey, known as Alderney, is depicted adjacent to the city. "" is also set in this version of Liberty City, although the state of Alderney is not present.
Other places in the same fictional universe as the "Grand Theft Auto" series also exist. Carcer City and Cottonmouth are two different cities featured in the "Manhunt" series. There is also the town of Bullworth from another Rockstar Game's release, "Bully".
Only the expansion packs for the original "Grand Theft Auto", ' and ', set in London, have featured a location outside of the United States and used a real-life location.
The upcoming instalment "Grand Theft Auto V" will be set in a revision of Los Santos (Los Angeles), a city set in the state of San Andreas and will feature the surrounding hills, countryside and beaches. Los Santos will also be bigger than the worlds of "GTA: San Andreas", "GTA IV" and "Red Dead Redemption" combined.
History.
The "Grand Theft Auto" series is considered by Rockstar Games to be split into separate fictional universes, named after the primary level of graphics capability used in each era. The original "Grand Theft Auto", its expansions and its sequel are considered the "2D universe". "Grand Theft Auto III" and its prequels are considered the "3D universe". "Grand Theft Auto IV", its expansions and "Grand Theft Auto V" are considered the "High-definition universe". Each universe is considered separate, with only brands and background characters shared between them.
"Grand Theft Auto" (1997).
"Grand Theft Auto", the first game in the "Grand Theft Auto" series, was created by video game developer DMA Design, and was released for Microsoft DOS/Windows in 1997/1998 and also for the PlayStation. The game is set in three different fictional cities, Liberty City, San Andreas and Vice City. A reduced Game Boy Color port was later released.
Subsequently, two expansion packs, ' and ', were released on 31 March and 1 June 1999, respectively.
"Grand Theft Auto 2" (1999).
The second game in the series, "Grand Theft Auto 2", was developed for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation, and Dreamcast and released in the year 1999. Set in the indeterminable future, it featured updated graphics and somewhat different gameplay based upon the player's appeal to various criminal organisations. "Grand Theft Auto 2" takes place in a retro-futuristic setting, in an unnamed American city.
A reduced Game Boy Color port was also produced. It is the only "Grand Theft Auto" game to have a "T" rating for a PlayStation console, it is also the only numbered sequel to have a digit in the title instead of a Roman numeral.
"Grand Theft Auto III" (2001).
"Grand Theft Auto III" was released in October 2001, and served as the breakthrough for the franchise. The game's setting takes place around that time, in fictional Liberty City, which is loosely based on New York City, but also incorporates elements of other American cities. "Grand Theft Auto III" brought a third-person view to the series, rather than the traditional top-down view of earlier titles (although the view is still made available as an optional camera angle). For the first time, the problem of navigating in the huge sandbox game was solved by implementing a constant GPS triggered mini-map that highlights the player's position as well as those of current targets. Graphics were also updated with a new 3D game engine. The gameplay engine expanded the explorable world of "GTA III", using a mission-based approach. Multiplayer was discarded (third party mods were later released, allowing for multiplayer gameplay), but "GTA III" improved in many other areas such as voice-acting and plot (in previous games, there was speech only in short animated cut scenes between levels, while other communication was simply subtitles running on the bottom of the screen).
On 13 October 2011, Rockstar announced the release of Grand Theft Auto III on iPad, iPhone, Android tablets and smartphones, along with various other handheld consoles, celebrating the 10th year of the game's release.
After the success of "Grand Theft Auto III", "" was released in 2002. This game was set in 1986 in Vice City, which was based on Miami, Florida. The game's plot focuses on the cocaine trade during the 1980s. "Vice City" was the first game to introduce fully functional flying vehicles that could be used by the player, such as seaplanes and helicopters. It also featured a variety of new weapons and vehicles.
"", released in October 2004, is set in 1992, focusing on California gang life and the awakening of the drug epidemic brought on by crack cocaine. The setting was in the fictional state of San Andreas, which was based on some California and Nevada cities, specifically Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Las Vegas. Their counterparts are Los Santos, San Fierro, and Las Venturas respectively. The game also included a countryside in between Los Santos and San Fierro and also between Los Santos and Las Venturas, and a desert in between Las Venturas and San Fierro.
"Grand Theft Auto Advance" (simply called "Grand Theft Auto" in the cover), for the Game Boy Advance, was also released in 2004. Originally developed as a top-down conversion of "GTA III", it eventually became an original game. Unlike the Game Boy Color ports of "Grand Theft Auto" and "Grand Theft Auto 2", "Grand Theft Auto" did not tone down the violence and profanity common to the "GTA" series. The game received an "M" rating from the ESRB. It was developed by an external developer, Digital Eclipse.
Two games for the PlayStation Portable, both developed by Rockstar Leeds. "" is a prequel to "Grand Theft Auto III" and set in Liberty City in 1998. A PlayStation 2 port was released by Rockstar on 6 June 2006.
"" was released for the PlayStation Portable on 31 October 2006 and set in Vice City in 1984, two years before the events of "Grand Theft Auto: Vice City". A PlayStation 2 port of the game was released on 6 March 2007. It is the last game of the third generation series, and the final game in the "Grand Theft Auto III" canon.
"Grand Theft Auto IV" (2008).
"Grand Theft Auto IV" was released on 29 April 2008, after a six month delay. It was the first "Grand Theft Auto" game to be released simultaneously for both Sony and Microsoft's video game consoles. In August 2008, Rockstar announced that it was going to publish "GTA IV" for PC. "GTA IV"'s game engine is the Rockstar Advanced Game Engine (RAGE) used in "Rockstar Games Presents Table Tennis" and the Euphoria physics engine.
"Grand Theft Auto IV" has much more realistic gameplay than its predecessors, no characters from previous games appear in "GTA IV"; according to Dan Houser "virtually none of the characters from the previous games returned, as a lot of them are dead anyway." The game once again takes place in a redesigned Liberty City that very closely resembles New York City, much more than previous renditions.
Microsoft officially announced a "strategic alliance" with Rockstar Games over the rights to episodic content through their Xbox Live service at their X06 event. This content was released as "" on 17 February 2009, and it was available for download, exclusively for the Xbox 360. This was because of the substantial $50 million that Microsoft paid Rockstar to keep it exclusive. The strategic alliance was however timed and both DLC episodes and the compilation pack were released on 13 April 2010 on PS3 and PC. The expansion adds some new elements to the existing game and focuses on Johnny Klebitz, the vice president of "The Lost" motorcycle gang.
The second and last "Grand Theft Auto IV" downloadable content episode was called "" and was released on 29 October 2009. "Grand Theft Auto: Episodes from Liberty City" is a compilation pack released for the Xbox 360, later also released on the PS3 at the same time as "The Ballad of Gay Tony". It contains "The Lost and Damned" and "The Ballad of Gay Tony" on one disk and does not require an original copy of "GTA IV".
"Grand Theft Auto IV" officially introduced online multiplayer to the series. In most games, a customisable character is used to play, and money earned in game is translated to levels, with more customisation available at higher levels. The game does not offer split screen or local area network (LAN) multiplayer modes on PlayStation 3 or Xbox 360, but there is LAN on the PC mode. Up to 16 (32 on PC) players can play together, doing a variety of games including Death Match, Cops 'n' Crooks, races, Deal Breaker, and Mafiya Work as well as team varieties of Death Match, and Mafiya Work to name just a few.
"Grand Theft Auto: Chinatown Wars" is the first "Grand Theft Auto" game to be released on the Nintendo DS, and was announced at the E3 Nintendo Press Conference on 15 July 2008. This game has several new features, such as touch screen mini-games. The game was released on 17 March 2009 in North America and 20 March 2009 to Australia and Europe. The game is rated 18+ by PEGI and the BBFC (Europe, UK) and M by the ESRB (North America). A PSP version was later announced on 22 June 2009 and was released in North America on 20 October 2009. It was also released on the Apple iOS platform 18 January 2010.
"Grand Theft Auto V" (2013).
On 26 February 2011, five websites were discovered which seemed to indicate a new title in the "Grand Theft Auto" franchise. There have been several minor leaks of supposed "GTA" production including websites, casting calls featuring "GTA" characters, and an IGN editor who has said the next game will be released in 2012.
On 25 October 2011, Rockstar changed their homepage to display the logo for "Grand Theft Auto V" with the "V" styled like a bank note. A message was printed below the logo stating that a trailer would be released on 2 November 2011.
On 2 November 2011, Rockstar released a debut trailer for "GTA V". Giving fans a first look at the upcoming title, the trailer revealed the setting to be Los Santos, the fictional version of Los Angeles and its California surroundings, including Hollywood ("Vinewood") and rural hills and valleys. Additional features revealed in the trailer included golf, planes, jet skis, a working gym, and police chases, making it look like a spiritual successor to 2004's "GTA: San Andreas". The song used in the trailer is "Ogdens' Nut Gone Flake" by the British band the Small Faces.
On 3 November 2011, Rockstar Games announced that "Grand Theft Auto V" was in full development and that it would take place within Los Santos and its "surrounding hills, countryside and beaches", and that it would be "the largest and the most ambitious game Rockstar has yet created". Rockstar parent Take-Two calls "GTA V" "a bold new direction in open-world freedom, storytelling, mission-based gameplay and online multiplayer", while confirming that its story will focus on "the pursuit of the almighty dollar in a re-imagined, present-day Southern California".
On 8 November 2011, Take-Two's second quarter financial earnings report included an update on future product launch dates, with the newest game to be added to the list was "GTA V", which carried a "TBA" release. On 2 February 2012, during Take-Two's third quarter financial report, CEO Strauss Zelnick said developer Rockstar is making "incredible progress". On 13 February 2012, in a Question and Answer section on their blog, a nameless Rockstar representative said that the developer is toiling away diligently and hopes to reveal more in a few months time.
On 29 October 2012, it was reported that a Polish fan site had published an image of some pre-order posters, which suggested that the game would arrive in "Spring 2013". The image contains the previous "Pest Control" artwork, as well as a previously-unseen illustration of a thug with a baseball bat and an angry-looking dog on a chain. A day later, it was reported that a branch of the British video game retailer Game had leaked two further pre-order artworks on Twitter, one showing a female police officer arresting a woman, and the other of a man sitting on a quad bike, holding what looked like a sniper rifle. These images both had "Spring 2013" as the release date. The tweet was later deleted. Later that day Rockstar Games announced that "Grand Theft Auto 5" will be released sometime during Q1/Q2 2013. Posted on their newswire they said "Today, we're proud to announce that "Grand Theft Auto V" is expected to launch worldwide during Q1/Q2 2013 for Playstation 3 and Xbox 360." They also stated that pre-orders for "Grand Theft Auto V" would start on 5 November 2012.
On 14 November 2012, Rockstar Games released a second trailer for "Grand Theft Auto V", providing an official release date which is Spring 2013, and announcing that the game is available to pre-order.
On 31 January 2013, Rockstar announced that "GTA V" would miss its original spring launch window, and would be released on 17 September 2013. Rockstar Games founder Sam Houser attributed the delay for "extra development time" on the project.
Future.
ESRB has rated "Grand Theft Auto III" and "Vice City" for the PlayStation 3.
Later, "Grand Theft Auto III" was confirmed to be coming to PlayStation 3 as a PlayStation 2 classic. However it was delayed due to copyright issues. On 18 September 2012, it was revealed by PlayStation Asia that "Grand Theft Auto III" would be coming to the PSN Network.
"San Andreas" was also rated by the ESRB.
It was released in late-2012 as a PS2 classic.
Controversy.
Former lawyer Jack Thompson has been involved in a number of attempts to get families of murder victims to hold the "Grand Theft Auto" series accountable for the death of their loved ones. Due to his conduct in this and related cases, Thompson was disbarred in 2008 and was fined more than $100,000 by the Florida Bar Association.
On 20 October 2003, the families of Aaron Hamel and Kimberly Bede, two young people shot by teens William and Josh Buckner (who in statements to investigators claimed their actions were inspired by "GTA III") filed a US$246 million lawsuit against publishers Rockstar Games, Take-Two Interactive Software, retailer Wal-Mart, and PlayStation 2 manufacturer Sony Computer Entertainment America. Rockstar and its parent company, Take-Two, filed for dismissal of the lawsuit, stating in U.S. District Court on 29 October 2003 that the "ideas and concepts as well as the 'purported psychological effects' on the Buckners are protected by the First Amendment's free-speech clause". The lawyer of the victims, Jack Thompson, denied that, but failed in his attempt to move the lawsuit into a state court and under Tennessee's consumer protection act. Two days later, the plaintiffs filed a Notice of Voluntary Dismissal, and the case was closed.
In February 2005, a lawsuit was brought upon the makers and distributors of the "Grand Theft Auto" series claiming the games caused a teenager to shoot and kill three members of the Alabama police force. The shooting took place in June 2003 when Devin Moore, 17 years old at the time, was taken in for questioning by police in Fayette, Alabama regarding a stolen vehicle. Moore then grabbed a pistol from one of the police officers and shot and killed him along with another officer and dispatcher before fleeing in a police car. One of Moore's attorneys, Jack Thompson, claimed it was "GTA"s graphic nature—with his constant playing time—that caused Moore to commit the murders, and Moore's family agrees. Damages are being sought from branches of GameStop and Wal-Mart in Jasper, Alabama, the stores from which "GTA III" and "Grand Theft Auto: Vice City", respectively, were purchased and also from the games' publisher Take-Two Interactive, and the PlayStation 2 manufacturer Sony Computer Entertainment. On 29 March 2006 the case was dismissed and permission to appeal was denied.
In May 2005, Thompson appeared via satellite on the "Glenn Beck" program on CNN's Headline News. Thompson mentioned Devin Moore and said regarding "Grand Theft Auto III" and "" "There's no doubt in my mind [...] that but for Devin Moore's training on this cop killing simulator, he would not have been able to kill three cops in Fayette, Alabama who are now dead and in the ground. We are suing Take-Two, Sony, Wal-Mart, and GameStop for having trained Devin Moore to kill. He had no history of violence. No criminal record."
In September 2006, Thompson brought another lawsuit, claiming that Cody Posey played the game obsessively before murdering his father Delbert Paul Posey, stepmother Tryone Schmid, and stepsister Marilea Schmid on a ranch in Albuquerque, New Mexico. The suit was filed on behalf of the victims' families. During the criminal trial, Posey's defense team argued he was abused by his father, and tormented by his stepmother. Posey was also taking Zoloft at the time of the killings. The suit alleged that were it not for his obsessive playing of "Grand Theft Auto: Vice City", the murders would not have taken place. Named in the suit were Cody Posey, Rockstar Games, Take-Two Interactive, and Sony. The suit asked for US$600 million in damages.
In 2009, a six-year-old boy, who claimed he had learned to drive from the game, took his family's car on a 10-mile trip before he crashed.
According to "The Guinness World Records" 2008 and 2009 Gamer's Edition, it is the most controversial video game series in history, with over 4,000 articles published about it, which include accusations of glamorising violence, corrupting gamers, and connection to real life crimes.
"Grand Theft Auto".
The game was controversial from the very first incarnation of the series "Grand Theft Auto" was condemned in Britain, Germany, and France due to its "extreme violence", and Brazil banned it outright. Publicist Max Clifford planted sensational stories in tabloids in order to help sell the first game.
"Grand Theft Auto III": general violence and crime.
The controversies flared up again with "Grand Theft Auto III", since the 3D graphics made the violence more realistic, and players could pay the services of prostitutes to recover their health, and if they wished, killing them to get their money back.
There is also criticism from the focus on illegal activities in comparison with traditional "heroic" roles that other games offer. The main character can commit a wide variety of crimes and violent acts while dealing with only temporary consequences, including the killing of policemen and military personnel.
"Vice City": ethnic discrimination.
The sixth game in the series, "", also came under criticism. One mission in particular, in which the player must instigate a gang war between Haitian and Cuban gangs, has been controversial. Haitian and Cuban anti-defamation groups criticised the game.
Jean-Robert Lafortune of the Haitian American Grassroots Coalition is quoted as saying that "The game shouldn't be designed to destroy human life, it shouldn't be designed to destroy an ethnic group," for this and similar scenarios, including lines in the game's script such as "kill the Haitian dickheads" said by character "Diaz" during an altercation between the player and a Haitian gang. After the threat of a lawsuit by the Haitian-American Grassroots Coalition, Rockstar removed the word "Haitians" from this phrase in the game's subtitles.
"San Andreas": sex minigame.
"San Andreas" was criticised initially due to its "gangster" elements, which include drugs, prostitution, and murder; but later due to the discovery of disabled interactive sex scenes, nicknamed Hot Coffee, which was a sexual minigame that was cut from the game, but remained in the game code, which was discovered in both the console and Windows versions of the game. Dubbed the "Hot Coffee mod", the minigame allowed players to have sex with their in-game girlfriends and also record sextapes.
After the release of "", modders managed to find the unused code in the game and released unofficial patches for the Windows and Xbox (with a modchip) versions and PlayStation 2 version with the use of an Action Replay code enabling the player to engage in these sexual mini-games (dubbed "Hot Coffee" in reference to a euphemism for sex used in the game). These mini-games were left partially intact in the game's code. This prompted application of an AO (Adults Only) ESRB rating to the version of the game containing the leftover code. Take-Two Interactive was forced to re-release the game in order to restore the M (Mature) rating. A class action lawsuit against Take-Two was also filed as a result of the "Hot Coffee" code.
"Grand Theft Auto IV": drunk driving.
One of the controversies involved with this game was Mothers Against Drunk Driving's (MADD) criticism of the ability to drink and drive as a new feature. MADD had even requested ESRB to change the rating of the game from "M" for ages seventeen and up to "AO", for adults only, because they felt it was inappropriate for children, even at the age of seventeen, to experience drunk driving in such a manner. In the final game, drunk driving is a playable event, but it is a crime that automatically generates a wanted rating and protagonist Niko Bellic loudly (and drunkenly) proclaims that it is a "bad idea" and that he "should know better".
"The Lost and Damned": full-frontal nudity.
"" expansion pack was condemned by U.S. parents group Common Sense Media who issued a public warning against the pack's content due to a full-frontal nudity scene during one of the cut scenes. They claimed the game was "more controversial than its predecessors" because it featured "full frontal male nudity".
"Chinatown Wars": drug dealing minigame.
There has been some controversy over a drug dealing minigame along with comments that some Nintendo games are being aimed at children (despite the fact that the game was rated Mature). The drug dealing mini-game allows players to peddle six types of drugs around the city, but the profit the player makes depends on market conditions, which will be based on the area in which they deal, and the level of regular service this area receives from them.
Reception.
Ever since 2001, the "Grand Theft Auto" series has been a major success, both critically and financially. It has generated perfect or near perfect reviews and scores on almost all of the games, and has sold over 114 million copies worldwide, . "The Times Online" reported that "Grand Theft Auto IV", the latest console instalment, recorded 609,000 copies in the UK on its first day of release. In its first week, "Grand Theft Auto IV" sold approximately 6 million copies worldwide and grossed over $500 million.
In 2006, "Grand Theft Auto" was voted one of Britain's top 10 designs among Concorde, Red Telephone Boxes, Catseyes, The Underground, Mini, Tomb Raider and the World Wide Web.
The series has broken several records, resulting in Guinness World Records awarding the series 10 world records in the "Gamer's Edition 2008". These records include Most Guest Stars in a Video Game Series, Largest Voice Cast in a Video Game ("GTA: San Andreas"), Largest In-Game Soundtrack ("GTA: San Andreas"). It also held the title of Most Successful Entertainment Launch of All Time ("GTA IV"), but has since been eclipsed by the release of "Call of Duty: Modern Warfare 2". Guinness World Records also ranked "Grand Theft Auto" in third place on their list of top 50 console games of all time based on initial impact and lasting legacy. "GTA: San Andreas" is listed as the most successful game in the PlayStation 2 according to "The Guinness World Records 2009 Gamer's Edition".
"Grand Theft Auto III", "San Andreas" and "Vice City" currently lie at the 2nd, 5th and 6th highest rated PlayStation 2 games on Metacritic, respectively, while "Chinatown Wars" is rated the best game on the Nintendo DS and the second best on the PlayStation Portable, and "Grand Theft Auto IV" is currently rated the second best game ever, with a score of 98, only trailing behind "". Also, "Vice City", "Grand Theft Auto III", "San Andreas" and "Grand Theft Auto IV" lie at 11th, 24th, 27th and 93rd best PC games of all time, on Metacritic. Along with this, "The Lost and Damned" and "The Ballad of Gay Tony" are currently placed 35th and 59th in the top Xbox 360 games.
Similar games.
The release of "Grand Theft Auto III" is treated as a revolutionary event in the history of video games, much like the release of "Doom" nearly a decade earlier.
During interviews to mark the 10th anniversary of the release of "Grand Theft Auto III", producer of the Street Fighter series, Yoshinori Ono, said "It would be no exaggeration to say that GTA III changed the industry, and we can basically separate the time before and after its emergence as distinct eras." In the same article Bethesda studios director, Todd Howard, said "The mark of a truly great game is how many people try to recapture or emulate it and fail. There’s a long line behind this one."
Subsequent games that follow this formula of driving and shooting have been called ""Grand Theft Auto" clones". Some reviewers even extended this label to the "Driver" series, even though this series began years before the release of "Grand Theft Auto III".
"Grand Theft Auto" clones are a type of 3D action-adventure game,i. ii. ; iii. iv. ; v. </ref> where players are given the ability to drive any vehicle or fire any weapon as they explore an open world. These games often incorporate violent and criminal themes. Notable games that are comparable to "Grand Theft Auto" are "Saints Row", ', ' and "Sleeping Dogs".
