Take Me Home is the second studio album by English-Irish boy band One Direction, released globally in November 2012 by Syco Records and Columbia Records (Sony Music Entertainment). After extensive promotional appearances and touring in North America and Oceania in support of their debut album, One Direction began recording the album in May 2012. As a follow-up to One Direction's internationally successful debut album "Up All Night" (2011), several writers and producers were enlisted, including Carl Falk, Rami Yacoub, Savan Kotecha, Ed Sheeran, Jake Gosling, and Tom Fletcher. The album is predominantly a pop music album, interpolating elements of pop rock, dance-pop, teen pop and power pop. 
The album received generally favourable reviews from contemporary music critics. "Take Me Home" topped the charts in more than thirty-five countries including Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States, sold over one million copies worldwide in its first week of release, and received a multitude of certifications across the globe. When "Take Me Home" topped the 1 million mark in US sales on the week ending 16 December 2012, One Direction became the first act to sell 1 million copies of two different albums in a calendar year since 2009. Their debut album "Up All Night" became the third best-selling album (1,616,000) and "Take Me Home" the fifth best-selling album (1,340,000) of 2012 in the United States, making the vocal quintet the first act to place two albums in the year-end top five in the Nielsen SoundScan era. 
The lead single, "Live While We're Young", released on 28 September 2012, peaked inside the top ten in almost every country it charted and recorded the highest one-week opening sales figure for a song by a non-American artist. The album's second single, "Little Things", released on 3 December 2012, became the group's second number-one hit in the United Kingdom. "Kiss You" will be released as the album's third single on 17 january 2013. Staged in support of the record, One Direction performed the album's songs on several television programs. The album's accompanying seven-month 2013 World Tour is scheduled to begin in February 2013.
Development.
In early 2012, One Direction revealed that a follow-up to their debut album, "Up All Night" (2011), was in development. "In the summer, we're going to get back and start a new record. We want to bring out a record nearly every year, every year and a half," Niall Horan said, revealing they were arranging "meetings and stuff with different writers and producers." In March 2012, McFly frontman Tom Fletcher confirmed that he would be writing a song for the album after he wrote the song "I Want" for their debut album. In February 2012, One Direction stated interest in collaborating with Ed Sheeran after he gave them the song "Moments" for their first album. In April 2012, Sheeran confirmed in an interview with "Dose.ca" that they were in contact, "I've got two songs that their manager emailed me for — old songs that were meant to go on my last album — a big stadium anthem. So I'm going to put them towards them and see if they like them, I wouldn't necessarily do that with any other bands." In June 2012, Sheeran confirmed the group would be recording two of his songs. He told the "Daily Star": "I wrote a couple of songs when I was 17 that One Direction want for their next album. I'm going into the studio in August to produce the tracks for them. I won't feature on the tracks though. There's definitely a divide in genre." 
In April 2012, "The Independent" reported that Simon Cowell had challenged music's 'most successful' songwriters to compete for space on One Direction's second album, after the global success of their debut album. Dee Demirbag, responsible for international artists and repertoire at music publisher, BMG Rights Management in Scandinavia, said: "Breaking a boy band in the U.S. is about as big as it gets in the music industry, so you can imagine the competition to get cuts on the next One Direction album is immense." Swede Carl Falk, who helmed One Direction's breakthrough hit, "What Makes You Beautiful", said: "It's important to get their personalities on the music." Falk said that he believes Sweden will strengthen its grip over the charts and win the battle to dominate One Direction's next release. "Swedes have been making great pop songs since ABBA. We love melodies and nice chord changes. That fits the market right now. Melody is back, pop is back and young girls want their pop idols again."
Conversely, the same month, Harry Styles stated, "we're always writing on the road and in hotels and airports. We don't ever want our music to sound like a 40-year-old man in an office has written it and given it to us to perform." After extensive promotional appearances and touring in North America and Oceania in support of their debut album, One Direction began recording the album in May 2012, in Stockholm, Sweden. In June 2012, the group continued recording the album in the United States, whilst touring on the final leg of their Up All Night Tour, which ended on 1 July 2012. 
In June 2012, Horan spoke to MTV News, disclosing that they intended to spend their time in July and August "getting the album done." According to an August 2012 press release, the album features production from pop veterans such as Dr. Luke, Shellback and Toby Gad, as well as input from Sheeran and Fletcher. Songwriters Savan Kotecha, Rami Yacoub and Carl Falk also return, helming the track "Live While We're Young" and various other songs on the album. The album cover artwork, revealed on 30 August, features the group surrounding a traditional British K2 red telephone box, a familiar sight on the streets of the UK. Regarding the album's title "Take Me Home", Horan stated that the group collectively came up with the title. Speaking on Ryan Seacrest's KIIS-FM radio show, Horan said: "We thought about it for a while. Because we all would do a lot of traveling around the world and we get to see a lot of cool places, but the main thing is there's no place like home. It's always kind of nice to go home."
Promotion.
"Live While We're Young" was featured in a Pepsi television commercial for the United States that featured both One Direction and the American football player Drew Brees. It premiered on Fox on 10 October 2012. In the commercial, Brees and One Direction member Harry Styles argue over who gets a can of Pepsi, Brees and One Direction show off their achievements, and Niall Horan tells Brees that he can join One Direction if he gives the can to Styles. The commercial ends with Brees performing with One Direction and singing part of "Live While We're Young" off-key. Jocelyn Vena of MTV called the clip comedic and wrote: "The brand-new commercial not only allows the group to show off their funny bones, but it also serves as a reminder that their new album Take Me Home, featuring "LWWY," is only a month away from dropping." 
One Direction performed at the BBC Radio 1 Teen Awards (7 October). They performed "Live While We're Young" on "The X Factor Italy" (1 November) and "The X Factor Sweden" (2 November). They performed "Live while we're young" in France on Danse avec les stars (4 november). They also performed on "The X Factor USA" (8 November), "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" (9 November), "The X Factor UK" (11 November), "The Today Show" (13 November), and the BBC's "Children in Need 2012" telethon (16 November). They performed "Little Things" on "Surprise, Surprise" (17 November), at the 2012 Royal Variety Performance (19 November), in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II, and on "The X Factor Australia" (20 November). Additionally, the band performed "Live While We're Young" at the 2012 Bambi Awards (22 November), headlined a sold-out show at New York City's Madison Square Garden (3 December), performed at Capital FM's "Jingle Bell Ball" (8 December), at The O2 Arena, and the finals of the ninth series of "The X Factor UK" (9 December).
One Direction are also set to embark on their second concert tour, the 2013 World Tour, in February 2013. Announced by member Liam Payne at the 2012 BRIT Awards in early 2012, the original concert tour was billed as the UK & Ireland Arena Tour. In mid-2012, the concert tour expanded with legs in North America and Australasia following the band's international breakthrough. The concert tour is set to visit arenas and stadiums from February through October 2013. The concert tour consists of over 100 shows in Europe, North America and Australia. In the UK and Ireland, ticket sales reached 300,000 within a day of release, which included a six-date sell out at London's The O2 Arena. In Australian and New Zealand markets, tickets grossed US$15.7 million, with all 190,000 tickets sold for eighteen shows to be held in Australia and New Zealand.
Singles.
"Take Me Home" has yielded three singles, including two US singles. The lead single "Live While We're Young" was released by Syco Records on 28 September 2012. The song rocketed to worldwide success, peaking at number one in Ireland and New Zealand and the top ten in almost every country it charted. In the United States, "Live While We're Young" debuted at number 3 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, sold 341,000 downloads in its first week, and bowed at number one on the Digital Songs chart. Its debut marks the highest bow by a British group and the second-highest debut among all UK acts, outpaced only by Elton John's number one arrival with "Candle in the Wind 1997". Its opening sales denote the biggest opening sales figure for a single by a non-US artist and the third ever for a download by a group, surpassed by the arrivals of Maroon 5's 2012 single "Payphone" (493,000) and The Black Eyed Peas' 2009 single "Boom Boom Pow" (465,000). "Little Things" was released in the UK and Ireland as the second single. The track debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart on 18 November 2012, becoming One Direction's fifth top ten appearance and second number-one hit in the United Kingdom. "Kiss You" was chosen as the second US single of "Take Me Home", set for a digital release on 8 February 2013.
Critical response.
"Take Me Home" received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 69, which indicates "generally favourable reviews". Al Fox of "BBC Music" expressed that despite its "boardroom-defined" objectives, the music itself is of "notable quality", considering it "Polished and dependable, despite its safety there are some show-stopping pop anthems present." Matt Collar from AllMusic described it as an "immediately catchy mix of dancey pop", which conveys "the group's shared lead-vocal approach and peppy, upbeat image." "The Boston Globe" editor Sarah Rodman quipped that while the album is "uniformly sleek and upbeat", "a few tunes hew too closely to the generic template". Rodman, however, acknowledged "but as boy bands go, fans — and their wary parents — could do much worse." Kate Wills from "The Independent" praised the uptempo tracks while defining the ballads as too saccharine. John Dolan of "Rolling Stone" opined that the album's uptempo material rivals the best of boy bands the Backstreet Boys and 'N Sync, however, for the ballads: "a certain amount of douchiness creeps in". "Entertainment Weekly" writer Adam Markovitz asserted that the album was rushed, resulting in an album with "barely enough zip to keep the kids up past dinner." Likewise, Robert Corpsey from Digital Spy wrote, "The result "Take Me Home" may see them progressing at a snail's pace, but when you've got it so good, what's the rush anyway?" 
In a favourable review, Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" commented that the album is "far more mechanical" than their debut album "Up All Night" (2011). Caramanica called the members' vocals "fundamentally interchangeable", and opined that only Zayn Malik "breaks free from the pack vocally with any regularity." While Alexis Petridis for "The Guardian" commended the album for its "variable quality", he felt the record would not be able to transcend its target market, a core audience aged approximately 8 to 12 and female, writing that "To anyone else, the mystery of One Direction's success – or at least the sheer scale of it – remains as opaque as ever." Ben Rayner from the "Toronto Star" concurred, assessing: "Unless you’re in the target demographic or are, perhaps, a mom who lived through the same thing in her youth, there’s no point in even going near this record, of course, but the rest of us were never meant to in the first place."
Commercial performance.
The record topped the charts in more than thirty-five countries and sold over one million copies in its first week worldwide. In the United Kingdom, the album sold over 94,000 copies in its first two days of release, totaled 155,000 copies in its first week, and became the group's first album to top the UK Albums Chart. The album and its second single "Little Things" both debuted simultaneously at number one in the UK, making One Direction the youngest act in British chart history to achieve the feat. The record became the fifth best-selling album in the UK of 2012, denoting sales of 616,000 copies. 
In the United States, the album recorded the third-largest debut sales week of 2012, behind Taylor Swift's "Red" (1.2 million sales) and Mumford and Sons' "Babel" (600,000 sales), with 540,000 copies sold. As a result, the album bowed atop the "Billboard" 200 chart on the week ending 18 November 2012, becoming the group's second number-one album. The album sold more than three times as many copies as One Direction's debut album, "Up All Night", did when it bowed at number-one in March 2012 with first-week sales of 176,000 copies. "Take Me Home" also recorded the biggest first-week sales tally for an album by a boy band since 'N Sync's "Celebrity" opened with sales of 1,880,000 in July 2001. The vocal ensemble became the first group to bow atop the "Billboard" 200 with their first two albums since Danity Kane entered with "Welcome to the Dollhouse" in 2008 and their self-titled debut in 2006. In addition, One Direction became the second act in 2012 to achieve two number-one albums within a 12-month period alongside Justin Bieber and the first boy band in US chart history to land two number-one albums in a calendar year. The album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on 5 December 2012, denoting shipments of 1 million copies within the United States.
"Take Me Home" topped the 1 million mark in US sales on the week ending 16 December 2012, becoming the boy band's second album to sell 1 million copies in 2012. The feat makes One Direction the first act to sell 1 million copies of two different albums in a calendar year since 2009, when Michael Jackson (who died that year) did it with four albums and Miley Cyrus did it with two. In addition, One Direction are the first group or duo to achieve this feat since Rascal Flatts in 2007. "Take Me Home" reached the 1 million threshold by its fifth week of release, compared to 19 weeks for their debut album "Up All Night". On "Billboard"s 2012 year-end chart, "Up All Night" ranked at number three (1,616,000) and "Take Me Home" at number five (1,340,000), making the vocal quintet the first act to place two albums in the year-end top five in the Nielsen SoundScan era. The group also became the first non-country act to place two albums in the top ten on the year-end chart in the Nielsen SoundScan era.
Track listing.
Credits adapted from album liner notes.
