Yoga (Sanskrit, Pāli: , /ˈjəʊɡə/, "") is a commonly known generic term for physical, mental, and spiritual disciplines which originated in ancient India. Specifically, yoga is one of the six "āstika" ("orthodox") schools of Hindu philosophy. One of the most detailed and thorough expositions on the subject are the "Yoga Sūtras of Patañjali". Various traditions of yoga are found in Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism.
Pre–philosophical speculations and diverse ascetic practices of first millennium BCE were systematized into a formal philosophy in early centuries CE by the "Yoga Sutras of Patanjali". By the turn of the first millennium, Hatha yoga emerged as a prominent tradition of yoga distinct from the Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras". While the "Yoga Sutras" focus on discipline of the mind, Hatha yoga concentrates on health and purity of the body.
Hindu monks, beginning with Swami Vivekananda, brought yoga to the West in the late 19th century. In the 1980s, yoga became popular as a physical system of health exercises across the Western world. Many studies have tried to determine the effectiveness of yoga as a complementary intervention for cancer, schizophrenia, asthma and heart patients. In a national survey, long-term yoga practitioners in the United States reported musculo–skeletal and mental health improvements.
Terminology.
In Vedic Sanskrit, the more commonly used, literal meaning of the Sanskrit word ' which is "to add", "to join", "to unite", or "to attach" from the root ', already had a much more figurative sense, where the yoking or harnessing of oxen or horses takes on broader meanings such as "employment, use, application, performance" (compare the figurative uses of "to harness" as in "to put something to some use"). All further developments of the sense of this word are post-Vedic. More prosaic moods such as "exertion", "endeavour", "zeal" and "diligence" are also found in Epic Sanskrit.
There are very many compound words containing "yog" in Sanskrit. "Yoga" can take on meanings such as "connection", "contact", "method", "application", "addition" and "performance". For example, "guṇá-yoga" means "contact with a cord"; "chakrá-yoga" has a medical sense of "applying a splint or similar instrument by means of pulleys (in case of dislocation of the thigh)"; "chandrá-yoga" has the astronomical sense of "conjunction of the moon with a constellation"; "puṃ-yoga" is a grammatical term expressing "connection or relation with a man", etc. Thus, "bhakti-yoga" means "devoted attachment" in the monotheistic Bhakti movement. The term "kriyā-yoga" has a grammatical sense, meaning "connection with a verb". But the same compound is also given a technical meaning in the "Yoga Sutras" (2.1), designating the "practical" aspects of the philosophy, i.e. the "union with the Supreme" due to performance of duties in everyday life
In Hindu philosophy, the word "yoga" is used to refer to one of the six orthodox ("āstika") schools of Hindu philosophy. The "Yoga Sutras of Patanjali" are often labelled as Rāja yoga. Someone who practices yoga or follows the yoga philosophy with a high level of commitment is called a yogi or yogini.
Purpose.
Generally put, yoga is a disciplined method utilized for attaining a goal. The ultimate goal of Yoga is "moksha" though the exact definition of what form this takes depends on the philosophical or theological system with which it is conjugated. Bhakti schools of Vaishnavism combine yoga with devotion to enjoy an eternal presence of Vishnu. In Shaiva theology, yoga is used to unite "kundalini" with Shiva. Mahabharata defines the purpose of yoga as the experience of "Brahman" or "Ātman" pervading all things. In the specific sense of Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras", the purpose of yoga is defined as "citta-vṛtti-nirodhaḥ" (the cessation of the peturbations of consciousness). In contemporary times, the physical postures of yoga are used to alleviate health problems, reduce stress and make the spine supple. Yoga is also used as a complete exercise program and physical therapy routine.
History.
Prehistory.
Several seals discovered at Indus Valley Civilization sites, dating to the mid 3rd millennium BC, depict figures in positions resembling a common yoga or meditation pose, showing "a form of ritual discipline, suggesting a precursor of yoga," according to archaeologist Gregory Possehl. Ramaprasad Chanda, who supervised Indus Valley Civilization excavations, states that, “Not only the seated deities on some of the Indus seals are in yoga posture and bear witness to the prevalence of yoga in the Indus Valley Civilization in that remote age, the standing deities on the seals also show Kayotsarga (a standing posture of meditation) position. It is a posture not of sitting but of standing." Some type of connection between the Indus Valley seals and later yoga and meditation practices is speculated upon by many scholars, though there is no conclusive evidence.
Ascetic practices ("tapas"), concentration and bodily postures used by Vedic priests to conduct "yajna" (Vedic ritual of fire sacrifice) might have been precursors to yoga. Vratya, a group of ascetics mentioned in the "Atharvaveda", emphasized on bodily postures which probably evolved into yogic asanas. Early Vedic Samhitas also contain references to other group ascetics such as, Munis, the Keśin, and Vratyas. Techniques for controlling breath and vital energies are mentioned in the Brahmanas (ritualistic texts of the Vedic corpus, c. 1000–800 BCE) and the "Atharvaveda". Nasadiya Sukta of the "Rig Veda" suggests the presence of an early contemplative tradition.
Alexander Wynne, author of "The Origin of Buddhist Meditation", observes that formless meditation and elemental meditation might have originated in the Upanishadic tradition. The earliest reference to meditation is in the "Brihadaranyaka Upanishad", one of the oldest Upanishads. "Chandogya Upanishad" describes the five kinds of vital energies ("prana"). Concepts used later in many yoga traditions such as internal sound and veins ("nadis") are also described in the Upanishad. "Taittiriya Upanishad" defines yoga as the mastery of body and senses.
Preclassical era.
Diffused pre-philosophical speculations of yoga begin to emerge in the texts of c. 500–200 BCE such as the middle Upanishads, the "Bhagavad Gita" and Mokshadharma of the "Mahabharata". The terms "samkhya" and "yoga" in these texts refer to spiritual methodologies rather than the philosophical systems which developed centuries later.
Upanishads.
The term "yoga" first appears in the Hindu scripture "Katha Upanishad" (a primary Upanishad c. 400 BCE) where it is defined as the steady control of the senses, which along with cessation of mental activity, leads to the supreme state. "Katha Upanishad" integrates the monism of early Upanishads with concepts of samkhya and yoga. It defines various levels of existence according to their proximity to the innermost being "Ātman". Yoga is therefore seen as a process of interiorization or ascent of consciousness. It is the earliest literary work that highlights the fundamentals of yoga. "Shvetashvatara Upanishad" (c. 400-200 BCE) elaborates on the relationship between thought and breath, control of mind, and the benefits of yoga. Like the "Katha Upanishad" the transcendent Self is seen as the goal of yoga. This text also recommends meditation on Om as a path to liberation. "Maitrayaniya Upanishad" (c. 300 BCE) formalizes the sixfold form of yoga. Physiological theories of later yoga make an appearance in this text. Further systematization of yoga is continued in the Yoga Upanishads of the "Atharvaveda". The concepts of Chakra and Kundalini are first mentioned in these Upanishads.
Bhagavad Gita.
- "Bhagavad Gita" 2.48
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada translates it as "Be steadfast in yoga ('), O Arjuna. Perform your duty (') and abandon all attachment (') to success or failure ('). Such evenness of mind ("") is called yoga."
Madhusudana Sarasvati (b. circa 1490) divided the "Gita" into three sections, with the first six chapters dealing with Karma yoga, the middle six with Bhakti yoga, and the last six with Jnana (knowledge). Other commentators ascribe a different 'yoga' to each chapter, delineating eighteen different yogas. Aurobindo, a freedom fighter and philosopher, describes the yoga of the "Gita" as "a large, flexible and many-sided system with various elements, which are all successfully harmonized by a sort of natural and living assimilation".
Mahabharata.
Description of an early form of yoga called "nirodha–yoga" (yoga of cessation) is contained in the Mokshadharma section of the 12th chapter (Shanti Parva) of the "Mahabharata" epic. The verses of the section are dated to c. 300–200 BCE. "Nirodha–yoga" emphasizes progressive withdrawal from the contents of empirical consciousness such as thoughts, sensations etc. until "purusha" (Self) is realized. Terms like "vichara" (subtle reflection), "viveka" (discrimination) and others which are similar to Patanjali's terminology are mentioned, but not described. There is no uniform goal of yoga mentioned in the "Mahabharata". Separation of self from matter, perceiving "Brahman" everywhere, entering into "Brahman" etc. are all described as goals of yoga. Samkhya and yoga are conflated together and some verses describe them as being identical. Mokshadharma also describes an early practice of elemental meditation.
Classical yoga.
During the period between the Mauryan and the Gupta era (c. 200 BCE–500 CE) philosophical schools of Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism were taking form and a coherent philosophical system of yoga began to emerge.
Early Buddhist texts.
Early Buddhist Pali canons (c. 29–17 BCE) are the oldest surviving texts to describe a systematic and comprehensive yoga discipline. The only other Indian texts with an antiquity comparable to the Pali canons are the "Yoga Sutras of Patanjali". Most of the other contemporary yoga systems alluded in the Upanishads and some Pali canons are lost to time. Another yoga system that predated the Buddhist school is Jain yoga. But since Jain sources postdate Buddhist ones, it is difficult to distinguish between the nature of the early Jain school and elements derived from other schools.
The early Buddhist texts describe meditative practices and states, some of which the Buddha borrowed from the ascetic (shramana) tradition. One key innovative teaching of the Buddha was that meditative absorption must be combined with liberating cognition. Meditative states alone are not an end, for according to the Buddha, even the highest meditative state is not liberating. Instead of attaining a complete cessation of thought, some sort of mental activity must take place: a liberating cognition, based on the practice of mindful awareness. The Buddha also departed from earlier yogic thought in discarding the early Brahminic notion of liberation at death. While the Upanishads thought liberation to be a realization at death of a nondual meditative state where the ontological duality between subject and object was abolished, Buddha's theory of liberation depended upon this duality because liberation to him was an insight into the subject's experience.
The Pali canon contains three passages in which the Buddha describes pressing the tongue against the palate for the purposes of controlling hunger or the mind, depending on the passage. However there is no mention of the tongue being inserted into the nasopharynx as in true "khecarī mudrā". The "Mahāsīhanadāsutta" ("Majjhima Nikaya" 1:78) mentions the Buddha using a posture where pressure is put on the perineum with the heel, similar even to modern postures intended to stimulate "kundalini".
Samkhya.
Samkhya was the oldest of Indian schools to take a coherent form in first century CE. When Patanjali systematized the conceptions of yoga, he set them forth on the background of the metaphysics of samkhya, which he assumed with slight variations. In the early works, the yoga principles appear together with the samkhya ideas. Vyasa's commentary on the "Yoga Sutras", also called the "Samkhyapravacanabhasya" ("Commentary on the Exposition of the Sankhya Philosophy"), brings out the intimate relation between the two systems. Yoga agrees with the essential metaphysics of samkhya, but differs from it in that while samkhya holds that knowledge is the means of liberation, yoga is a system of active striving, mental discipline, and dutiful action. Yoga also introduces the conception of god. Sometimes Patanjali's system is referred to as "Seshvara Samkhya" in contradistinction to Kapila's "Nirivara Samkhya".
Yoga Sutras of Patanjali.
- "Yoga Sutras" 1.2
This terse definition hinges on the meaning of three Sanskrit terms. I. K. Taimni translates it as "Yoga is the inhibition (') of the modifications (') of the mind (')". The use of the word ' in the opening definition of yoga is an example of the important role that Buddhist technical terminology and concepts play in the "Yoga Sutras"; this role suggests that Patanjali was aware of Buddhist ideas and wove them into his system. Swami Vivekananda translates the sutra as "Yoga is restraining the mind-stuff ("Citta") from taking various forms ("Vrittis")."
In the view of this school, the highest attainment does not reveal the experienced diversity of the world to be illusion. The everyday world is real. Furthermore, the highest attainment is the event of one of many individual selves discovering itself; there is no single universal self shared by all persons.
Jainism.
According to "Tattvarthasutra", 2nd century CE Jain text, yoga is the sum total of all the activities of mind, speech and body. Umasvati calls yoga the cause of "asrava" or karmic influx In his "Niyamasara", Acarya Kundakunda, describes "yoga bhakti"—devotion to the path to liberation—as the highest form of devotion. Acarya Haribhadra and Acarya Hemacandra mention the five major vows of ascetics and 12 minor vows of laity under yoga. This has led certain Indologists like Prof. Robert J. Zydenbos to call Jainism, essentially, a system of yogic thinking that grew into a full-fledged religion. The five yamas or the constraints of the "Yoga Sutras of Patanjali" bear a resemblance to the five major vows of Jainism, indicating a history of strong cross-fertilization between these traditions.
Yogacara school.
In the late phase of Indian antiquity, on the eve of the development of Classical Hinduism, the
Yogacara movement arises during the Gupta period (4th to 5th centuries).
Yogacara received the name as it provided a "yoga," a framework for engaging in the practices that lead to the path of the bodhisattva. The yogacara sect teaches "yoga" as a way to reach enlightenment.
Middle Ages.
Middle Ages saw the development of many satellite traditions of yoga. Hatha yoga emerged as a dominant practice of yoga in this period.
Bhakti movement.
The Bhakti movement was a development in medieval Hinduism which advocated the concept of a personal God (or "Supreme Personality of Godhead"). The movement was initiated by the Alvars of South India in the 6th to 9th centuries, and it started gaining influence throughout India by the 12th to 15th centuries. Shaiva and Vaishnava bhakti traditions integrated aspects of "Yoga Sutras", such as the practical meditative exercises, with devotion. "Bhagavata Purana" elucidates the practice of a form of yoga called "viraha" (separation) "bhakti". "Viraha bhakti" emphasizes one pointed concentration on Krishna.
Vajrayana.
While breath channels (nāḍis) of yogic practices had already been discussed in the classical Upanishads, it was not until Tantric works, such as the eighth-century Buddhist "Hevajra Tantra" and "Caryāgiti", that hierarchies of chakras were introduced.
Hatha Yoga.
The basic tenets of Hatha yoga were formulated by Shaiva ascetics Matsyendranath and Gorakshanath c. 900 CE. Hatha yoga synthesizes elements of Patanjali's "Yoga Sutras" with posture and breathing exercises. Hatha yoga is also defined in the 11th century Buddhist text "Vimalaprabha", which defines it in relation to the center channel, "bindu" etc. Hatha yoga, sometimes referred to as the "psychophysical yoga", was further elaborated by Yogi Swatmarama, compiler of the "Hatha Yoga Pradipika" in 15th century CE. This yoga differs substantially from the Raja yoga of Patanjali in that it focuses on "shatkarma", the purification of the physical body as leading to the purification of the mind ("ha"), and "prana", or vital energy ("tha"). Compared to the seated asana, or sitting meditation posture, of Patanjali's Raja yoga, it marks the development of asanas (plural) into the full body 'postures' now in popular usage and, along with its many modern variations, is the style that many people associate with the word "yoga" today.
The "Yoga Yajnavalkya" is a classical treatise on Hatha yoga attributed to the Vedic sage Yajnavalkya. It takes the form of a dialogue between Yajnavalkya and his wife Gargi, a renowned female philosopher. The text contains 12 chapters and it probably originated c. 13th century CE. Many Hatha yoga texts like the "Hatha Yoga Pradipika", the "Yoga Kundalini" and the "Yoga Tattva Upanishads" have borrowed verses from or make frequent references to the "Yoga Yajnavalkya". In the "Yoga Yajnavalkya", yoga is defined as "jivatmaparamatmasamyogah", or the union between the individual self ("jivatma") and the Divine ("paramatma").
Modern history.
Reception in the West.
Yoga came to the attention of an educated western public in the mid 19th century along with other topics of Hindu philosophy.
The first Hindu teacher to actively advocate and disseminate aspects of yoga to a western audience was Swami Vivekananda, who toured Europe and the United States in the 1890s.
In the West, the term "yoga" is today typically associated with Hatha yoga and its asanas (postures) or as a form of exercise.
In the 1960s, western interest in Hindu spirituality reached its peak, giving rise to a great number of Neo-Hindu schools specifically advocated to a western public.
Among the teachers of Hatha yoga who were active in the west in this period were B.K.S. Iyengar, K. Pattabhi Jois, and Swami Vishnu-devananda, and Swami Satchidananda. Kundalini Yoga, considered an advanced form of yoga and meditation, was brought to the United States by Yogi Bhajan in 1969.
A second "yoga boom" followed in the 1980s, as Dean Ornish, a follower of Swami Satchidananda, connected yoga to heart health, legitimizing yoga as a purely physical system of health exercises outside of counter culture or esotericism circles, and unconnected to a religious denomination. Numerous asanas seemed modern in origin, and strongly overlaped 19th and early 20th century Western exercise traditions.
Since 2001, the popularity of yoga in the USA has been on the constant rise. The number of people who practiced some form of yoga has grown from 4 million (in 2001) to 20 million (in 2011).
Medicine.
Potential Benefits for Adults.
Long-term yoga practitioners in the United States have reported musculoskeletal and mental health improvements, as well as reduced symptoms of asthma in asthmatics. Regular yoga practice increases brain GABA levels and has been shown to improve mood and anxiety more than some other metabolically matched exercises, such as walking. The three main focuses of Hatha yoga (exercise, breathing, and meditation) make it beneficial to those suffering from heart disease. Overall, studies of the effects of yoga on heart disease suggest that yoga may reduce high blood pressure, improve symptoms of heart failure, enhance cardiac rehabilitation, and lower cardiovascular risk factors. For chronic low back pain, specialist Yoga for Healthy Lower Backs has been found 30% more beneficial than usual care alone in a UK clinical trial. Other smaller studies support this finding. The Yoga for Healthy Lower Backs programme is the dominant treatment for society (both cheaper and more effective than usual care alone) due to 8.5 fewer days off work each year. A research group from Boston University School of Medicine also tested yoga’s effects on lower back pain. Over twelve weeks, one group of volunteers practiced yoga while the control group continued with standard treatment for back pain. The reported pain for yoga participants decreased by one third, while the standard treatment group had only a five percent drop. Yoga participants also had a drop of 80% in pain medication use.
There has been an emergence of studies investigating yoga as a complementary intervention for cancer patients. Yoga is used for treatment of cancer patients to decrease depression, insomnia, pain, and fatigue and increase anxiety control. Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) programs include yoga as a mind-body technique to reduce stress. A study found that after seven weeks the group treated with yoga reported significantly less mood disturbance and reduced stress compared to the control group. Another study found that MBSR had showed positive effects on sleep anxiety, quality of life, and spiritual growth.
Researchers at Washington State University conducted a study in 2007 to see if there was a link between yoga and the health of breast cancer patients. Their results showed that Iyengar yoga could help reduce the inflammation caused by therapy. The ten women in the yoga group participated in 90-minute yoga sessions three times a week for eight consecutive weeks, while the others continued with their normal routines and treatments. At the end of the eight weeks, the researchers compared blood tests and quality-of-life surveys of the yoga group and control group. The researchers noted that the majority of the test subjects were clinically depressed prior to the trial, but after eight weeks of yoga, the yoga group reported less fatigue and better moods. 
Other researchers have looked into yoga as a supplementary or alternative treatment for arthritis. Researchers in the United Arab Emirates studied a group of over forty rheumatoid arthritis patients to see if yoga could be effective in treating the disease. The yoga group completed twelve sessions of Raj yoga, which combines exercise and breathing techniques. The yoga group showed improvement in disease activity scores, but there was no statistically significant evidence to show that their quality of life improved.
Yoga has also been studied as a treatment for schizophrenia. Yoga is found to improve cognitive functions and reduce stress in schizophrenia, a condition associated with cognitive deficits and stress-related relapse. In one study, at the end of four months those patients treated with yoga were better in their social and occupational functions and quality of life. The practice of yoga in Hindu tradition also has psychological benefits, allowing one to develop control over one's mind and body. Rather than adapting the sick or mentally ill mind (the primary focus of modern psychology), traditional Hindu psychology focuses on enhancing the normal and healthy mind through the practice of meditative techniques such as yoga.
Implementation of the Kundalini Yoga Lifestyle has shown to help substance abuse addicts increase their quality of life according to psychological questionnaires like the Behavior and Symptom Identification Scale and the Quality of Recovery Index.
Physical injuries.
A small percentage of yoga practitioners each year suffer physical injuries analogous to sports injuries; caution and common sense are recommended. Yoga has been criticised for being potentially dangerous and being a cause for a range of serious medical conditions including thoracic outlet syndrome, degenerative arthritis of the cervical spine, spinal stenosis, retinal tears, damage to the common fibular nerve, so called "Yoga foot drop," etc. An exposé of these problems by William Broad published in January, 2012 in "The New York Times Magazine" resulted in controversy and denial in the yoga community in New York City where yoga is popular. Broad, a science writer, experienced yoga practitioner, and author of "The Science of Yoga: The Risks and the Rewards", had suffered a back injury while performing a yoga exercise. Torn muscles, knee injuries, and headaches are common ailments which may result from yoga practice.
An extensive survey of yoga practitioners in Australia showed that about 20% had suffered some physical injury while practicing yoga. In the previous 12 months 4.6% of the respondents had suffered an injury producing prolonged pain or requiring medical treatment. Headstands, shoulder stands, lotus and half lotus (seated cross-legged position), forward bends, backward bends, and handstands produced the greatest number of injuries.
Some yoga practitioners do not recommend certain yoga exercises for women during menstruation, for pregnant women, or for nursing mothers. However, mediation and breathing exercises are encouraged.
Among the main reasons that experts cite for causing negative effects from yoga, beginners' competitiveness and instructors' lack of qualification are foremost. As the demand for yoga classes grows, many people get trained and certified to become yoga instructors. However, not every newly certified instructor can evaluate the condition of every new trainee in their class and recommend refraining from doing certain poses to avoid injuries. In turn, a beginning yoga student can overestimate the abilities of their body and strive to do advanced poses before their body is flexible enough to perform them.
Vertebral artery dissection, a tear in the arteries in the neck which provide blood to the brain can result from rotation of the neck while the neck is extended. This can occur in a variety of contexts, for example, in a beauty shop while your hair is being rinsed, but is an event which could occur in some yoga practices. This is a very serious condition which can result in a stroke.
Acetabular labral tears, damage to the structure joining the femur and the hip, have been reported to have resulted from yoga practice and engagement in sports.
Pediatrics.
The American Yoga Association states, "Yoga exercises are not recommended for children under 16 because their bodies’ nervous and glandular systems are still growing, and the effect of Yoga exercises on these systems may interfere with natural growth." However, meditation and simple breathing exercises (without breath-holding) are safe and can help children to manage stress, impulsiveness, and emotional situations.
Yoga compared with other systems of meditation.
Tantra.
Tantrism is a practice that is supposed to alter the relation of its practitioners to the ordinary social, religious, and logical reality in which they live. Through Tantric practice, an individual perceives reality as maya, illusion, and the individual achieves liberation from it. Both Tantra and yoga offer paths that relieve a person from depending on the world. Where yoga relies on progressive restriction of inputs from outside; Tantra relies on transmutation of all external inputs so that one is no longer dependent on them, but can take them or leave them at will. They both make a person independent. This particular path to salvation among the several offered by Hinduism, links Tantrism to those practices of Indian religions, such as yoga, meditation, and social renunciation, which are based on temporary or permanent withdrawal from social relationships and modes.
During tantric practices and studies, the student is instructed further in meditation technique, particularly chakra meditation. This is often in a limited form in comparison with the way this kind of meditation is known and used by Tantric practitioners and yogis elsewhere, but is more elaborate than the initiate's previous meditation. It is considered to be a kind of Kundalini yoga for the purpose of moving the Goddess into the chakra located in the "heart", for meditation and worship.
Buddhism.
Zen Buddhism.
Zen (the name of which derives from the Sanskrit "dhyaana" via the Chinese "ch'an" is a form of Mahayana Buddhism. The Mahayana school of Buddhism is noted for its proximity with yoga. In the west, Zen is often set alongside yoga; the two schools of meditation display obvious family resemblances. This phenomenon merits special attention since yogic practices have some of their roots in the Zen Buddhist school. Certain essential elements of yoga are important both for Buddhism in general and for Zen in particular.
Tibetan Buddhism.
Yoga is central to Tibetan Buddhism. In the Nyingma tradition, the path of meditation practice is divided into nine "yanas", or vehicles, which are said to be increasingly profound. The last six are described as "yoga yanas": "Kriya yoga," "Upa yoga," "Yoga yana," "Mahā yoga," "Anu yoga" and the ultimate practice, "Ati yoga." The Sarma traditions also include Kriya, Upa (called "Charya"), and Yoga, with the Anuttara yoga class substituting for Mahayoga and Atiyoga.
Other tantra yoga practices include a system of 108 bodily postures practiced with breath and heart rhythm. The Nyingma tradition also practices Yantra yoga (Tib. "Trul khor"), a discipline that includes breath work (or pranayama), meditative contemplation and precise dynamic movements to centre the practitioner. The body postures of Tibetan ancient yogis are depicted on the walls of the Dalai Lama's summer temple of Lukhang. A semi-popular account of Tibetan yoga by Chang (1993) refers to caṇḍalī (Tib. "tummo"), the generation of heat in one's own body, as being "the very foundation of the whole of Tibetan yoga." Chang also claims that Tibetan yoga involves reconciliation of apparent polarities, such as prana and mind, relating this to theoretical implications of tantrism.
Christian meditation.
Some Christians integrate yoga and other aspects of Eastern spirituality with prayer and meditation. This has been attributed to a desire to experience God in a more complete way. The Roman Catholic Church, and some other Christian organizations have expressed concerns and disapproval with respect to some eastern and New Age practices that include yoga and meditation.
In 1989 and 2003, the Vatican issued two documents: "Aspects of Christian meditation" and "A Christian reflection on the New Age," that were mostly critical of eastern and New Age practices. The 2003 document was published as a 90 page handbook detailing the Vatican's position. The Vatican warned that concentration on the physical aspects of meditation "can degenerate into a cult of the body" and that equating bodily states with mysticism "could also lead to psychic disturbance and, at times, to moral deviations." Such has been compared to the early days of Christianity, when the church opposed the gnostics' belief that salvation came not through faith but through a mystical inner knowledge. The letter also says, "one can see if and how might be enriched by meditation methods developed in other religions and cultures" but maintains the idea that "there must be some fit between the nature of [other approaches to prayer and Christian beliefs about ultimate reality." Some fundamentalist Christian organizations consider yoga to be incompatible with their religious background, considering it a part of the New Age movement inconsistent with Christianity.
Sufism.
The development of Sufism was considerably influenced by Indian yogic practises, where they adapted both physical postures (asanas) and breath control (pranayama). The ancient Indian yogic text Amritakunda ("Pool of Nectar)" was translated into Arabic and Persian as early as the 11th century.
Several other yogic texts were appropriated by Sufi tradition, but typically the texts juxtapose yoga materials alongside Sufi practices without any real attempt at integration or synthesis. Yoga became known to Indian Sufis gradually over time, but engagement with yoga is not found at the historical beginnings of the tradition.
Sunni Islam.
Malaysia's top Islamic body in 2008 passed a fatwa, which is legally non-binding, against Muslims practicing yoga, saying it had elements of "Hindu spiritual teachings" and that its practice was blasphemy and is therefore haraam. Muslim yoga teachers in Malaysia criticized the decision as "insulting." Sisters in Islam, a women's rights group in Malaysia, also expressed disappointment and said that its members would continue with their yoga classes.
The fatwa states that yoga practiced only as physical exercise is permissible, but prohibits the chanting of religious mantras, and states that teachings such as the uniting of a human with God is not consistent with Islamic philosophy.
In a similar vein, the Council of Ulemas, an Islamic body in Indonesia, passed a fatwa banning yoga on the grounds that it contains "Hindu elements" These fatwas have, in turn, been criticized by Darul Uloom Deoband, a Deobandi Islamic seminary in India.
In May 2009, Turkey's head of the Directorate of Religious Affairs, Ali Bardakoğlu, discounted personal development techniques such as yoga as commercial ventures that could lead to extremism. His comments were made in the context of yoga possibly competing with and eroding participation in Islamic practice.
