Nicole Prescovia Elikolani Valiente Scherzinger, often referred to simply as Nicole Scherzinger, ( ; June 29, 1978) is an American recording artist and television personality. Born in Honolulu, Hawaii and raised in Louisville, Kentucky, Scherzinger enrolled in performing arts schools and was first exposed to singing and dancing competitions as a child. She rose to fame in the early 2000s as the lead singer of The Pussycat Dolls one of the world's best-selling girl groups of all time. During the hiatus of The Pussycat Dolls, Scherzinger released an international top twenty single — "Baby Love" which garnered her worldwide attention. Following the disbandment of The Pussycat Dolls, Scherzinger released her debut solo album, "Killer Love", which spawned a number of hit singles — "Poison", "Don't Hold Your Breath" and "Right There" — and became one of the most successful albums of that year. Two of the latter became two of the best selling singles of 2011 in the United Kingdom. Scherzinger has also featured on hit singles including — "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" and "Heartbeat".
Scherzinger's work has earned her numerous awards and accolades, including two MTV Music Video Awards, three Billboard Music Awards and a Cosmopolitan Award. As of today, Scherzinger has sold 50 million records worldwide. In 2009, "Billboard" ranked her, along with the Pussycat Dolls, as one of the most successful musical acts of the 2000s. In 2011, "Rolling Stone" ranked Scherzinger the ninth best dancing musician. She also appeared on VH1's list of the "100 Greatest Women in Music" in 2012. In 2013, Scherzinger was The Harvard Foundations "Artist of the Year". 
Apart from Scherzinger's work in music, she has also ventured into acting, modelling, musical theatre and reality television. Scherzinger first gained a judging role on singing competition, "The Sing-Off" in 2009, where she judged the show for two seasons before leaving and becoming a judge on both the "The X Factor US" and "The X Factor UK" in 2011 and 2012. Scherzinger later took part in "The Phantom of the Opera" and received universal critical acclaim. Scherzinger has also endorsed such brands as Estée Lauder, Nike, Herbal Essences and Beats By Dr Dre.
Biography.
1978–2003: Early life and career beginnings.
Scherzinger was born Nicole Prescovia Elikolani Valiente in Honolulu, Hawaii, into a staunchly Roman Catholic family. Her father, Alfonso Valiente, is of Filipino descent, and her mother, Rosemary Elikolani, is of half-Hawaiian and half-Russian descent. Her mother was eighteen at the time of Scherzinger's birth and lived in an inner city neighborhood. Scherzinger's parents separated when she was still a baby. When she was six years old, her maternal family moved to Louisville, Kentucky, with her sister, Keala, and her German American stepfather, Gary Scherzinger. She took her stepfather's surname after he adopted her. She first attended Bowen Elementary, and later attended Meyzeek Middle School as an adolescent. Scherzinger states that, growing up, her family did not have a lot of money, and she thanks her mother for all the support she gave her to become what she is today. Scherzinger began performing in Louisville, attending the Youth Performing Arts School at duPont Manual High School, and performing with Actors Theatre of Louisville. As a teenager, Scherzinger was the first runner-up at the 1996 Kentucky State Fair's Coca-Cola Talent Classic contest.
In college, Scherzinger majored in Acting and Musical theatre at Wright State University, where she had a role in "Chicago" and in "Show Boat". She then put her studies in art on hold in 1999 to sing backing vocals for the rock band, Days of the New. Meeks also claims that after touring for the album, the two grew apart creatively and that despite being an "amazing entertainer," she "didn’t seem to understand music very well." In 2001, Scherzinger went on to audition on The WB's television show, "Popstars" in which she auditioned with Whitney Houston's version of "I Will Always Love You". Scherzinger later won the show as part of Eden's Crush, alongside Ivette Sosa, Maile Misajon, Ana Maria Lombo and Rosanna Tavarez, in which she was one of the lead vocalists for the group. The group released the single, "Get Over Yourself", which charted within the top 10 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. They later went on to tour with 'N Sync and Jessica Simpson. Will.i.am approached Scherzinger to become a member of The Black Eyed Peas, but she was forced to decline due to her contract as a member of Eden's Crush and recently on Behind the Music will.i.am also revealed that her boyfriend at the time, Nick Hexum forced her to decline as he controlled her entire career to try to make her a solo artist. The position was eventually given to Fergie. In late 2001, the band's record company, London-Sire Records, went bankrupt, and the group split. Scherzinger subsequently made a few promotional solo appearances under the stage name of Nicole Kea, including covering "Breakfast in Bed" for the soundtrack to "50 First Dates" in 2003. Scherzinger also worked with Yoshiki of Japanese rock band X Japan on his Violet UK project. She sang the English version of "I'll Be Your Love" live with the Tokyo Symphonic Orchestra. The track also appeared on the 2003 Various Artists album "Exposition of Global Harmony".
2003–10: The Pussycat Dolls.
In May 2003, Scherzinger joined the Pussycat Dolls, a burlesque troupe, as a lead singer, when they were re-cast as recording artists. She had first seen them performing on the "Late Show with David Letterman" in November 2002, where Carmen Electra sang "Big Spender" from the Bob Fosse musical "Sweet Charity". Scherzinger's first recordings with the band was in two soundtracks in 2004, for the films "Shark Tale" and "Shall We Dance?". The newly formed recording group's first single was "Sway" from "Shall We Dance?", with a music video inspired by the movie. In September 2005, the band released "PCD", an album combined with several dance-pop songs interlacing their burlesque style, while the second half of the album contain tributes and covers. The album peaked at number one in New Zealand, the top-five in Canada, the Netherlands and the United States, and top-ten in United Kingdom, Austria, Germany, Switzerland and Ireland. "PCD" has sold over three million copies in the US. Worldwide, "PCD" has sold nine million copies. The album received a certification in thirty-six countries. Their first single, "Don't Cha" was a global commercial success, reaching number one in multiple countries. Worldwide, the song has sold more than 6 million copies, making it one of the best selling singles of all time. The band went onto release five more successful singles from the album—"Stickwitu", "Beep", "Buttons", "I Don't Need a Man" and "Wait a Minute". "Stickwitu" was later nominated for a Grammy for Best Pop Performance By a Duo or Group. The group was selected to perform for the introduction for ABC's coverage of the NBA. They also toured with The Black Eyed Peas on their Honda Civic Tour and Christina Aguilera's "Back to Basics Tour". With the success of the debut album, it brought Scherzinger into the media spotlight, which resulted in a series of duets and guest vocals with many male vocalists, including: Shaggy, Vittorio Grigolo and Will Smith. In 2006, she sang co-lead vocals with Avant on his single "Lie About Us". Shcherzinger later appeared on Diddy's lead single "Come to Me" marking her first solo top-ten hit on "Billboard" Hot 100.
In 2008, the band returned with a comeback single, "When I Grow Up". The song became another hit single, charting in the top 10 in numerous countries. "Whatcha Think About That" was released with Missy Elliott as a single before the album and had moderate success internationally. "Doll Domination" was released on September 19, 2008. It debuted at number four on the "Billboard" 200, with 79,000 copies sold in its first week of release. Worldwide, "Doll Domination" sold over five million copies. Three more successful singles were released from the album—"I Hate This Part", "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" and "Hush Hush" One less successful single was also released, which was a collaboration with Snoop Dogg—"Bottle Pop". The band began their second world tour, Doll Domination Tour in early 2009. Lady Gaga and Ne-Yo supported the Pussycat Dolls on the UK leg. and were opening acts for the tour. In mid-2009, Scherzinger and the band joined Britney Spears' on her The Circus Starring Britney Spears tour as an opening act for the first leg in North America. In April 2009, Scherzinger confirmed to "Billboard" that the album would be re-released to give more people a chance to get their music. Scherzinger left the group in 2010. Scherzinger later admitted that she cried when she saw the first outfit she would have to wear as a member of the band. As of 2012, the Pussycat Dolls have sold 50 million records.
2006–09: "Her Name is Nicole" and "The Sing Off".
In 2006, Scherzinger began working on her debut album while still a member of the Pussycat Dolls, while the group were on a hiatus. Scherzinger later confirmed that the Pussycat Dolls' second album, "Doll Domination", featured some of the songs which had initially been recorded for Scherzinger's own album. "Happily Never After" and "Who's Gonna Love You" were placed on the album. She also announced that "I Hate This Part" was also intended for her own solo album. Christopher "Tricky Stewart" and The-Dream were also working with Scherzinger and produced, wrote and recorded at least two songs for the album. Both of the known recordings, "Punch You In Your Sleep" and "I'm a Cheat" were re-allocated to The-Dream's ex-wife Christina Milian who has recorded them for her fourth studio album "Elope" due in 2010. Keri Hilson wrote a song for Scherzinger's album titled "Alienated", but Hilson later reclaimed the song from Scherzinger for her debut album, "In a Perfect World...". In April 2008, Scherzinger recorded a cover version of "Rio" by Duran Duran for an advertising campaign for Unilever's Caress brand of body wash. A commercial video was released, and the single was released via download only, after May 2008. In 2008, in support of Barack Obama, she was one of many musicians to contribute to a track by will.i.am called "Yes We Can". Also on September 5, 2008, Scherzinger joined an all-star cast to perform the charity song "Just Stand Up" on live TV. Scherzinger revealed that her incarnation of the album was "just in talks" and writing process, but she had not began recording for the album again. She confirmed that she would be in the studio regarding her solo debut album once the Pussycat Dolls had finished their World Domination Tour. Scherzinger began working with Will.i.am, Timbaland, Lady Gaga and A.R. Rahman.
Scherzinger announced that her debut album would be titled "Her Name Is Nicole", which she recorded about 100 songs for the album, which was supposed to be released in 2007 before being pushed to October 16, 2008 and later into 2009 before being shelved. She told MTV "I've always said that in the Pussycat Dolls, I kind of feel like Superwoman. But that's just one of my alter egos. I've got the vulnerable, lovesick side of me amongst others which all appear on my record." In an attempt to release a solo album, "Whatever U Like" featuring guest vocals from T.I. was released as the album's lead single. The song didn't manage to chart on "Billboard" Hot 100, but charted at number 83 on Pop Songs and number 73 on Hot Digital Songs. The song peaked at number 57 in Canada. "Baby Love" was the second single released. The single achieved reasonable success outside of the United States, particularly in Europe. This is likely due to Scherzinger's performance at the MTV Europe Music Awards 2007 on November 1, 2007, in which she sang the song with will.i.am, the producer and featured artist of the song. Although the song was not successful on the "Billboard" Hot 100, it reached number four on the "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Play and topped at number 8 at Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart. As a result of both singles charting poorly in the US, Scherzinger decided not to release any further singles from the album. Two promotional singles were released from the album—"Supervillain" and "Puakenikeni" respectively and also both failed to chart.
Although the song was originally written for Gwen Stefani, lead band member of Snow Patrol and critically acclaimed song-writer, Gary Lightbody asked Scherzinger to record the song, "Just Say Yes". Scherzinger loved the song and said: "It's a very honest and truthful song." Ne-Yo also gave Scherzinger two songs, "Happily Never After" a slow ballad of which Scherzinger said she felt it "important for young girls to have an empowering message that they deserve better". Interestingly the song was originally written for Britney Spears to record for her album "Blackout" in 2007. "Power's Out" a riveting duet with English singer Sting (featured in Revlon adverts with Jessica Alba) and "I M.I.S.S You" written by Pharrell Williams and produced by The Neptunes. When commenting on another song "March" Scherzinger said she wanted a powerful record. "It's about never giving up on your dreams and it’s about what I went through to get where I am today." Timbaland produced and featured on the song "Physical" on which his trademark vocals can be heard over the upbeat melody and thumping baseline. Part of the song was used in the film "". and "I M.I.S.S You" written by Pharrell Williams and produced by The Neptunes. In December 2009, Scherzinger served as a celebrity judge on NBC's reality singing competition, "The Sing-Off", along with singer-songwriter Ben Folds and Boyz II Men bandmember Shawn Stockman. The show was hosted by singer Nick Lachey. Scherzinger's role was to critique performances of the competitors and vote on eliminations in all but the final round, which was determined by audience vote. In the show finale, Scherzinger performed "You Don't Own Me" with competition finalists the Beelzebubs of Tufts University. She returned to her role as judge for a second season of "The Sing-Off" in December 2010, but did not return for a third season.
2010–12: "Dancing with the Stars", "Killer Love" and "The X Factor".
Scherzinger returned to the studio in 2010 in a second attempt to record her debut album, which she said she was starting from scratch. In March 2010, it was announced that Scherzinger would be a celebrity contestant on "Dancing with the Stars" for the tenth season and would be partnered with Season 7 champion Derek Hough. On May 25, 2010 Scherzinger won "Dancing with the Stars" season 10. Scherzinger confirmed that she has done one song with Slash for his solo album "Slash" released in April 2010. On February 1, 2010 along with other artists Scherzinger had re-recorded "We Are the World", a charity single for the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. The song debuted during NBC's coverage of the opening ceremonies of the 2010 Winter Olympics. It was released as a single on iTunes on February 12, 2010 accompanied by the music video. In August 2010, RedOne revealed that he was working on Scherzinger's debut album, stating: "I just finished her album. Her last one never came out because it was collecting hamburgers, like fast food. One from McDonald's, one from Burger King, and so on. It tasted good, but it wasn't consistent. Her new record – people are really going to go crazy about it because it's the real her." Scherzinger revealed that it was her choice not to release "Her Name Is Nicole". Scherzinger said that herself and RedOne had created something "unique".
In 2010, Scherzinger guest judged on seventh series of UK version of "The X Factor" auditions. Scherzinger has been credited in the formation of One Direction, which includes: Zayn Malik, Niall Horan, Louis Tomlinson, Liam Payne, and Harry Styles. She also left her mark on the competition after she persuaded producers to change the ages of the judging categories. An "X Factor" spokesman told the media that "At Nicole's suggestion, and agreed by Simon and Louis, the boys' and girls' category age limit has been increased to 28. The judges believe this will strengthen the competition and talent." She later returned the same year with lead single from her debut album, "Poison", which premiered on October 14, 2010 and released on November 29, 2010. A picture from the video shoot was revealed by MTV, showing Scherzinger dressed provocatively. "Poison" charted at number-three on the UK Singles Chart. In November 2010 she joined Prince on-stage during his concert in Abu Dhabi. While working with RedOne she has also recorded vocals for songs which will be included on Mohombi's debut album. Mohombi is the first signee to RedOne's record label. In March 2011, Scherzinger returned with second single, "Don't Hold Your Breath" in March 2011. The following week, "Don't Hold Your Breath" peaked at number-one on the UK Singles Chart and the song also became a worldwide hit single. "Killer Love" was released a week later and became a top-ten hit album on the UK Albums Chart and became one of the most successful selling albums of 2011, with shipments over 750,000. It became the 73rd biggest selling album of the year in the same country. The album was also listed as one of the "Top Selling Albums" on the UK iTunes and the twentieth best selling album by a female artist in 2011.
The US version of "Killer Love" was planned to feature an alternate track listing. Scherzinger confirmed, during an interview with MTV, that the US album would contain contributions from RedOne, Ne-Yo, Jim Jonsin, The-Dream and Tricky Stewart. In addition to this, 50 Cent was featured on the album's US lead single, a new version of the Jonsin-produced, "Right There". American hip-hop artist Snoop Dogg appears on one of the new songs recorded for the US album. Scherzinger has recorded more than 40 songs to be considered for her US solo debut album, but insists that it "will not be finished until the very last minute. I don't know if I will ever feel like I have finished the album." To date, a US version of the album has yet to appear. In May 2011, Scherzinger was announced as one of two co-hosts of the first season of Cowell's U.S. version of "The X Factor" alongside Steve Jones, but one month later, a Fox press release announced Scherzinger would replace Cheryl Cole as a judge instead. As a result, Scherzinger joined the judging panel alongside Cowell, Paula Abdul, and L.A. Reid. The first season of the show premiered on Fox on September 21, 2011. She later mentored the "Over 30s" category and was runner-up with Josh Krajcik. During the Judges' Houses stage of the competition, Scherzinger was aided by friend and fellow artist Enrique Iglesias to help decide which of her acts should go through to the Live Shows stage. Scherzinger created immense controversy on the show when her vote was put to deadlock and the public vote sent home contestant Rachel Crow on December 8, 2011. Scherzinger also faced backlash from the fans of the show, which included boos from the audience and later, death threats. Scherzinger left the show after just one season as a judge.
After receiving worldwide attention, "Right There" was announced as the third single from the album. For its release in the US, it was remixed to feature two new verses from American rapper 50 Cent, it serves as her first American lead single from her debut album, "Killer Love". "Right There" was released as a digital download in the US on May 17, 2011 and sent to US mainstream radio on May 24, 2011. The song became an international worldwide hit, charting in top-ten in numerous countries and the single has since sold over 500,000 copies in America. It was later announced it 2011 that Scherzinger would portray Lily Poison in the film, "Men in Black 3", which is was released in May 2012. A further two more singles were released from "Killer Love"—"Wet" and "Try with Me". Both singles achiever limited success, but charted well in individual countries. While shooting the music video for "Try with Me", Scherzinger, her team and choreographer Brian Friedman, were held at gunpoint by a local gang when they were travelling through the mountains to the Xilitla rainforest to shoot the video. They were released without harm but shaken by the experience.
Shortly after her "X Factor" exit, Scherzinger began her first solo tour in Europe and Asia in February 2012, the "Killer Love Tour". On June 15, 2012, Scherzinger signed a £750,000 contract to join the ninth series of "The X Factor UK" as a replacement judge for the departing Kelly Rowland. The show premiered on August 18, 2012. and concluded on December 9. During her first season overseas, Scherzinger mentored the "Boys" category. Scherzinger was aided by friend and fellow artist Ne-Yo during the Judges' Houses stage of the competition in Dubai to help decide which of her acts should go through to the Live Shows stage. The three acts she chose were James Arthur, Rylan Clark and Jahmene Douglas. Arthur and Douglas went on to become winner and runner-up respectively. In October 2012 she faced backlash over a controversial inclusion of Rylan in her final three. Scherzinger has received positive feedback for her role as a judge in the UK, especially from Louis Walsh. Scherzinger was announced the winning mentor on December 9, 2012. All three acts in Scherzinger's category made it to the final five, the first time this has happened in the history of The X Factor.
In 2012, Scherzinger recorded a track with will.i.am which will be included on will.i.am's upcoming fourth studio album, "#willpower". Scherzinger performed at the Hollywood Bowl on July 7, 2012 along with will.i.am. In October 2012, "Behind the Music" premiered a documentary about Scherzinger. In late 2012, Scherzinger featured on the latest studio album of the Italian singer, Eros Ramazzotti.
2013: Upcoming second studio album.
Scherzinger's second album will be globally released in early 2013. The lead single for the album is "Boomerang", the music video for which was released on January 25 on Scherzinger's VEVO channel. The single will be released first in the UK on March 10, 2013.
Artistry.
Influences.
Scherzinger credits Whitney Houston as her greatest musical influence and idol, as she said she wanted to "be Whitney" when she was growing up. She admired Houston so much that she auditioned with her version of "I Will Always Love You" at her "Popstars" audition. When Scherzinger was growing up in her home town of Louisville, she received a Christmas gift at the age of six. It was a tiny purple boombox and a cassette of Whitney Houston's chart-topping 1985 self-titled debut album. "My parents had no money, but they got me this player and Whitney’s album, which had "The Greatest Love of All" on it," Scherzinger recalls. "That was it for me. From that moment on I wanted to sing. Her voice was so powerful; every note she sang just felt like the truth." Scherzinger also named Ella Fitzgerald, Billie Holiday, Roberta Flack, Sade Adu, Alanis Morissette, Toni Braxton and Tina Turner as her biggest influences to Scherzinger while growing up. Scherzinger said that Beyoncé Knowles also inspired her, stating: "I am inspired by women like Beyoncé who wear costumes that aren't much but they are real artists and they put real artistry into what they do and that is how I pride myself." Scherzinger said while she is on stage performing, she borrows personas of Tina Turner and Mick Jagger: "The way he Jagger prances around stage and the poise he has on stage. But I love Tina Turner’s attitude and sass. I steal from her all the time, especially being the lead singer of this group, the Pussycat Dolls, to be fearless and just have that attitude and that soul behind you. Scherzinger also cites Gwen Stefani as an influences. Janet Jackson and M.I.A are also influences to her. When Scherzinger was older, Mariah Carey became a huge influence to her. She also wished to work with The Black Eyed Peas saying she admired their music. Scherzinger is also a fan of Adele. Critically acclaimed, "Pop Prince", Prince also became a big influence when she was in her teens. Michael Jackson was one of Scherzinger's biggest influences and idols. Paula Abdul, who Scherzinger sat alongside on the judging panel of "The X Factor" was one of her influences. When she gained the role on Men in Black 3, Scherzinger said that music was a very big part of her inspiration for the character, which she plays for the film. She said, "I listened to my heavier music and I listened to Led Zeppelin and I kind of got in that frame of mind because music is what inspires me most. I worked with my acting coach a lot and she told me about lots of crazy things to think about while I was in character, but I better not tell you what she said." Scherzinger said that the role has inspired her to record differently on her second studio album.
Public image.
Scherzinger said that her public image is one of the most important things about herself and she admits it is very "frustrating" to read about the media's portrayal of her as "a man-eater". Scherzinger ended her relationship with Lewis Hamilton in October 2011, before the pair got back together and she had been linked to a number of different men, but insists none of the rumors are true. "It annoys me, I'm a very classy girl. I have very strong morals. I've only dated a few men in my life, so to read the news that I've got a new guy every week, it makes me look like I'm easily distracted or that any guy can have me, I'm not like that. I'm not a man-eater, I'm quite the opposite." In September 2012, for example, she denied a report by TMZ that she was in a relationship with Chris Brown. Scherzinger has been linked to several other men including long time friend Drake. According to Scherzinger, she said that a lot of people recognizes her from being a member from the Pussycat Dolls, which she said is "amazing" but wants people to recognize her for her own music and the Pussycat Dolls do not fulfill her musical desires. When asked what she intended to achieve with her solo career she commented "Some people only have their glasses half full, but there was never a limit to mine." In one interview she spoke of her role with the Pussycat Dolls stating that it was a "challenge fronting the group" but that "every girl has something different to bring and add to the success". Scherzinger said "It caught my eye because I’d played Velma Kelly in [Fosse's] "Chicago" in college."
Scherzinger's style has been influenced by rock n' roll ever since her start in the business. She claims that she prefers wearing a "grown up" style of clothing including leather jackets and boots, which can be seen on her very first solo tour. Her style has evolved into being a little bit more grown up. It's rock 'n' roll inspired, but chic and Glam rock." The outfits she wore as a Pussycat Doll and sexual dance moves they performed has continued ever since she embarked on her solo career, and are anything but conservative. Scherzinger politely addressed the issue: "Well, I have been able to dress more in my own style now that I am no longer in the band, but as a Pussycat Doll, I was playing a character, a "persona". It was meant to be fun. I think I am able to handle myself in a good manner and hopefully I’m a positive role model for other girls out there. I think my style is a little edgier now." Scherzinger also enjoys experimenting with new looks to suit her mood. She's constantly playing around with fashion and beauty products to keep her aesthetic looking fresh and fabulous, but when it comes to style, "I am definitely a person that likes to mix things up and take risks," Scherzinger admits. "I think the bolder the better! It's fun to experiment with a range of colours and patterns." Scherzinger's trademark is her long dark hair. Scherzinger also wore the very first Twitter dress at the EE launch party. In 2012, Scherzinger was ranked number one on Complex's "Hottest Singing Competition Winners Worldwide".
As a former member of the Pussycat Dolls, Scherzinger is the most recognizable publicly. In an interview with the UK's "Recognise Magazine", Scherzinger revealed she hopes her former bandmates are not jealous of her. "I hope the girls are not jealous of me because I'm only positive. I wish them the best in their success and happiness" she says. Meanwhile, Margeaux Watson of "Entertainment Weekly" took a major swipe at the group for their overemphasis of Scherzinger as the lead singer. Watson said, "there are two kinds of girl groups: those anchored by a superstar (The Supremes, Destiny's Child), and those made up of charismatic personalities endowed with limited individual gifts (Spice Girls, TLC). The Pussycat Dolls are neither — they're a brand, not a band. This follow-up to 2005's multiplatinum debut album finds lead Doll Nicole Scherzinger in the spotlight, and she's no Beyoncé. As for the others, well...can you name them? Do you even know how many there are?"
Choreography and music videos.
Scherzinger's music videos have also gained global attention. As of 2012, Scherzinger has a total of 643,161,340 views on both her solo and Pussycat Dolls' Vevo accounts on YouTube. Contessa Gayles of AOL Music Blog included the music video for "Buttons" at number 39 on the list of Top 50 Dance Music Videos. In 2007 Canadian music channel MuchMusic the video at number 4 in the list of the "50 Sexiest Music Videos of All-Time". It was also ranked at number 85 on Fuse's "100 Sexiest Videos of All Time". On August 17, 2008, it was announced that the video for "When I Grow Up" was nominated for Video of the Year, Best Dance Video, Best Art Direction, Best Cinematography, and Best Choreography at the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, having the most VMA nominations of that year. The ceremony was held on September 7, 2008, and the video won the award for the Best Dancing. The music video was the fifteenth-most streamed video on MTV.com in 2008. Nick Levine from Digital Spy, wrote that: "The Pussycat Dolls have a novel way of amusing themselves during traffic jams" and described the dance breakdown as "entertaining" and "nostalgic". In Australia, the video was criticized for the video being too raunchy. MTV's Brandee J. Tecson commented, "leave it to the Pussycat Dolls to cast someone in their music video who can actually steal attention away from six gyrating half-naked chicks." Billy Johnson, Jr. of Yahoo! Music said, "front and center, the stunning Nicole Scherzinger, surrounded by good company, pranced around in tank tops and short shorts while drag racing in convertible jeeps. They raised the bar." VH1 listed "Don't Cha" at number fourteen on its Top 40 Videos of 2005. Reviewer Melinda Newman commended the overemphasis of lead singer Nicole Scherzinger. "It's a PCD' video ["Hush Hush"] in name only given that the other dancers barely have more than cameo appearances. There's not even the remotest hint that there are other people in the group until more than a minute in when she passes through a door onto a multi-level staircase and the other Dolls are dancing as the song morphs from a ballad to dance number. The other Pussycat Dolls are completely relegated to background dancers, along with the other hired hands." In 2012, Scherzinger topped the "Queen of Sexy Music Videos" list. Scherzinger was also ranked number one on the "Best Dancer of 2011" list in 2011 as a solo artist and in 2009 as a part of the Pussycat Dolls. A reviewer from "Sugar Magazine" said the video for "Don't Hold Your Breath" was "dark and moody". Moreover the reviewer praised "the warm fuzzy" blanket scene, the "vexed bathroom" scene and the "sexy tantrum" at the end of the video. Andrea Magrath, from "The Daily Mail" agreed, particularly commenting on the glimpses of Scherzinger's toned body seen in the early stages of the video. Christopher R. Weingarten of Popdust dismissed the video calling it "the most emo thing we’ve ever seen," however he did agree that the video showed "themes of heartbreak and resentment." According to a press release from Interscope Records, the video has received critical acclaim with over 32 million Vevo views as of June 2012. A reporter from The "Daily Mail" commented the video for "Right There", "Nicole exudes confidence and sexiness in the video and ... she even manages to make the earth move, so to speak, as she performs on sliding pavements. The "Daily Mail" also noted that Scherzinger and 50 Cent were on the same shot due to clever green screen technology. Eliot Glazer from MTV Buzzworthy noted that the back-up dancers reminded that she used to lead the Pussycat Dolls as the lead singer. AOL Music's Contessa Gayles agreed saying, "She may no longer be a Pussycat Doll, but Nicole's got a whole troupe of sexy dancers backing her up." Jillian Mapes of "Billboard" commented, "effortless moves from the "Dancing With The Stars" winner are expected". The video was ranked at number forty-nine on AOL's Top 50 Dance Music Videos.
Legacy.
In October 2012, Scherzinger confessed of doing 95% of the work in the Pussycat Dolls—therefore, taking credit for the group's success that launched them into a global phenomenon. But on 7 October 2012, former member, Kaya Jones, claimed that Scherzinger became the lead singer for the group because "there was a lot more going on behind the scenes". Jones told TMZ: "Nicole was always someone who wanted to be in the spotlight and would do pretty much anything to get it." "To call the other girls in the Pussycat Dolls 'window dressings' is a bit farfetched... every girl in the group was talented," she added. Scherzinger led the group to become the best selling girl group of the 2000s and 21st century. Her work with the group has also earned her numerous awards and accolades, including three Billboard Music Awards and two MTV Music Video Awards—the most nominations of the 2008 show that night in any category. Besides attaining twelve number one singles worldwide, Scherzinger has had six number one singles on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart—making the Pussycat Dolls the first girl group to achieve this feat. In February 2012, the Pussycat Dolls were ranked within the Top 100 on VH1's "Greatest Woman in Music". In December 2009, "Billboard" ranked the band as the 80th most successful musical act of the 2000s—also became the first all-female group in digital history to have three or more singles pass the 2 million mark in digital sales. Worldwide, "Don't Cha" has sold more than 6 million copies, making it one of the best selling singles of all time. The group were also a success in the UK. "Don't Cha" was one of the best selling singles of the 2000s. The group's debut album, "PCD", was also included in the list of best selling albums of the 2000s with sales over 1,246,769 as of 2009. The album is still one the best selling albums by a girl group, having sold over 9 million copies and has been certified gold or platinum in more than thirty-six countries. On September 29, 2011, "Don't Cha", was included in VH1's "Greatest Songs of 2000s". One of the Pussycat Dolls's biggest hits, "Jai Ho! (You are My Destiny)" has been placed in fifth place as the biggest moves in the lifetime of the "Billboard" Hot 100, moving up eighty-five places. On 6 September 2009, The Official Charts Company listed "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" and "Don't Cha" at number thirty-nine and five, as of the most downloaded song since its launch, respectively. All of the Pussycat Dolls studio albums released have peaked within the top five on the "Billboard" 200 and top ten on the UK Albums Chart. Most of her singles have charted within the "Billboard" Hot 100 and all on the UK Singles Chart. The Pussycat Dolls has achieved platinum-status certifications for her albums in 18 countries and multi-platinum in 7. "Don't Cha" and "Jai Ho! (You Are My Destiny)" strongly defines Scherzinger to most people as it contributed to her breakout as a global superstar.
As of 2012, The Pussycat Dolls has sold 50 million records. In the US, Scherzinger has sold 11.5 million records as of October 2012. Scherzinger has also become one of the best-selling international artists in the UK, selling 6.5 million records as a solo artist. "Rolling Stone" has ranked Scherzinger the ninth best dancing musician of all time. Scherzinger became the first person to appear on three or more judging shows within yearly distance—"The Sing Off", "The X Factor US" and "The X Factor UK". She also made "X Factor" history as the first "X Factor" judge to have worked on the US and UK shows.
Travis Payne has studied Scherzinger since she won Popstars in 2001 and stated: "I remember when I found her, and I was very insistent in her continuing on in the process through the auditions. "She always thanks me for that, but I saw in her that she was a star and she just needed to be discovered. I met her in Chicago. She was in college and she had pigtails and glasses - not at all the vixen that we've come to know now! "I think she's immensely talented and she's had enough experience that she can mentor others." Payne also choreographed the debut music video for Scherzinger, and re-teamed with Scherzinger to provide the artistic direction for her critically acclaimed performances on both the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards and So You Think You Can Dance. R&B musician Ne-Yo recalled: "The thing I love about Nicole is what you see is what you get. She is very genuine and very sweet but at the same time she knows what she’s looking for and she’s not afraid to say so." Paula Walker stated that she "has an incredible talent and ability to communicate a wealth of emotion and range with a subtle movement. She can command space, even one as dramatic as the palace," comments Walker. "Her incredible beauty is equal parts femininity and strength, perfect for the spot. We all loved working with her." Marcus Collins commented that Scherzinger's "comments "The X Factor" as a musician are really something to take note of. It was her that actually pieced One Direction together, was it not? So she knows what she’s talking about. "She’s a really clever business woman and a fantastic performer so it’s always great to get feedback from somebody who actually does the job themselves, there’s no one better." Mark Sidaway stated: "Nicole is an international artist, so she knows what it takes to make it on the worldwide stage. She has worked hard to get where she is." Amelia Lily recalled: "She’s been in the industry for God knows how many years. "She put One Direction together! She also did the American X Factor. I also think it’s nice to change the judging panel to keep it fresh and keep it new."
Other ventures.
Products and endorsements.
Scherzinger had re-recorded "Don't Cha" in Simlish for inclusion in the computer game '. She has also recorded a version of "GoldenEye" — the theme song of the 1995 Bond film "GoldenEye" — for the 2010 video game "GoldenEye 007". She also appeared in character form in the computer game ' in November 2006. Scherzinger's solo and Pussycat Dolls songs have been featured in an array of dance and singing games including—"Just Dance 2 ", "Zumba Fitness 2", "Get Up and Dance", "Everybody Dance", "" and "SingStar". In a merchandising agreement with Interscope Records in 2006, toy manufacturer Hasbro planned a line of dolls modeled after the Pussycat Dolls, reportedly to be marketed to six to nine-year-olds. Two organizations, "Dads and Daughters" and "Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood", successfully lobbied Hasbro to scrap the plan, saying they felt the dolls would have been inappropriate for children due to the overtly sexual nature of the Pussycat Dolls' songs, videos and performances. Also in 2006, Interscope negotiated a deal with Estée Lauder for a Pussycat Dolls line of cosmetics under the Stila brand.
In 2008, Robin Antin and the La Senza Corporation of Canada produced a line of Burlesque/Pussycat Dolls-styled lingerie called "Shhh...by Robin Antin" and on December 15, Antin released "Robin Antin's Pussycat Dolls Workout". The DVD release is composed of dancers from the Pussycat Doll Lounge Review, including Chrystina Sayers from the group Girlicious, and features Scherzinger. In 2006, she made a "Bench Body" brand underwear commercial in the Philippines, and in October 2008 she promoted Clear Shampoo and Conditioner. Both commercials were reportedly aired throughout Southeast Asia. She appeared in a Nike shoe commercial with basketball player LeBron James. In 2010, she made a commercial for the C&A campaign. In December 2011, Scherzinger began endorsing "imPress Nails" as the ambassador to the manicure line and has her own signature series. Later in 2012, Scherzinger became the global ambassador for "Herbal Essences"—one of the largest image products in the world.
Acting and musical theatre.
Scherzinger has made minor appearances as an actress. She appeared in the TV comedy, "Half & Half", "My Wife and Kids" and the 2003 film, "Love Don't Cost a Thing". She also had a role in 2001 as one of the "Pop Stars" in the episode, "Finally!", of the show "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch", and also made appearances in "Wanda at Large", "Chasing Papi", "Be Cool" and "Cane". Scherzinger was intended to be cast in one of the lead roles in the upcoming movie with the Filipino Boxing Champion, Manny Pacquiao, together with professional wrestler, Dave Batista. She was about to play the leading lady of the Filipino Champ, but her audition was cancelled and the role went to the Filipina actress, Ruffa Mae Quinto. She also made an appearance in the Nickelodeon show, "Big Time Rush", as herself. In 2010 Scherzinger appeared in the "How I Met Your Mother" episode "Glitter", as Robin Scherbatsky's former best friend, Jessica Glitter. Scherzinger portrayed Lily Poison in the film "Men in Black 3", released May 25, 2012. She appeared on the covers of numerous "Cosmopolitan" editions (British, Bulgarian, Croatian, Estonian, Italian, Indonesian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Mexican, Mongolian, Portuguese, Romanian, Spanish and others). Scherzinger frequently has appeared in FHM Magazine's 100 Sexiest Women poll, ranking #49 in 2006, #22 in 2007, #49 in 2008, #60 in 2009, and #73 in 2010. In 2011, she jumped 64 places to rank #9. In 2012, Scherzinger was ranked number one on Complex's "Hottest Singing Competition Winners Worldwide".
Scherzinger majored in acting and musical theatre at Wright State University, where she played Velma Kelly in "Chicago" and Julie La Verne in "Show Boat". She put her studies on hold in 1999 to sing backing vocals for the rock band, Days of the New. In late 2009 it was reported that Scherzinger was working closely with Andrew Lloyd Webber on the musical "Love Never Dies", the sequel to "The Phantom of the Opera". Although she has not yet appeared in the show, her version of the title song - "Love Never Dies" - was played on the "Chris Evans Breakfast Show" on Friday 1 April 2011. June 2010, it was announced that Scherzinger would take on the role of Maureen in the Hollywood Bowl production of the rock musical "Rent", directed by Neil Patrick Harris. She played the role from August 6–8, 2010. As part of the 25th Anniversary of "The Phantom of the Opera", Scherzinger performed the title song at The Royal Variety Performance - held in The Lowry, Manchester - on Monday 5 December 2011. She performed alongside four former Phantoms (Simon Bowman, Earl Carpenter, John Owen-Jones and Ramin Karimloo). The performance was aired on ITV1 on Wednesday 14 December 2011.
Philanthropy.
Besides her career in music, Scherzinger has also contributed to various charities. For natural disasters, Scherzinger has helped various relief efforts. She was to appear on the single "We Are the World 25 for Haiti" to benefit a donation to the victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Along with the Pussycat Dolls, Scherzinger raised money for a charity fundraiser to assist breast cancer research in Australia in 2008. The Dolls hit the stage at QBH (of the Queensbridge Hotel) in Melbourne on October 16, with all proceeds going to the National Breast Cancer Foundation. The girls had agreed to do the benefit after their close friend Christina Applegate was diagnosed with the disease earlier that year. She has also performed for many music events that donated to charities such as performing alongside Lea Michele for a performance of the Rocky Horror Picture Show in LA. In February 2012, Scherzinger attended the third annual "Women in Music" event which benefited the VH1 Save The Music Foundation, a nonprofit organization dedicated to restoring instrumental music education programs in America’s public schools, and raising awareness about the importance of music as part of each child’s complete education. Early in the evening a check for $30,000 was presented to "VH1 Save The Music" on behalf. She's admitted that on some weekends, she visit associations for adults with special needs. Scherzinger says she enjoys her charitable endeavors so much, the work has ceased to be selfless and become a mere pursuit of her own pleasure, "I don't know if it's selfish because I get so much fulfillment out of it, but it excites me to be with special-needs kids and families. My aunt has down's syndrome so it's very close to my heart," says Scherzinger. Additionally, Scherzinger plans for a "Special Needs Charity Camp". Inspired by her aunt who suffers from down syndrome, she hopes to give disabled kids a special place to sing and learn to play instruments. She says, "I grew up with my aunt, who is actually younger than me because my grandmother had her at an older age, and she has down syndrome. She has always had a special place in my heart and is such a wonderful addition to our family. I want to bring awareness to how special people with down syndrome are…" said Nicole.
Personal life.
Scherzinger met Nick Hexum of rock band 311 backstage at a Days of the New concert in 2001. They dated and later became engaged, but broke it off arou d november 2004. She was the inspiration for their song "Amber" and appeared in the music video. She also dated actor Talan Torriero from 2005 to 2007. As of 2008, Scherzinger has been in a relationship with Lewis Hamilton, a Formula One World Champion. At the start of September 2009, it was reported that the couple had split because Hamilton was not ready to settle down and start a family. However, on September 13, 2009 at the Italian Grand Prix, Hamilton revealed that the couple were very much in love and definitely still together and denied the accuracy of previous reports. 
In 2012, Scherzinger publicly revealed her eight year struggle with bulimia, explaining how during her time in the Pussycat Dolls, "I just hated myself. I was in a group but I never felt so alone in my life ... I never did drugs, but hurting myself was my addiction. The music is what saved me. That's the only thing I can trust."
Relationships.
In 2011, Jessica Sutta went into detail about her relationship with Scherzinger within the Pussycat Dolls in an interview with "Xtra". She confirmed that they weren't "personally friends" but that she's grateful for Scherzinger taking creative control of the Dolls. Sutta insists that she wouldn't have worked as hard as an artist if it had not been for Scherzinger's position in the group. On October 5, 2012, Scherzinger claimed in a "VH1's Behind The Music" special that she was responsible for both lead and backing vocals on the group's songs, with hardly anything sung by her fellow members. Scherzinger, who said that she didn't want to get in trouble for her revelations, explained that the other Pussycat Dolls members often hadn't even heard their tracks until they were recorded. "I never really talked about it, but I'll never forget I finished the album "PCD" and Ron Fair and I brought the girls into the studio and we played it for them, and it was the first time they'd ever heard the music," she said. "Do you understand what I'm saying? We played the album for the Pussycat Dolls. It was the first time they'd ever heard the songs."
On October 7, 2012, former member, Kaya Jones, claimed that Scherzinger became the lead singer for the group because "there was a lot more going on behind the scenes". Jones told TMZ: "Nicole was always someone who wanted to be in the spotlight and would do pretty much anything to get it." "To call the other girls in the Pussycat Dolls 'window dressings' is a bit farfetched... every girl in the group was talented," she added.
"The X Factor" controversies.
In week 7 of "The X Factor US", Scherzinger voted to eliminate contestant Rachel Crow from the show over Marcus Canty; this took the results to deadlock. Immediately after the results were revealed, Crow collapsed onstage and cried inconsolably. Scherzinger was visibly upset by the result. Steve Jones asked Scherzinger if she had anything to say, but she shook her head and turned away. Following this, Crow was eliminated and Scherzinger was booed off the stage and her future on the show was put in jeopardy. She subsequently received death threats from some viewers. According to an interview with "People Magazine", Scherzinger admitted feeling regrets voting Crow off the show and felt like she let her down. "When I saw that look on her face felt that I let her down, like I dropped her. I could have been holding on and I dropped her," Scherzinger told "People". On September 30, 2012, Scherzinger decided to put Rylan Clark through to live shows on "The X Factor UK" which caused controversy for both the two. They both received death threats from some viewers on Twitter.
Discography.
Studio albums
