Brian Edward Cox, OBE (born 3 March 1968) is a British particle physicist, a Royal Society University Research Fellow, PPARC Advanced Fellow and Professor at the University of Manchester. He is a member of the High Energy Physics group at the University of Manchester, and works on the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN, near Geneva, Switzerland. He is working on the R&D project of the FP420 experiment in an international collaboration to upgrade the ATLAS and the CMS experiment by installing additional, smaller detectors at a distance of 420 metres from the interaction points of the main experiments.
Cox is best known to the public as the presenter of a number of science programmes for the BBC, boosting the popularity of subjects such as astronomy and physics. He has been described as the natural successor for BBC's scientific programming by both David Attenborough and the late Patrick Moore. He also had some fame in the 1990s as the keyboard player for the pop band D:Ream.
Early life and education.
Cox's parents were bankers and he attended the fee-charging Hulme Grammar School in Oldham from 1979 to 1986. Cox revealed on "The Jonathan Ross Show", that he performed poorly on his Maths A-level: "I got a D... I was really not very good... I found out you need to practice." He cites a lack of interest and fledgling band commitments as the reason for the result. He studied physics at the University of Manchester where he joined D:Ream,
a group which had several hits in the UK charts, including the number one, "", later used as a New Labour election anthem. He already had experience of the music industry in the 1980s as a keyboard player with the rock band Dare.
Cox obtained first class Bachelor of Science and MPhil degrees in physics. After D:Ream disbanded in 1997, Cox completed his Doctor of Philosophy in high energy particle physics at the University of Manchester. His thesis, entitled "Double Diffraction Dissociation at Large Momentum Transfer", was supervised by Robin Marshall and drawn from work he did for the H1 experiment at the HERA particle accelerator at the DESY laboratory in Hamburg, Germany.
Broadcasting career.
Cox has appeared in many science programmes for BBC radio and television, including "In Einstein's Shadow," the BBC "Horizon" series ("The Six Billion Dollar Experiment", "What on Earth is Wrong with Gravity?", "Do You Know What Time It Is?" and "Can we Make a Star on Earth?") and as a voice-over for the BBC's "Bitesize" revision programmes. Cox presented a five-part BBC Two television series entitled "Wonders of the Solar System" in early 2010 and a follow up four-part series, "Wonders of the Universe", which began on 6 March 2011. A new series, titled " Wonders of Life" completed filming in June 2012, which Cox describes as "a physicist's take on life / natural history."
He co-presents "Space Hoppers" and has also featured in "Dani's House" on CBBC.
BBC Two commissioned Cox to copresent "Stargazing Live", a three day live astronomy series in January 2011 – co-presented with physicist-turned-comedian Dara Ó Briain and featuring chat show host Jonathan Ross – linked to events across the United Kingdom. A second and a third series featuring a variety of guests ran in January 2012 and January 2013.
Since November 2009 Cox has co-presented a BBC Radio 4 "comedy science magazine programme", "The Infinite Monkey Cage" with comedian Robin Ince. Guests have included comedians Tim Minchin, Alexei Sayle, Dara Ó Briain and scientists including Dr Alice Roberts of the BBC show "The Incredible Human Journey". Cox also appeared in Ince's "Nine Lessons and Carols for Godless People". Cox is a regular contributor to the BBC 6 Music Breakfast Show with Shaun Keaveny, with a weekly feature. Cox appeared on the 24 July 2009 episode of Robert Llewellyn's "CarPool" podcast series.
Cox has also appeared numerous times at TED, giving talks on the LHC and particle physics. In 2009 he appeared in "People" magazine's Sexiest Men Alive. In 2010 he was featured in "The Case for Mars" by Symphony of Science. In November 2010 he made a promotional appearance in the Covent Garden Apple Store, talking about his new e-book set to accompany his new TV series as well as answering audience questions.
Cox gave the Royal Television Society's 2010 Huw Wheldon Memorial Lecture on "Science, a Challenge to TV Orthodoxy", in which he examined problems in media coverage of science and news about science. It was subsequently broadcast on BBC Two. On 4 March, Frankenstein’s Science featured Cox in discussion with biographer Richard Holmes on Mary Shelley’s exploration of humanity’s desire to bring life to an inanimate object and whether the notion is possible, in both the 19th century and today.
On 6 March 2011, Cox appeared as a guest at Patrick Moore's 700th episode anniversary of "The Sky At Night". He has said that he is a lifelong fan of the programme, and that it helped inspire him to become a physicist. On 10 March 2011, Cox gave the Ninth Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture.
He has also written and co-authored several books on physics including "Why does E=mc2?" with Jeff Forshaw, and "The Quantum Universe", also with Jeff Forshaw. 
Cox was the science advisor for the science fiction film "Sunshine". On the DVD release, he provides an audio commentary where he discusses scientific accuracies (and inaccuracies) depicted in the film. He was also featured on the Discovery Channel special "Megaworld: Switzerland". In 2013, he presented another series of "Wonders of Life".
Honours and awards.
Cox has received many awards for his efforts to publicise science. In 2002 he was elected an International Fellow of The Explorers Club and in 2006 Cox received the British Association's Lord Kelvin Award for this work. Also in 2006 he was awarded a Royal Society University Research Fellowship (an early-career research fellowship scheme). A frequent lecturer, he was keynote speaker at the Australian Science Festival in 2006, and in 2010 won the Institute of Physics Kelvin Prize for his work in communicating the appeal and excitement of physics to the general public. Cox was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the Queen's 2010 Birthday Honours for services to science.
On 15 March 2011, Cox won Best Presenter and Best Science/Natural History programme by the Royal Television Society for "Wonders of the Universe". On March 25, 2011, Cox won twice at the Broadcasting Press Guild Awards for 'Best Performer' in a non-acting role, while Wonders of the Solar System was named best documentary series of 2010.
In July 2012, Cox was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University of Huddersfield. Later that year, he was awarded the Institute of Physics President's medal by Sir Patrick Stewart, following which he gave a speech on the value of education in science and the need to invest more in future generations of scientists. On 5th October 2012 Professor Cox was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by the Open University for his 'Exceptional contribution to Education and Culture' In 2012 he was also awarded the Michael Faraday Prize of the Royal Society "for his excellent work in science communication" 
Personal life.
In 2003 Cox married US science presenter Gia Milinovich, who was working at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN when a documentary was being made. Their first son George was born on 26 May 2009. George's middle name is "Eagle" after the Apollo 11 lunar module. Milinovich also has a son, named Moki, from a previous relationship. The family currently lives in Manchester.
He recalls a happy childhood in Oldham that included pursuits such as dance, gymnastics, plane spotting and even bus spotting. He has stated in many interviews and in an episode of "Wonders of the Universe" that when he was 12, the book "Cosmos" by Carl Sagan was a key factor in inspiring him to become a physicist. Brian Cox is a humanist, and is a "Distinguished Supporter" of the British Humanist Association.
He is a lifelong Oldham Athletic A.F.C. fan, and held a season ticket at the club.
