Shahs of Sunset is an American reality television series on Bravo in the United States and on OMNI in Canada. The series debuted on March 11, 2012 and the first season finale was the highest rated episode of the series, at the time, with 1.8 million total viewers. The series follows a group of Iranian American friends living in Beverly Hills (and the greater area known as "Tehrangeles"), who are trying to juggle their active social lives and up-and-coming careers while balancing the demands of their families and traditions. It is the second American reality television show about Persians after E!'s "Love Is in the Heir" in 2004.
Current Shahs.
Reza Farahan.
(Season 1 - present)Lynn Ebler, Reza Farahan, Gay Iranian, Stars In Bravo's 'Shahs Of Sunset' Reality Show, "Huffington Post", March 10, 2012, accessed April 14, 2012.</ref> He wanted to participate in the show after seeing news reports of the suicides of teenagers who were bullied because they were gay, and he wanted to help by portraying a positive image of both gay people and Middle Easterners.
His father is Jewish, and his mother is Muslim. In an episode he reveals his father converted to Islam to marry his mother. When his parents' marriage ended in divorce, his father moved back to New York to be with his Jewish family; in an episode it's revealed that Farahan's paternal grandmother pressured his father and rejected Reza because he was not Jewish. His family supports him in spite of the pressure they feel to ostracize him.
He works with MJ at Keller Williams Realty.
Golnesa "GG" Gharachedaghi.
(Season 1 - present)Charlotte Safavi, Shahs of Sunset: Episode 3 With a Nugget From Episode 1, "Huffington Post", March 28, 2012, accessed April 14, 2012.</ref> She lunches with her friends during the day and socializes at night. She has eight tattoos, including one on the inside of her lip. With a fiery, combative personality, she claims to have been kicked out of a number of schools while growing up due to fighting. Growing up she attended Jewish day care, Catholic preschool and Loyola Marymount University. Her father is Mahmoud Gharachedaghi, architect and principal at GA Architecture and Planning, who appears on the show starting in season one. Over the second season, she launches "GG's Extensions", a brand of hair extensions, with her sister Leila. In December 2012 she told Andy Cohen that she was engaged to Omid Kalantari, who has a recurring role in season 2. The two broke off their engagement the following month. She has compared the show's cast's effect on the entertainment industry to the struggles of civil rights icon Rosa Parks.
Asa Soltan Rahmati.
(Season 1 - present)Diamond Water by Asa Gets Splash on WWHL, LALate.com, January 27, 2013, accessed January 30, 2013.</ref> She is from a Persian Muslim family. Soltan Rahmati has been together with Jermaine Jackson Jr, the eldest child of Jermaine Jackson, since 2010 and he has appeared in the second season. She graduated from UCLA with a double major in Psychology and Philosophy. She claims her family left Iran as political refugees when she was as a young girl; she grew up in Europe before moving to Los Angeles as a teenager. She lives in Venice; previously with wealthy entrepreneur Shaahin Cheyene.
Mike Shouhed.
(Season 1 - present)Mike Shouhed, BravoTV.com, accessed January 28, 2013.</ref> After losing some money in the Las Vegas commercial real estate market, he has moved back home to rebuild. He and his family are Persian Jews. One of his brothers is a dentist. In January 2013, Shouhed announced he was going to be featured in a photo shoot for "Playgirl".
Mercedes "MJ" Javid.
(Season 1 - present)Erin O'Sullivan, Shahs Of Sunset’s Mercedes ‘MJ’ Javid Opens Up About Weight Struggles: A Doctor Put Me On Diet Pills At Age 14, Access Hollywood, February 6, 2013.</ref> MJ and her mother have a very difficult relationship and argue frequently on the show. MJ and her father however, are very close. She works with Reza at Keller Williams Realty.
Neelufar Seyed "Lilly" Ghalichi.
(Season 2 - present)'SHAHS OF SUNSET' Slammed by Hot Model ... I'm the Real 'Persian Barbie', TMZ.com, December 2, 2012, accessed January 26, 2013.</ref> She founded a lingerie-inspired line of swimwear known as "Swimgerie" that later merged with another swim line to become Have Faith Swimgerie. She also founded her own line of eyelashes known as Lilly Lashes. Raised in Houston, Texas, she comes from a Persian Muslim family. Her sister, Yassamin, has appeared on the show and her brother, Mohammed, is a cardiologist. She attended the McCombs School of Business at The University of Texas at Austin and Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, graduating in 2008. Ghalichi has had a decade long on-again, off-again relationship with a Houston-based lawyer named Ali; after she graduated from law school in Los Angeles they became engaged and she moved back to Texas to live with him. They later broke up due what she described as bad habits, notably cheating on her. She also struggles with her conservative family due to her decision to leave law and pursue a career in fashion and beauty. On her blog she has indicated she has had breast implants that have resulted in complications and replacement. She was the subject of controversy after joking during episode that HIV/AIDS can be spread from a used pair of bikini bottoms and issued an apology.
Former Shahs.
Sammy Younai.
(Season 1) His family left Iran and moved to Florida when he was a young child, later moving to Beverly Hills when Sammy was a teenager. During Season 1 he works with celebrity developer Mohamed Hadid on his latest mansion: a 48,000-square foot, $58 million house in Bel Air called "the Crescent Palace". He has appeared as a guest in Season 2.
Reception.
Community reaction.
Before the show debuted, there was concern among the Persian-American diaspora that "Shahs of Sunset" would promote an unwelcome image at a particularly tense historical moment. Firoozeh Dumas, author of "Funny in Farsi", worried that "Americans have a chance to see a slice of materialistic, shallow and downright embarrassing Iranian culture. I just want to shout, 'We are not all like that!'" Two-time Mayor of Beverly Hills, Jimmy Delshad, voiced concerns that instead of showcasing the professional class of doctors, lawyers and business executives, the show would "take us back and make us look like undesirable people." Iranian American Novelist Porochista Khakpour took issue with the cast's self-description as "Persian" rather than "Iranian", but otherwise found the show to be just another reality television show in the "been-there-done-that "Kardashian"-"Real-Housewives"-"Jersey Shore" mash-up" with characters that reminded her of elements in those she grew up with in the diaspora. The city of West Hollywood's City Council passed a resolution on March 22, 2012 condemning the show. Professor Gina B. Nahai lamented the cast as "unattractive, unsophisticated, unproductive" and "consists entirely of every negative stereotype floating around this city about the community". Author and scholar Reza Aslan felt the concerns of the Persian community was overstated, commenting "Only the most moronic viewers would watch 'Shahs of Sunset' and extract an opinion about Iranians and Iran."
In response to criticism producer Ryan Seacrest dismissed the notion the series would cast the community in a bad light, describing the show as simply "escapism" that is "meant to be entertaining and fun." The president of Bravo described the cast members as representative of what the channel deems "affluencers:" 30-something, upscale, highly educated and influential."
The members of the cast have stated that they portray a more Americanized and modern version of Persians than those depicted in such films as 2012's "Argo", where Iranians are depicted in ways they felt made them "savages" or "homeless people." Mike Shouhed has commented that the show's producers sometimes add to the confusion by using Arabic music on the show; Reza Farahan has received mistaken feedback complimenting Arab American culture.
Critical reaction.
The show holds a 48 out of 100 score from Metacritic. Mike Hale's review in "The New York Times" commented that the show's characters "are a more diverting bunch than the high school football coaches and community activists of the well-meaning, admirable but prosaic "All-American Muslim" on TLC", but the "one really unfortunate thing about "Shahs of Sunset" is the way it exploits, and will in turn amplify, a previously localized phenomenon: the longstanding stereotyping of Los Angeles's Iranian-Americans as vulgar, materialistic show-offs who don’t fit in among the city’s supposedly more cultured elites." Tom Conroy of "Media Life Magazine" mentions that the show sparks some interest due to the cultural backgrounds of the cast, "but that is nearly outweighed by their dislikability." Verne Gay of "Newsday" described the show as "Another insufferable nose-pressed-against-the-glass reality romp that says the rich are just like you and me -- only rich, and exceedingly, tiresomely narcissistic." Linda Stasi of the "New York Post" wrote: "If the goal of Bravo’s newest stereotyping gang bang, "Shahs of Sunset", is to make Persians in LA look like egomaniacs, soulless bores whom you wouldn't want to spend five minutes with, let alone an hour, then they've succeeded."
