Jennifer Love Hewitt (born February 21, 1979) is an American actress producer, author, television director and singer-songwriter. Hewitt began her acting career as a child by appearing in television commercials and the Disney Channel series "Kids Incorporated". She rose to fame in teenage popular culture in her roles in the Fox series "Party of Five" as Sarah Reeves Merrin, and films "I Know What You Did Last Summer" and its sequel as Julie James.
Hewitt starred on the hit CBS television program "Ghost Whisperer" as Melinda Gordon, for which she won a Saturn Award in 2007 and 2008 for Best Actress on Television. She was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award for her television movie "The Client List". In addition to acting, she has served as a producer on some of her film and television projects. As a singer, Hewitt has been signed by Atlantic Records and Jive Records, and is primarily known for her recordings in the pop genre. Her most successful single on the "Billboard" Hot 100 is the 1999 release "How Do I Deal", which peaked at No. 59. She has also contributed music to the promotion or soundtracks of acting projects. She was identified as the "#1 reader choice" on the November 1999 and May 2009 covers of "Maxim". "TV Guide" named her the sexiest woman on television in 2008.
Early life.
Hewitt was born in Waco, Texas, to Patricia Mae (née Shipp), a speech-language pathologist, and Herbert Daniel Hewitt, a medical technician. Hewitt grew up in Nolanville in Central Texas. Hewitt received her middle name after her mother promised her college friend (named "Love") that if she had a daughter, she would name her after her. Her older brother, Todd Hewitt, chose the name "Jennifer" as a homage to a crush he had at the time she was born. After the divorce of her parents, Hewitt and her brother were raised by her mother. Patricia Mae Hewitt died on June 12, 2012, aged 67, following a battle with cancer.
As a young girl, Hewitt was attracted to music, which led to her first encounters with the entertainment industry. At the age of three, she sang "The Greatest Love of All" at a livestock show. Just a year after that, at a restaurant-dance hall, she entertained an audience with her version of "Help Me Make It Through the Night". By age five, she had tap dancing and ballet in her portfolio. At nine, she became a member of the Texas Show Team (which also toured in the Soviet Union).
At age ten, at the suggestion of talent scouts and after gaining the title of "Texas Our Little Miss Talent Winner", she moved to Los Angeles with her mother to pursue a career in both acting and singing. In Los Angeles, she attended Lincoln High School where her classmates included Jonathan Neville, who became a talent scout and recommended Hewitt for her role in "Party of Five".
Career.
Acting.
After moving to Los Angeles, Hewitt appeared in more than twenty television commercials, including some for Mattel toys. Her first break came as a child actor on the Disney Channel variety show "Kids Incorporated" (1989–1991), where she was credited as "Love Hewitt". She later appeared in the live action video short "Dance! Workout with Barbie" (1992), released by Buena Vista.
She played Pierce Brosnan's daughter in a pilot for NBC called "Running Wilde" (1993), which featured Brosnan as a reporter for "Auto World" magazine whose stories cover his own wild auto adventures. However, the series was not picked up and the pilot never aired. Hewitt later had roles in several short-lived television series, such as Fox's "Shaky Ground" (1992–1993), ABC's "The Byrds of Paradise" (1994), and "McKenna" (1994–1995), and finally became a young star after landing the role of Sarah Reeves Merrin on the popular Fox show "Party of Five" (1995–1999). She assumed the role of Sarah after joining that show during its second season and continued it on the short-lived "Party of Five" spin-off, "Time of Your Life" (1999), which she also co-produced. The show was cancelled after half a season.
Hewitt's first feature film role was in the independent film "Munchie" (1992). A year later, she achieved her first starring film role in "Little Miss Millions" (1993). She appeared as a choir member in "" (1993). Hewitt became a film star after a lead role in the horror film "I Know What You Did Last Summer" (1997), which enjoyed great box office success ($125,000,000 USD). Hewitt and her co-stars gained popular exposure from the film. She appeared in the sequel "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" (1998), which, though not as successful as the first film, took in more money on its opening weekend. She starred in the high-school comedy "Can't Hardly Wait" (1998).
Hewitt starred in "The Audrey Hepburn Story" (2000). That same year, she was the "most popular actress on television" due to her Q-rating (a measurement of a celebrity's popularity) of 37. Noting her "Q-rating", Nokia chose her to become its spokesperson.
She starred alongside Sigourney Weaver in the romantic comedy "Heartbreakers" (2001). She did voice work in the animated film "The Hunchback of Notre Dame II" (2002) as Madellaine, the main protagonist's love interest. Hewitt wrote and performed "I'm Gonna Love You" for the film; the song won "Best Original Song" at the DVD Premiere Awards. She starred alongside Jackie Chan in "The Tuxedo" (2002), which received negative reviews from critics but was a box office success. Hewitt appeared in "If Only" (2004) and co-wrote and performed "Love Will Show You Everything" and "Take My Heart Back" for the film's soundtrack. She starred in ' (2004), which became her highest-grossing film to date ($200,804,534 USD). She reprised her role for the sequel, ' (2006), which, though not performing as well as its predecessor, achieved a strong box office gross.
Hewitt starred in the television series "Ghost Whisperer" (2005–2010), which ran on CBS for five seasons before being canceled by the network in May, 2010. She reunited with her "I Know What You Did Last Summer" co-star, Freddie Prinze Jr., in "Delgo" (2008). The film was a massive box office bomb ($694,782 USD domestically). After a two-year absence from feature films, Hewitt led the independent drama "Café" (2010) with her then-boyfriend Jamie Kennedy. She starred in the Lifetime film "The Client List" (2010), for which she received a Golden Globe nomination. The next year, Hewitt starred in the Hallmark Hall of Fame film "The Lost Valentine" (2011).
Hewitt was announced to direct the film "Wait Till Helen Comes" (based on by Mary Downing Hahn. This will be Hewitt's feature film directorial debut (she previously directed three episodes of "Ghost Whisperer"). Production on the film was slated to begin in the summer of 2011, however, no other announcements about the film have been made since. She also starred alongside Ivan Sergei and Joel David Moore in the independent comedy "Jewtopia" (2012).
As of 2012, she currently stars in the television series "The Client List" (2012).
Music.
Hewitt was one of the back-up singers in Martika's number-one single, "Toy Soldiers" (1989).
At the age of 12, Meldac funded the recording of Hewitt's first album, "Love Songs" (1992). The album was released exclusively in Japan, where Hewitt became a pop star. Her explanation for her success in Japan is that the Japanese "love perky music. The poppier the music, the better."
After she joined the cast of "Party of Five", she signed to Atlantic Records, who rushed her second album, "Let's Go Bang" (1995), out in October. The album and its three singles failed to chart. Juggling her music career with her acting career, she recorded and released her follow-up album, "Jennifer Love Hewitt" (1996). The album, along with its four singles, failed to chart and Atlantic dropped Hewitt, who did not return to the music scene for three years.
She recorded the single "How Do I Deal" (1999) for the "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer" soundtrack. The song became Hewitt's first charting single, climbing to No. 59 on the Hot 100 and No. 36 on the Top 40 Mainstream. It reached No. 8 in Australia. Hewitt also recorded a cover of the Gloria Gaynor song "I Will Survive", which features briefly in the film.
She appeared in the LFO video for "Girl on TV" (1999), a song which was written for her by a member of the band. She also appeared in the music video for the Enrique Iglesias song, "Hero" (2001), as the singer's love interest.
In 2002, Hewitt signed to Jive Records and recorded her fourth album with singer, songwriter and producer Meredith Brooks. The first single, "BareNaked" (2002), became her biggest radio hit to date when it peaked at No. 24 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart, No. 31 on the Adult Top 40 and No. 25 on the Top 40 Mainstream. It climbed to No. 6 in Australia, remaining there for two weeks, and reached No. 33 in the Netherlands. The song later featured in two episodes of "Ghost Whisperer": "The Vanishing" (Season 1, episode 20) and "The Collector" (Season 2, episode 20). The moderate success of the single propelled the album to peak at No. 37 on the "Billboard" 200 and No. 31 in Australia. However, it only remained on the chart for three weeks. The second single, "Can I Go Now" (2003), failed to chart in the US, while managing to peak at No. 8 in the Netherlands and No. 12 in Australia.
Since 2004, Hewitt has remained inactive in the music industry, but the compilation album "" (2006) was released in Asia. Another compilation, "Hey Everybody" (2007), was released in Brazil. In 2009, reports surfaced that Hewitt was planning on making a country album and was in the process of writing material for it. Jamie Kennedy, Hewitt's boyfriend at the time, said: "I really want to make her a new demo for her music, because I think she should do singing again. She's so good." However, nothing has of yet come of the reports and Hewitt has remained absent from the music scene.
Writing.
In November 2009, Hewitt made a foray into comic books. Writer Scott Lobdell scripted the 5-issue anthology, "Jennifer Love Hewitt's Music Box" (2009–2010), based on Hewitt's ideas. The series was published by IDW Publishing, and was collected in a trade paperback.
She wrote a book titled "The Day I Shot Cupid" (2010), in which she speaks of her experiences with love and dating. During a January 2010 interview on "Lopez Tonight", Hewitt said that there was a chapter in the book about "" her "vajayjay" (decorating her vulva with Swarovski crystals). Hewitt was attributed with popularizing the trend. The book became a New York Times Bestseller the week of its release. She announced via her Twitter page in June 2011 that she was penning a follow-up. There is an audiobook version Love reads herself.
Personal life.
Hewitt began a relationship with Scottish actor Ross McCall, whom she met when he made an appearance on "Ghost Whisperer" in late 2005. After two years of dating, they became engaged in November 2007, while vacationing in Hawaii. "People" magazine reported that Hewitt called off their engagement in late 2008. She dated her "Ghost Whisperer" co-star Jamie Kennedy from March 2009 to March 2010. As of 2012 she dated her "Client list" co-star Brian Hallisay.
In 2002, a conspiracy theorist and former social worker, Diana Napolis, was arrested for stalking and uttering death threats against Hewitt and Steven Spielberg after "verbally confronting" the actress at the 2002 Grammy Awards, and the subsequent day attempting to pose as one of Hewitt's friends to enter the premiere of "The Tuxedo". Napolis admitted to being involved in a shoving match with Hewitt's mother while confronting the actress. Napolis accused Hewitt, along with director Spielberg, of controlling her thoughts through "cybertronic" technology and being part of a Satanic conspiracy against her. Napolis was charged with six felonies related to the incidents. After a year of involuntary commitment, Napolis pleaded guilty and was released on bail with a condition that she was barred from contact with both Spielberg and Hewitt.
