Mayim Hoya Bialik (; born December 12, 1975) is an American actress widely known for her roles as Blossom Russo on NBC's "Blossom" (1990–1995), and currently as Amy Farrah Fowler on CBS's "The Big Bang Theory", for which she was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series.
Early life and education.
Bialik was born in San Diego, California, the daughter of Barry Bialik and Beverly (Winkelman). Her grandparents emigrated from Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary in the late 1930s. Hayim Nahman Bialik, Israel's national poet, was Mayim Bialik's great-great-grandfather's uncle. Bialik was raised in Reform Judaism. Her given name means "water" in Hebrew.
Bialik attended Walter Reed Junior High School in North Hollywood, California, located in the San Fernando Valley. At the end of "Blossom", she chose to attend UCLA, although she also had been accepted to both Harvard and Yale. She stated that she wanted to stay close to her parents and did not want to move to the East Coast. She earned a bachelor's degree in 2000 in neuroscience, Hebrew and Jewish studies, and went on to the PhD program in neuroscience. 
She took a break from studies in 2005 to return to acting. Bialik completed her PhD in 2007. Her dissertation was an investigation of hypothalamic activity in patients with Prader-Willi syndrome.
Career.
Bialik started her career as a child actress in the late 1980s. Her early roles included the horror film "Pumpkinhead" (1988), her first acting job, and guest appearances on "The Facts of Life" and "Beauty and the Beast". She appeared in three episodes of "MacGyver" as Lisa Woodman. She appeared in "Beaches" (1988), playing Bette Midler's character as a young girl. She also appeared in the video for the song "Liberian Girl" by Michael Jackson.
In 1990, Bialik was tied to two television pilots, Fox's "Molloy" and NBC's "Blossom". "Molloy" at first produced six episodes for a tryout run, followed by the shooting of the pilot special for "Blossom". The latter actually aired two weeks before Bialik's Fox series and ultimately garnered higher ratings than it. When "Molloy" folded after its six episodes, "Blossom" was pursued as a regular series, airing until 1995.
Between 1995 and 2005, Bialik mostly did voice-over work for cartoons, such as "The Real Adventures of Jonny Quest" and "Recess".
She appeared in the feature film "Kalamazoo?" (2005) and appeared in three episodes of the HBO comedy series "Curb Your Enthusiasm" as Jodi Funkhouser, the lesbian daughter of a friend of Larry David. Bialik also made guest appearances as a fictionalized version of herself in the series "Fat Actress", and made a guest appearance as a Hasidic Jew in an episode of "Saving Grace". She had a recurring role as the high school guidance counselor in ABC Family's "The Secret Life of the American Teenager". She also made an appearance on the Fox TV show '"Til Death" in which she has a reunion of sorts with two of her "Blossom" co-stars—Jenna von Oÿ, who played Blossom’s quirky best friend Six, and Michael Stoyanov, who played Blossom’s older brother Anthony.
In 2009, Bialik was nominated by Clinton Kelly for a makeover on TLC's What Not To Wear.
In Season 3 (2009–2010), she joined the cast of "The Big Bang Theory" as Dr. Amy Farrah Fowler. Her first appearance was in the season finale as a potential love interest for the character of Sheldon Cooper (Jim Parsons). In Season 4, she began as a recurring character playing Sheldon's "friend that's a girl, but not a girlfriend." Beginning with Season 4, Episode 8, she became part of the main cast. Bialik's character is a neurobiologist, or neuroscientist, which corresponds to Bialik's real-life educational pursuits. Bialik's performance in "The Big Bang Theory" earned her a 2012 Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series. 
Prior to her joining the cast, in the episode "The Bat Jar Conjecture", Raj suggests recruiting the real-life Bialik to their Physics Bowl team, saying "You know who’s apparently very smart, is the girl who played TV’s "Blossom". She got a Ph.D. in Neuroscience or something."
On March 6, 2012, her book, "Beyond the Sling: A Real-Life Guide to Raising Confident, Loving Children the Attachment Parenting Way", was released.
Personal life.
Bialik married Michael Stone on August 31, 2003, in a Victorian-themed ceremony with traditional Jewish customs (Bialik's husband, born into a Mormon family, converted to Judaism; several years later, Bialik's mother-in-law converted to Judaism as well). Bialik and Stone have two sons together: Miles Roosevelt Bialik Stone, born October 10, 2005, and Frederick Heschel Bialik Stone, born August 15, 2008. On November 21, 2012, Bialik and Stone announced that they were divorcing, citing irreconcilable differences.
In a 2012 interview, Bialik stated that she would call herself "aspiring Modern Orthodox." She has appeared in several YouTube cameos as Blossom and Amy Farrah Fowler asking questions about Jewish beliefs. The videos are produced by Allison Josephs, Bialik's Judaism study partner, whom she met with the help of Partners in Torah.
She is a celebrity spokesperson for the Holistic Moms Network.
Bialik is a vegan and a founding member of the Shamayim V'Aretz Institute.
Bialik spoke at the 2011 Penn State Lehigh Valley graduation in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania.
On August 15, 2012, Bialik was injured in a car accident in Los Angeles, suffering severe lacerations to her right hand. While initial reports indicated she might lose a finger in the accident, Bialik confirmed via Twitter that all her fingers would remain intact. Bialik returned to work on "The Big Bang Theory" the next day.
