The Amazing Spider-Man is a 2012 American superhero film directed by Marc Webb, based on the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man. It is a reboot of the "Spider-Man" film series, portraying the character's origin story and his development into a superhero while a high school student. The film stars Andrew Garfield in the title role, with Emma Stone as Gwen Stacy and Rhys Ifans as Dr. Curt Connors.
Development of the film began with the cancellation of "Spider-Man 4" in 2010, ending director Sam Raimi's "Spider-Man" film series that had starred Tobey Maguire, Kirsten Dunst and James Franco. Opting to reboot the franchise with the same production team, Sony Pictures Entertainment announced a July 2012 release date for "The Amazing Spider-Man". James Vanderbilt was hired to write the script while Alvin Sargent and Steve Kloves helped fine-tune it. Pre-production involved auditioning many actors for the roles of Parker and Stacy. New designs were introduced from the comics such as artificial web-shooters. Using Red Digital Cinema Camera Company's RED Epic camera, principal photography started in December 2010 in Los Angeles before moving to New York City. The film entered post-production in April 2011. 3ality Technica provided 3D image processing, Sony Imageworks handled CGI and James Horner composed the film score.
Sony Entertainment built a promotional website, released three trailers and launched a viral marketing campaign, among other moves. Tie-ins included a video game by Beenox. The film premiered on June 30 in Tokyo and was released in the United States on July 3 in 2D, 3D and IMAX 3D. Critical reaction was mostly positive, with a 73% "certified fresh" score from review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes. The film was also a box office success, becoming the 47th highest-grossing film of all time and the seventh highest-grossing film of 2012. The first of at least two sequels, "The Amazing Spider-Man 2", is scheduled for release in 2014, with director Marc Webb and most of the first film's main cast set to return.
Plot.
As a child, Peter Parker discovers his father Richard's study has been ransacked. His father gathers concealed documents before Peter's parents take him to stay with his Aunt May and Uncle Ben. His parents leave, but are later killed in a plane crash.
As a teenager, Peter is a student at Midtown Science High School, where he is bullied by Flash Thompson, and is romantically interested in the beautiful Gwen Stacy, the daughter of police captain George Stacy. At home, Peter discovers his father's documents, and learns he had been working with scientist Dr. Curt Connors at Oscorp to combine human and animal DNA to cure illnesses. Peter sneaks into Oscorp to meet Connors, who is pressured by his superior Dr. Ratha to complete his serum, and cure the terminally ill head of Oscorp Norman Osborn. Connors wants the cure himself to restore his missing arm. Meanwhile, Peter breaks into a lab where a "bio-cable"—a high strength strand of webbing—is created by genetically modified spiders, one of which bites him. During a subway ride home, a fight reveals that he has developed superhuman speed, strength, the ability to stick to surfaces, and a heightened sense of danger.
Peter finds an algorithm in his father's documents and gives it to Connors−the missing key to his serum. In school, Peter damages school property during a confrontation with Flash and Ben is forced to work late so that he can pick up Peter. Ben tells Peter to escort May home that night. Peter ignores Ben in favor of helping Connors test their serum on a three-legged mouse. After he returns home, Peter argues with Ben about not picking up May. Ben then recounts Richard's philosophy of responsibility to Peter, who only leaves in anger after pointing out the hypocrisy. At a grocery store, the clerk rudely refuses to let Peter buy a drink, and when a thief steals money from the register, Peter lets the thief escape. Ben, searching the streets for Peter, confronts the thief, but is shot and killed. Peter responds to the gunshot and finds Ben's body. After seeing a police sketch of the suspect, Peter realizes it was the thief he let go.
Peter hunts the killer, taking out other criminals as a result and attracting police attention for his vigilante actions. During one confrontation he falls into an abandoned gym, where a luchador-wrestling poster inspires him to create a mask to hide his identity. He creates a costume for himself with a spandex suit, and builds wrist-mounted mechanical devices that shoot biocable strands. Peter, after going to Gwen's house for a dinner "date" with her family, later reveals he is the vigilante to Gwen and they kiss.
Seeing that the test mouse has regrown its missing limb using lizard DNA, Ratha demands human trials begin immediately. Connors refuses to risk innocent lives and is fired. Desperate, Connors tests the serum on himself and his missing arm regenerates. He learns that Ratha is going to test the serum on human subjects and goes to stop him, but his body begins to mutate. By the time he finds Ratha on the Williamsburg Bridge Connors has transformed into a large Lizard-like creature, tossing cars, including Ratha's, over the side of the bridge. Peter, now calling himself Spider-Man, manages to save Ratha and other civilians. Connors retreats into the sewer and reverts to human form.
Peter later meets Connors in his office and suspects he is the Lizard, and later unsuccessfully confronts Connors' Lizard form in the sewers, leaving behind his camera. Connors learns Peter's identity via the name on the camera and pursues him to Midtown Science High School where they fight. In response, the police start a manhunt for both Spider-Man and Lizard. Connors heads to Oscorp, intending to disperse his serum across the city and make everyone into lizards, while Gwen develops an antidote in Oscorp's lab. The police corner Spider-Man and Captain Stacy discovers that he is Peter, but lets him escape to go save Gwen. With the help of the father of a boy he rescued earlier, Spider-Man reaches Oscorp in time. Spider-Man manages to replace Connors' serum with the antidote, reverting Connors to human form, but not before Connors mortally wounds Captain Stacy. Spider-Man nearly falls to his death, but Connors saves him. Before his death, Captain Stacy makes Peter promise to stay away from Gwen for her safety. He initially keeps the promise, but later admits to Gwen that failed promises are the best kind; she responds to this with a smile. 
In a post-credits scene, Connors, in a dark prison cell, is confronted by a man in the shadows who asks if Connors told Peter the truth about his father. Connors replies, "No", and demands Peter be left alone before the man disappears.
Cast.
Campbell Scott and Embeth Davidtz portray Peter's parents, Richard and Mary Parker. C. Thomas Howell plays a character named Ray whose son is saved by Spider-Man in the Williamsburg Bridge scene. Hannah Marks portrays Missy Kallenback, an unpopular girl who has a crush on Peter. Kelsey Chow has a small role: she identified her character in an interview as high-school classmate Sally Avril, but who is unnamed onscreen and credited solely as "Hot girl". Unlike the previous films, J. Jonah Jameson does not appear. "Spider-Man" co-creator Stan Lee has a cameo appearance, as he did in the previous films. At the 2011 Dallas Comic Con, Lee detailed that he plays a librarian listening to music on his headphones while stamping books, oblivious to the ongoing battle. Michael Massee plays the mysterious man in the shadows who talks with Connors in his prison cell in a teaser scene during the end credits. As to the man's identity, director Marc Webb said, "It's intentionally mysterious. And I invite speculation..."
Themes and analysis.
Webb described the film as "a story about a kid who grows up looking for his father and finds himself." Both Webb and star Garfield described Parker as an outsider by choice, someone hard to get close to. As in the early comic books, the character "is a science whiz. If you look back to the early Stan Lee and Steve Ditko comics, he's a nerd with big glasses," said Webb. He explained "the idea of what a nerd is has changed in 40 or 50 years. Nerds are running the world. Andrew Garfield made a movie "The Social Network" about it. ... What was important in those early comics was this notion that Peter Parker is an outsider and how we define that in a contemporary context." Garfield compared his Spider-Man façade as a metaphor for internet anonymity, saying, "You feel the power of it, the power of not being seen, the power of the mask. Peter becomes witty when he's got that protective layer. It's like he's on a message board. He's got the anonymity of the Internet within that suit, and he can say whatever the hell he likes, and he can get away with anything." Garfield tried to explore Parker as an orphan, whom he feels "are the strongest human beings on the planet." He said Parker is "a human hero goes through all of the same struggles that we all have gone through, especially the skinny ones [who want more power than they feel they have." He believes Parker represents "a very inspiring, aspirational character that symbolizes goodness — and how difficult it is to be good — but how worth it is." Rhys Ifans compared this film to William Shakespeare's "Hamlet" on the grounds that Spider-Man can be redone over and over in different ways. He felt that they are similar in that they both represent meaningful archetypal young men grappling with the loss of their father.
Stone described her character as "a daddy's girl" who is very responsible and protective of her family and loves science. She said her character "offers Parker a world of stability, of a family unit not marred with parental loss and, beyond physical allure, the two forge an intellectual connection over their shared love of science." Her character, she explained, "is stuck between father the Captain and Peter Parker and Spider-Man, who have different ways about going about finding justice in their lives" which she felt was a fun thing to explore.
Webb felt that Lizard was the best villain because, "He's the literal embodiment of the theme of the movie, which is we all have a missing piece. He has no arm. Peter has no parents, and he fills that void with Spider-Man." Producer Avi Avrad felt likewise, explaining, "look at Peter, he misses the parents, [and Connors has one arm. ...[it is a very similar problem. It is a cautionary tale." Webb said Lizard "is not the worst villain on the planet. He's not a mustache-twirling guy who wants to terrorize people. He believes he's doing the right thing." Actor Rhys Ifans described his character as a flawed character, much as with Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde. "Curt Connors is by no means an evil villain," Ifans stated. "He's not like the Batman villains, like the Joker, who are the embodiment of evil. Curtis Connors is a great man who makes a bad decision. ... hat's the whole magic of the Spider-Man idea. These people are the embodiment of our flaws and our desires that lead to tragedy." Ifans described Connors as a force for good throughout his life: "He's a geneticist who wants to help people, like him, who are limbless. In his eagerness to advance that science, he makes a mistake and that's an occurrence we've seen throughout time, sometimes to our benefit, sometimes to our detriment. ...He is a broken man who wants to fix himself." Ifans added, "I'm not portraying a villain in any sense. Connors does feel cheated by God, and he's looking for answers in science. God seems to intervene."
Webb said that Oscorp Tower is pivotal as a part of a new mythology of the film. He liked that Parker was connected to the building in some way and to think of it as "a Tower of Babel in the middle of Manhattan that has something dark and seedy going on in there."
Production.
Development.
Following the release of "Spider-Man 3", Sony Pictures Entertainment had announced a May 5, 2011, release date for Sam Raimi's next film in the earlier series. By this time, screenwriters James Vanderbilt, David Lindsay-Abaire and Gary Ross had all written rejected versions of a script and Ziskin's husband Alvin Sargent, who wrote the second and third films was working on yet another attempt. Raimi wanted John Malkovich to play his next villain. However, on January 11, 2010, Columbia Pictures and Marvel Studios announced that rather than continue the earlier saga, they were rebooting the series with a new cast and crew. Industry reports claimed that Raimi had admitted that he could not meet the scheduled release date and retain creative integrity. Avi Arad, Matt Tolmach and Ziskin continued as producers.
Arad later explained, "We were working on what we called "Spider-Man 4" and it was the same team with the first three films. The problem was we didn't have a story that was strong enough and warranted ... another movie. And Sam Raimi ... realized we have a good reason to make another one. And between [him and Tobey and obviously the studio, we all went into it not feeling good about the next story." Tolmach said one reason to restart the series was that the producers felt the core Spider-Man story was that of a boy becoming a man. Screenwriter Steve Kloves did a polish of Sargent's script, saying he had originally declined the opportunity to do so but relented "as a favor" to the filmmakers. "I also really wanted to write for Emma Stone, because I like to write for women and I particularly like Emma," he explained. "So ...I did basically character and dialogue, and that was enjoyable for me. So that was my hand in it. And I did a little plot work, but a lot of the plot was done." He did "a little bit" of dialog for Andrew Garfield's Peter Parker / Spider-Man. In April 2012, writer-director Paul Feig said that Webb "invited me on set, and I did a little bit of writing for that movie, for one of the high school scenes".
Days after announcing Raimi's departure, the studio announced that Webb, whose previous film "(500) Days of Summer" was his directorial debut, would direct the reboot. Tolmach, now president of Columbia Pictures and Amy Pascal, co-chairman of Sony Pictures Entertainment, said they looked for a director who could give sharp focus to Parker's life. Webb said he "was a little sceptical at first — you feel the presence of those other movies. But then I was like, 'How could I walk away from this? What an opportunity!'" Webb said in the press release announcing him that, "Sam Raimi's virtuoso rendering of Spider-Man is a humbling precedent to follow and build upon. The first three films are beloved for good reason. But I think the Spider-Man mythology transcends not only generations but directors as well. I am signing on not to 'take over' from Sam. That would be impossible. Not to mention arrogant. I'm here because there's an opportunity for ideas, stories, and histories that will add a new dimension, canvas, and creative voice to Spider-Man." Webb felt Spider-Man is different from the Harry Potter franchise, which is based on a small number of novels and "more like James Bond" because "there's so much material in Spider-Man that there are so many stories to tell and so many characters." He described the film as "not a remake" explaining that "we're not making Sam's movie again. It's a different universe and a different story with different characters."
Casting.
In May 2010, "The Hollywood Reporter" said the actors who met with Webb to be considered for the lead role included Jamie Bell, Alden Ehrenreich, Frank Dillane, Garfield and Josh Hutcherson. In June 2010 the "Los Angeles Times" reported that the shortlist had expanded to include Aaron Johnson and Anton Yelchin. At least Bell, Ehrenreich, Garfield, Yelchin, Logan Lerman and Michael Angarano had screen tests. On July 1, 2010, the choice of Garfield was confirmed. Webb stated that he felt he knew Garfield was the right guy when they were filming a cutscene where he was eating a cheeseburger while telling Gwen to calm down.
Sony then held auditions for the role of the young Peter, who needed to resemble Garfield. Webb said, "I think we saw the origin of Spider-Man before but not the origin of Peter Parker." Webb felt that when you try to build the film you must build the protagonist from the ground up. That's why he wanted Parker to begin as a child.
It was reported originally that the film would feature both Mary Jane Watson and Gwen Stacy as love interests, but the website "The Wrap" later reported that only Gwen Stacy would appear. In August 2010, the list of candidates included Imogen Poots, Ophelia Lovibond and Lily Collins, with Teresa Palmer, Mary Elizabeth Winstead and Emma Roberts cited by "The Hollywood Reporter" as "potentially in the mix". In September 2010, "Variety" reported that the shortlist had expanded to include Stone and Mia Wasikowska. The shortlist was reported to then include Dianna Agron, Georgina Haig and Dominique McElligott. On October 5, 2010, the choice of Stone was confirmed. Webb noted that the chemistry between Emma and Garfield made her the clear choice. That chemistry inspired their off-screen romance.
On October 11, 2010, Rhys Ifans was confirmed to be the unnamed villain and two days later his character was revealed to be Dr. Curt Connors/Lizard. Arad said that Lizard is his favorite Spider-Man villain and he had long wanted to use him in a film. Well before the choice of villain, Arad had had conceptual drawings prepared for the character.
In November 2010, Martin Sheen was reported to be Uncle Ben while Sally Field was in negotiations to play Aunt May. Also that month, Denis Leary was reported to accept the role of George Stacy. In December 2010, Campbell Scott and Julianne Nicholson were in negotiations to play Peter's parents. Khan was originally reported as playing Van Adder until the character's name was revealed to be Dr. Ratha. Embeth Davidtz then replaced Nicholson. Annie Parisse was originally reported to play "the villain's wife" and Miles Elliot was reported to portray Billy Connors, son of Dr. Connors; but they did not appear in the final cut of the film.
Design.
Webb felt a responsibility to reinvent Spider-Man, stating that he and the crew wanted to keep the stunts more grounded physically, a challenge for a superhuman character. Webb liked the Mark Bagley art in "Ultimate Spider-Man" for the hero's body. One reinvention for the film was to adopt the convention from the mainstream Spider-Man that gave him artificial web-shooters. Writer Geoff Boucher of the "Los Angeles Times" was skeptical of the change feeling that it was too hard to believe that a financially strapped young man could conceive a wrist-worn device that can instantly produce a strand of synthetic webbing. Despite the skepticism, Webb felt that "the web-shooters were able to dramatize Peter's intellect". Webb paid attention to the question of "How would a kid make it?" And then took some license with it. About the new costume, Webb explained that he and the crew "wanted a design that would make the body longer and more lithe, more of an acrobat, someone incredibly agile and the legs of the spider on the chest were something we used to emphasize that." He revealed that the film used varying suits for different lighting conditions. They made the webbing on the costume a little bit darker. Webb stated that "With the costume and the web-shooters we wanted to emphasize that these are things that Peter Parker made".
While Webb introduced a few elements from "Ultimate Spider-Man", he wanted to keep the mainstream version of Gwen Stacy instead of that world's punk rocker.
The release of Lizard merchandise designs along with unconfirmed concept art featuring a humanoid-shape with a layer of scales on top instead of a pronounced snout (similar to a dinosaur or crocodile) as in the most recent comics, produced a mixed reaction. Many commenters compared it to other fictional characters instead of his rendering in comics. Russ Fischer of /Film described the character as looking more "Steve Ditko derived" (the character's original artist). Webb felt that there are different incarnations of Lizard in the comic book. He felt that he should do it without the snout because he was interested more in human emotions, because he wanted to keep Rhys' presence in the creature. Webb wanted him to have emotion, have a face and have feeling. He stated "that in a comic book, you just put that thing up there, and you can say, oh, thought bubble, whatever. But when you try to do that and make it look real, it's a different challenge, and I'm creating a movie, I'm not creating a comic book. That was part of the design."
Webb "wanted to do something that felt more contemporary, and was less based in representing panels from the comics" and focus on spirit over style.
Filming.
Principal photography began on December 6, 2010, in Los Angeles. The working title was "Fiona's Tale". The 90-day shoot included two weeks in New York City, while the bulk of filming occurred in and around Los Angeles, including such locations as the Henry Fonda Theater in Hollywood, St. John Bosco High School's Gym, Immanuel Presbyterian Church in Mid-Wilshire and various locations around South Pasadena, San Pedro and Woodland Hills. Sony Entertainment spokesman Steve Elzer explained, "here is a comfort level in producing a project of this size and scope on your own backlot. ...Basing the film on the lot also makes it easier for producers to interact with Sony's in-house visual effects team, and gives the studios greater control of quality and security."
Some location shooting took place in New York City. The Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House served as the exterior for NYPD headquarters and an apartment house at 15 West 81st Street, on Manhattan's Upper West Side, was used as the exterior for the home of Gwen Stacy and her family. A row of houses on Fuller Place in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Windsor Terrace stood in for the Forest Hills, Queens neighborhood of Ben and May Parker. A web-swinging stunt sequence takes place along the Riverside Drive Viaduct in Harlem.
The film was the first Hollywood production to be filmed with the Red Digital Cinema Camera Company's RED Epic camera and was shot in 3-D at 5K resolution. Cinematographer John Schwartzman had this to say about the camera: "Today was Epic, Monday December 6 marks the first day the Red Epic camera was used to shoot a major studio motion picture. I can say for certainty the camera does exist and boy is it ready for primetime, as a matter of fact it's a true game changer." Schwartzman felt that the 3D would have been impossible without it. He said, "I can tell you without these cameras it would be impossible to move a 3D rig in the ways that this story demands, if Jim and the crew hadn't made these cameras available to us I don't think we could have shot this movie the way our director envisioned it in 3D." Webb wanted cameras small enough to fit on the rigs and swing around very fast, saying that the "RED Epic cameras were the right cameras to do that." Webb continued that "you need to shoot it with a level of velocity and 3D cameras can be very large... and so we need those cameras to mount on rigs that could fly to the air and run to the streets in a certain pace. That allowed us to do it." "The Amazing Spider-Man" climax was filmed in a 1:78:1 aspect ratio for its IMax DMR release.
On April 2011, Stone revealed that the cinematography had wrapped and that post-production began in May although some reshooting took place in New York City in November 2011 and in Los Angeles in December 2011.
Stunts.
The stunt performers included the Armstrong family, Vic and Andy, along with Richard Norton who plays a SWAT team member. Andy Armstrong was the stunt coordinator while Vic was the second unit director. To determine how Spider-Man should swing Andy videotaped an Olympic Games gymnast swinging on a horizontal bar. Andy noted that in the computer-generated swing in the earlier "Spider-Man" films, "he swings down at the same speed as he swings up," and this "constant" speed is unlike a real gymnast's movement where "he's accelerating until he reaches the bottom, then as he starts to come up, he's decelerating until he gets to the top of his swing and he actually gets negative gravity, where he'll go weightless for a second, and then the next swing starts, and it becomes another violent swing again." Vic felt that Spider-Man moves were comparable to those of Tarzan and he wanted to add that in the film. While filming in New York City, they swung a man through traffic down the street. Then, while the crew built a rig hundreds of feet long over Riverside Drive in Harlem, Andy built a car rig with a series of wires to help with effects which Webb said required an "incredible wealth of acrobatics". These rigs were over 200–300 feet long and demanded months of rehearsals and design. According to Andy, operating the rigs "was a combination of a lot of human skills and mechanical engineering." The purpose of the rigs was to depict Spider-Man's swing in a way that wasn't computer-generated. Garfield was reported to be involved with some of the stunts. Leaked pictures reveal Garfield with a nosebleed that reports claimed was from swinging. Arad explained that "Andrew is not only a brilliant actor but he is a sportsman. This gave us the opportunity to try things with him that were it not so it would have been almost impossible."
Effects.
The company 3ality Technica of Burbank, California produced some of the equipment. The film was reported to be the first to adopt 3ality Digital's TS-5 wireless and handheld beamsplitter mirror rig. 3ality technology helped make it possible to avoid 2D to 3D conversion. Webb wanted a new 3D experience for Spider-Man: "Because we're shooting in 3D, I wanted to conceive of certain things very specifically for 3D. There's an experimental component to 3D that's fascinating and we're experimenting with generating that point of view – so you feel what Peter Parker feels, you feel what Spider-Man feels when he's jumping over buildings and over the streets." He felt that Spider-Man was ideal for 3D, admitting that they "started making the movie around the time "Avatar" came out" which made every studio want 3D. This was Webb's first film using the technique and he did not want a force-fit or clumsy conversion as he had seen in other films. Webb cited childhood films such as "Creature from the Black Lagoon" and "House of Wax" for inspirations to push the 3D in his film even further than the type of depth that James Cameron uses in his film.
An entire staff was dedicated to make Lizard lifelike. They started by thinking about lizard biology and how his muscles would work. A large man referred to as "Big John" stood in as the character during shooting, performing much of the interaction with other characters. The computer-generated lizard replaced him in post-production. Ifans used motion capture for Lizard's speaking parts, which Webb found challenging to incorporate into the character's final version.
In February 2012, Sony Pictures Imageworks gave the film a digital touch-up in Vancouver.
Music.
James Horner scored the film. Webb described Horner's first musical cue as "spectacular". Webb said, "I wanted to to create a score that felt massive and huge but also intimate and small." The film also features music by Coldplay, the song: 'til Kingdom Come, from the Album X&Y. In May 2012, Sony Classical revealed details about the soundtrack.
Marketing.
In February 2011, with the launch of the official website, the title and first official image of Garfield as Spider-Man were revealed. Geoff Boucher of the "Los Angeles Times" noted "the suit lives up to the challenge of being different from the Sam Raimi films but not too different from the classic suit that stands as one of the great comic-book costumes ever." Matt Goldberg of "Collider" admitted the he was not crazy about it, explaining that the bug-yellow eyes felt weird to him and the mesh-pattern felt too busy. He explained that the design of the gloves caused flashbacks to the Spider-Man 2099 costume which he didn't like, although he felt that the web-shooters looked fine.
Walmart provided tours for the film and offered exclusive never-before-seen footage.
Merchandising.
A Spider-Man and Lizard PEZ dispenser revealed at the Comic-Con in November 2011 first depicted the film-Lizard. In December 2011, it was revealed that Mega Brands had the rights to produce construction sets. A Marvel Select Spider-Man action figure by Diamond Select Toys was announced on January 2012 — the fifth Marvel Select Spider-Man figure, but the first based on a film. The first look at a Hasbro action figure of the film's version of Spider-Man was revealed in Comic-Con in July 2011. Hasbro made a radio control speed-climbing figure. Minimates made action figures from the film. Other companies releasing action figures for the film include Hot Toys, MediCom and Kaiyodo. OPI Products released a collection of "The Amazing Spider-Man" nail polish. Trading cards are available.
CKE Restaurants, parent company of Carls Jr. and Hardee's, helped sponsor the film. Chief marketing officer Brad Haley said they would market a new burger as part of the promotion. The burger was dubbed "The Amazing Grilled Cheese Bacon Burger". It was promoted through film-themed commercials and radio ads featuring Stan Lee. Spider-Man themed premiums were offered as part of the Cool Kid's Combo. Tours and PlayStation 3 game prizes were part of the promotion along with a video game. Big Cola was reported to enter a deal for promoting the film.
The Kellogg Company and the Keebler Company built marketing campaigns around clips from the film. Sony launched a new augmented reality mobile application for the film using Qualcomm's Vuforia platform. Sony's Dwight Caines felt that the "use of augmented reality technology is a fun way of embracing the 3D aspects of the movie while nurturing the playful kid inside all of us who wants to collect items from their favorite superhero character to share with their friends and family." Twizzlers challenged fans nationwide to help the hero build a virtual web of Twizzlers Twists to unlock prizes and exclusive content. D-Box Technologies provide motion simulation for the film in select theaters.
As is common in Sony films, Sony product placements abounded, replacing the ubiquitous Apple Computer products often used by other studios. The film's mobile phones, tablets, monitors and laptops all came from other Sony divisions. Other placements included Microsoft's Bing search engine.
Previews.
A teaser trailer was leaked on the Internet and aired at San Diego's Comic-Con International in July 2011, attached to the superhero film "". Rob Keyes of Screen Rant felt that "it takes on a noticeably different tone from that of Raimi trilogy of Spider-Man movies, and presents itself in a similar fashion to what Christopher Nolan did with "Batman Begins"." Some writers have observed that the trailer closely resembles the 2008 video game "Mirror's Edge". After the third trailer was released, Webb defended the point of view footage, saying it was an early rendering and that the CGI was still in production.
A "sneak peek screening" of "The Amazing Spider-Man" was held on February 6, 2012 in 13 cities internationally: Berlin, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Mexico City, Moscow, New York City, Paris, Rio de Janeiro, Rome, Seoul, Sydney and Tokyo. On January 8, 2012, the Spider-Man logo appeared on some of the world's most iconic buildings such as the Sydney Opera House, the Colosseum of Rome, the Kremlin in Moscow and the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. The screening revealed a second trailer in 3D, which thereafter appeared online. Glen Levy of "Time" magazine felt that the trailer's "dialogue goes hand in hand with the action, rather than be dominated by it" and that the action scenes from the film looked "polished and slick". The special screening included an eight and a half minute extended trailer. Scott Mantz of "Access Hollywood" felt that the extended footage seemed is edgier and more character-driven and that "the Lizard looks like a great villain". Peter Sciretta of /Film said that the trailers had left him "impressed" and had captured a feeling of dark naturalism alongside Spider-Man's trademark wisecracking. With the second official trailer and the sizzle reel, Webb felt that it was important to provide a more specific idea of the film, such as showcasing Peter and Gwen's relationship and the visual effects, just to display the attitude of the film that he and the crew were trying to create. On February 7, 2012 it was reported that the latest official trailer revealed a link to the viral marketing internet site for the film.
A third official trailer debuted on iTunes on May 3, 2012. The trailer was attached to the 3D première of "The Avengers", the day after. The trailer contains what most reporters called a better and more fleshed Lizard. Adam Chitwood of "Collider" said, "The webslinging has an edge to it and The Lizard has much more texture. I like Andrew Garfield a whole lot, and the biggest draw for me here is the character work between Garfield and Emma Stone. They look to have some great chemistry and Garfield brings out a... side of Peter Parker that we didn't really see in Sam Raimi's trilogy." Sandy Schaefer of ScreenRant felt that "the darker color palette and 3D visuals shown here look overall quite crisp, even without the benefit of the big screen." Webb felt that "there's a small, intimate little indie movie at the heart of Spider-Man".
In May 9, 2012 the first television trailer was revealed which teased an "4 minute Super Preview" on NBC with the season premiere of "America's Got Talent" on May 14. The super preview revealed Spider-Man saving a boy near a bridge. Fans and writers rated that scene the highest in the trailer. Angela Watercutter of "Wired" the rescue scene as "pretty freaking epic." Kofi Outlaw of Screen Rant felt that the biggest thing to note "is the tone and composition of the film" and that most of the footage "manages to showcase a version of Peter Parker/Spider-Man that is both familiar and fresh."
A six minute 3D preview was tied in with IMAX 3D showings of "Men in Black 3". Sony's Rory Bruer explained that the audience of "Men in Black 3" should be a perfect match for this footage and that the six minutes should get everyone excited. The footage revealed an exchange between Peter and Gwen that Brad Williams from WhatCulture.com described as "brief and cutesy". Brad found the CGI pretty clean and felt that the film seemed like a perfect match for 3D.
Viral campaign.
The main viral marketing site was revealed in the second trailer in February 2012. The official Twitter account revealed a scavenger hunt by posting "Property of Peter Parker... Lost" with the longitude and latitude coordinates of direct markets in major US cities. The missing items included a JanSport backpack. One of the clues hidden in the backpack was a link to a page on the viral site that unlocked countdown timers for the cities of Los Angeles, New York City, Atlanta, Denver, Seattle and Phoenix, Arizona. Once the countdown was up, each of the city-specific Twitter accounts for the marketing campaign sent out five locations in each city. A person at each spot waited to give the first person with the password a package and the tag-name "operative". These operatives painted the Spider-Man logo as graffiti. They could view the first scene. The main viral website revealed hints to other websites, such as a photo blog that expressed Peter Parker's point of view. An unlocked puzzle there revealed the words "evolve", "through" and "engineering" which when put together led to another website with design sketches on how to build a web-shooter.
A "Daily Bugle" website revealed Denis Leary as George Stacy lamenting the appearance of the wall-crawler and asking whoever spots Spider-Man to e-mail him. The site hosted the best fan-made Spider-Man scenes. People who uploaded images of "Spider-Man" on the "Webbed Menace" viral site received a poster that sent them to a website for a boxing gym called "Jerera's Boxing Gym". The Gym was funded by Peter Parker's school. A viral website of that class was discovered. Entering the correct password revealed Parker's class schedule. The Midtown High School site then revealed a Twitter user tracking down Lizard and asked people in Los Angeles, New York City, Atlanta, Chicago, Salt Lake City, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Austin, Tampa, Minneapolis and New Orleans to stay tuned for details. A viral site for Oscorp Industries was available. The Twitter account that coordinated a nationwide effort to track Lizard sightings revealed locations that had packages containing Connor's shredded lab coat, an Oscorp ID badge and scientific samples of reptilian skin. When unscrambling the letters listed on each sample, the words "animal dynamics lab" led players to a new Oscorp Industries site focusing on a science program about reptile genetics. The site depicts Doctor Connors search for interns who could begin applying on May 14. Completing the application and supplying the keyword "Mutagen" unveiled a Lizard featurette. The Oscorp Industries website contained puzzles that revealed two in-game documents, two video updates featuring Connors and a following cipher that as of July 2012 had yet to be cracked. From there images were then unscrambled, revealing a research project with spiders, a letter from Mary Parker to Richard Parker that exposed his workaholic habits and a "Daily Bugle" newspaper that contained notes about Oscorp.
On May 30, 2012, the third (and apparently final) set of challenges in the Animal Dynamics Lab was launched with two new video updates of Doctor Connors, an image of Richard and Mary Parker, letters from Rajit Ratha to Doctor Connors, one from Doctor Connors to Richard Parker and another note to Richard from Mary. In June 1, 2012, a Carl's Jr. in Glendale, California hosted the next viral campaign by decorating webs and declaring a crime scene due to Spider-Man's apprehension of a serial car and motorcycle thief. It was announced via "The Mark of the Spider-Man" Twitter feed and with the code word "Web of Crime", a hidden message was discovered, entitled a "Spider cipher". The code name "adhere" named another sub-site of "the Mark of the Spider-Man" campaign that revealed crime reports.
Oliver Lyttleton of indieWire felt that viral ads such as the webbed menace website seemed a little forced and cribbed heavily from the example set by "The Dark Knight" with viral games. Silas Lesnick of SuperheroHype!, on the other hand, described the film's viral as "one of the most comprehensive film virals to date".
Philanthropy.
T-shirts depicting the film's Spider-Man to help the cause for Stand Up to Cancer were available. Garfield wore the shirt, explaining that "these shirts underscore the idea that anyone has the power to be a hero. Cancer is one of our greatest villains. I'm proud to join others in standing up to this disease." Ziskin's death from cancer was used as inspiration for the cause. Sony created a website for the cause. Columbia Pictures teamed up with New York City cultural institutions to create "Spider-Man week" by helping out in the community.
Release.
On February 10, 2010, Sony announced that the film would be released in 3D and IMAX 3D on July 3, 2012. Release dates outside the US were moved up to June in other countries to increase first-week sales. Premieres took place in Tokyo, Japan on June 13.
Critical reception.
"The Amazing Spider-Man" received mostly positive reviews by critics upon release. The review aggregator film site Rotten Tomatoes reported a 73% approval rating, based on 275 reviews, with an average rating of 6.7/10. The consensus: "A well-chosen cast and sure-handed direction allows "The Amazing Spider-Man" to thrill despite revisiting many of the same plot points from 2002's "Spider-Man"." On Metacritic, as of July 5, the film had received an average score of 66 out of 100, based on 42 critics, signifying "Generally favorable reviews". CinemaScore's audience graded it an A-.
Jordan Mintzer of "The Hollywood Reporter" felt that the film was satisfying, explaining that Webb directed with emotional and comedic touches and provided a darker depiction and a stronger romance than the original. Boyd Van Hoeija of "Variety" described the film as a "mostly slick, entertaining and emotionally involving recombination of fresh and familiar elements". He said Garfield makes an interesting hero of the film because "his struggles involve real people — and real lives." A columnist of "The Village Voice", Chris Pakham felt that the film was faithful to the comics and that "Garfield's spindly physicality evokes the Marvel illustrations of the 1960s." Conversely, Lou Lemenick of the "New York Post" wrote that the film was dull and uninspiring and felt that it did not compare to "Batman Begins" and was "a pointless rehash in the mode of "Superman Returns"." "New Yorker" critic Anthony Lane described the film as "running out of nimbleness and fun, and the promise contained in its title seems ever more tendentious." Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" called the film "memorable in pieces but not as a whole" and said that its best element is the relationship between Peter and Gwen, while the Lizard is not quite an opponent for the ages."
Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the film an A- describing the film as "a friskier, sweeter-natured variation when compared to Raimi's work. She explained that the most "amazing" element was "not the... blockbuster wow!" but instead "the... intimate awww." Claudia Puig of "USA Today" explained that "as a new chapter in the superpowered arachnid saga, it stands on its own quite nicely, focusing more on human emotions than on a panoply of special effects." She said "where Tobey Maguire in the original Spider-Man trilogy was earnest, Garfield's Spider-Man is whip-smart and likably cheeky, with an undercurrent of teenage angst." She also described the film "as much a coming-of-age story as a crime-fighting action saga." Christy Lemire of the Associated Press described Garfield' Spidey as an arrogant and misunderstood outsider, giving the film a "restless, reckless energy and a welcome sense of danger." She also concluded that Webb was a different sort of director, saying that while Webb's big set pieces lacked Raimi's imagination, they conveyed "emotional truth" and "a pervasive sense of humanity". However, Ty Burr of "The Boston Globe" felt that the film lacked the original's pop grace and the pulpy joy saying the film was "dumbed down, tarted up" and "almost shockingly uninspired". Burr evaluated it as "the worst superhero film since "Green Lantern"". Also Colin Covert of the "Star Tribune" felt that it is weaker than its predecessor and described it as ""The Notebook" in spandex". Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" felt that the reboot provided better reasons for why Peter Parker adopts his superhero role, even if the origin story didn't need to be told once again. He also remarked that it was "probably the second best" of the four "Spider-Man" films after "Spider-Man 2" explaining that Lizard was lackluster compared to "Doctor Octopus" and had the dramatic range of "Godzilla".
Joe Morgenstern of "The Wall Street Journal", pointed out that "the truly amazing thing is that most of what happens to Peter Parker in the first half of the film has already happened in previous chapters of the Spidey saga", that "what's old is old again." However, Randy Myers from the "San Jose Mercury News" found it "the best Spidey yet", describing it as "strong, bold and well-acted." He felt that you can't help but feel déjà vu, but that the work shows greater "dimension". Dana Stevens at "Slate" magazine believed that the film was "absolutely unnecessary" retelling the origin story, although it avoided "the common comic-book adaptation trap of gloomy self-seriousness". Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" also opined that the "unnecessary" reboot pulled stellar performances from Garfield and Stone and touches the heart.
The comic-book website Newsarama placed "The Amazing Spider-Man" on its top-10 list of comic-book movies. Rotten Tomatoes placed the film as number 32 on its list of best comic book movies as of 2012.
Box office.
"The Amazing Spider-Man" earned $262,030,663 in North America and $490,185,894 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $752,216,557. Worldwide, the film is the 46th highest-grossing film, the 7th highest-grossing 2012 film, the tenth highest-grossing superhero film, the lowest-grossing "Spider-Man" film and the sixth highest-grossing film distributed by Sony/Columbia.
In North America, the film earned an estimated $7.5 million during its midnight run at 3,150 locations, including $1.2 million from 300 IMAX venues. On its opening day, a pre-holiday Tuesday, it set a Tuesday-gross record with $35 million (previously held by "Transformers"). The next day, the film dropped 33.4 percent to $23.3 million—the second-highest non-opening Wednesday. Over the three-day weekend, it grossed $62.0 million. This pushed the film's six-day gross to $137.0 million, which was smaller than those of "Transformers" ($155.41 million) and "Spider-Man 2" ($180.07 million) among past Fourth-of-July releases. Although the film did not match its predecessors, Sony pictures stated, "In the world of relaunched franchises, this is a spectacular success by any measure". For example, both "Batman Begins "($79.5 million) and " "($69.9 million) (both were non 3D-movies) opened significantly below "The Amazing Spider-Man". It remained at the #1 spot for ten consecutive days, until the opening day of "".
Outside North America, "The Amazing Spider-Man" grossed $51.1 million on its five-day opening weekend (June 27 – July 1, 2012) from 13 markets, with strong openings in many Asian countries. In India, it earned $6.0 million, a record opening for a Hollywood film. Kercy Daruwala of Sony Pictures in India felt very confident that the presence of famed Indian actor Irrfan Khan would enhance attendance. Opening in an additional 61 markets, the film made $127.5 million over its second weekend. The movie ranked number one in over 30 countries. In Indonesia, it broke the opening-weekend record with $4.5 million while, in the UK, it opened to £11.1 million ($18.1 million) which is about equal with "Spider-Man 3" (£11.8 million). In its last market, China, "The Amazing Spider-Man" grossed $33.3 million over its seven-day debut, which is more than "Spider-Man 3"’s lifetime box office in China. As of August 27, 2012, the movie's highest-grossing territory is the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta, where it has grossed $40.4 million.
Home media.
"The Amazing Spider-Man" was released by Sony Pictures Home Entertainment on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, DVD and digital download on November 9, 2012 in North America.
Other media.
A video game of the same name developed by Beenox was announced at the 2011 New York Comic Con. They were the development team behind the previous two "Spider-Man" games, ' and '. The game was released on June 26, 2012, in Xbox 360, PlayStation 3, personal computer, Wii, Nintendo DS and Nintendo 3DS. Dee Brown of Beenox noted, "The fact that our game is based on the movie, and the movie is re-approaching the universe in a completely different way — a more grounded, more realistic approach — gives us an incredible setting to play with". The game takes place after the events of the film . Sony and Gameloft teamed up again to create an official mobile game for the film. Sky Betting and Gaming's online casino website Sky Vegas created a related casino game.
The comic was released in June, named "Amazing Spider-Man: The Movie" #1–2", written by Tom Cohen and illustrated by Neil Edwards. A trade paperback was published collecting the two-parter a week before the film's release, entitled "Amazing Spider-Man: The Movie Prelude", which also included "The Amazing Spider-Man" issues #75–77.
The soundtrack album of the film was released the same day as the film, under the Sony Classical banner.
