The less-than sign is a sign of inequality.
Computing.
The less-than sign (<) is an original ASCII character (hex 3C, decimal 60).
Angle brackets.
The less-than sign is used for an approximation of the opening angle bracket (⟨). ASCII does not have angle brackets.
Programming language.
In BASIC, Lisp-family languages, and C-family languages (including Java and C++), operator < means "less than".
In Coldfusion, operator .lt. means "less than".
In Fortran, operator .LT. means "less than"; later versions allow <.
In Bourne shell, operator -lt means "less than".
Double less-than sign.
The double less-than sign («) is used for an approximation of the much-less-than sign (≪). ASCII does not have much-less-than sign.
The double less-than sign («) is used for an approximation of the opening guillemet («). ASCII does not have guillemets.
In Bash, Perl, and Ruby, operator «EOF (where "EOF" is an arbitrary string, but commonly "EOF" denoting "end of file") is used to denote the beginning of a here document.
In C and C++, operator « represents a binary left shift.
In C++, operator «, when applied on an output stream, acts as "insertion operator" and performs an output operation on the stream.
Triple less-than sign.
In PHP, operator «<OUTPUT is used to denote the beginning of a heredoc statement (where OUTPUT is an arbitrary named variable.)
Less-than sign plus equals sign.
The less-than sign plus the equals sign (<=) is used for an approximation of the less-than-or-equal-to sign (≤). ASCII does not have less-than-or-equal-to sign.
In BASIC, Lisp-family languages, and C-family languages (including Java and C++), operator <= means "less than or equal to".
In Fortran, operator .LE. means "less than or equal to".
In Bourne shell and Windows PowerShell, operator -le means "less than or equal to".
Shell scripts.
In Bourne shell (and many other shells), less-than sign is used to redirect input from a file. Less-than plus ampersand (<&) is used to redirect from a file descriptor.
Spaceship operator.
Less-than sign is used in the spaceship operator.
HTML.
In HTML (and SGML and XML), the less-than sign is used at the beginning of tags. The less-than sign may be included with codice_1. The less-than-or-equal-to sign may be included with codice_2.
