Banshee is an American drama television series created by Jonathan Tropper and David Schickler, who serve as executive producers along with Alan Ball, Greg Yaitanes and Peter Macdissi. The series is set in a small town in Pennsylvania Amish country and features an enigmatic ex-con posing as a murdered sheriff who imposes his own brand of justice while also cooking up plans that serve his own interests. It airs on HBO-owned Cinemax and is produced by Your Face Goes Here Entertainment. "Banshee" is part of Cinemax's attempt to expand its original programming content, and it will join "" (co-produced with BSkyB) and Steve Kronish's "Sandbox". "Banshee" premiered on January 11, 2013. On January 29, 2013 Cinemax renewed Banshee for a 10-episode second season scheduled to debut in 2014.
Premise.
"Banshee" takes place in the fictional small town of Banshee, Pennsylvania. After serving 15 years in prison for stealing diamonds from Ukranian gangster Mr. Rabbit, the unnamed protagonist travels to Banshee to find his heist accomplice and former lover, Anastasia. When he finds her, the protagonist learns that she is now a married mother of two living under the assumed identity of Carrie Hopewell. Later, when the incoming Sheriff is killed, the protagonist takes on his identity as Lucas Hood, becoming the town's new Sheriff. "Banshee" sees Hood struggle with adapting to his new identity while dealing with the machinations of local crime lord Kai Proctor, and remaining hidden from Rabbit.
Cast.
The series also features in recurring roles, Matthew Rauch as Proctor's right-hand-man Burton, Christos Vasilopoulos as Rabbit's right-hand-man Olek, and Gabriel Suttle as Carrie's son Max.
Episodes.
Season 1 (2013).
The first season of "Banshee" will consist of 10 episodes. 
Season 2 (2014).
On January 29, 2013, Cinemax renewed "Banshee" for a 10-episode second season, which will debut in 2014.
Reception.
Critical reception of "Banshee" has been generally favorable. Banshee currently holds a 61/100 meta score on Metacritic. 
"Wall Street Journal" critic Dorothy Rabinowitz wrote, "Its smartness comes shining through despite the claptrap (none worse than the parade of sex scenes, soft-porn variety, whose noisiness is exceeded only by their unconvincingness); its story, littered with intriguingly repellent characters, like Kai Proctor (Ulrich Thomsen), local evil tycoon, grows ever more enticing". 
The "San Francisco Chronicle" said about Banshee, "It has a solid pedigree. It's also part of Cinemax's effort to expand its original programming. That effort pays off with Banshee". 
Banshee has also had less favourable reviews. A "Boston Herald" critic described the series as: "A slow-pokey drama punctuated by shocking violence and sex".
