Helena Bonham Carter, CBE (born 26 May 1966) is an English actress. She made her acting debut in a television adaptation of K. M. Peyton's "A Pattern of Roses" before winning her first film role as the titular character in "Lady Jane". She is known for her roles in films such as "A Room with a View", "Fight Club", and playing the villainess Bellatrix Lestrange in the "Harry Potter" series, as well as for frequently collaborating with her domestic partner, director Tim Burton, in films such as "Planet of the Apes", "Big Fish", "Corpse Bride", "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory", "", "Alice in Wonderland", and "Dark Shadows". In 2012, she played Miss Havisham in "Great Expectations", and Madame Thénardier in "Les Misérables".
A two-time Academy Award nominee for her performances in "The Wings of the Dove" and "The King's Speech", Bonham Carter's acting has been further recognised with six Golden Globe nominations, an International Emmy Award, a BAFTA Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award. She was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to drama, and received the award from the Queen at Buckingham Palace on 22 February 2012.
Early life.
Bonham Carter was born in Golders Green, London. Her mother, Elena (née Propper de Callejón), is a psychotherapist. Her father, Raymond Bonham Carter, who came from a prominent British political family, was a merchant banker and served as the alternative British director representing the Bank of England at the International Monetary Fund in Washington, D.C. during the 1960s.
Bonham Carter has two brothers, Edward and Thomas. She was educated at South Hampstead High School, an independent girls' school in Hampstead, London, and completed her A Levels at Westminster School, a public school in Westminster. Bonham Carter was denied admission to King's College, Cambridge, not because of her academic performance but because school officials were afraid that she would leave during the course to pursue her acting career.
When Bonham Carter was five, her mother had a serious nervous breakdown, from which it took her three years to recover. Upon her recovery, her experience in therapy led her to become a psychotherapist herself – Bonham Carter now pays her to read her scripts and deliver her opinion of the characters' psychological motivations. Five years after her mother's recovery, her father was diagnosed with acoustic neuroma. He suffered complications during an operation to remove the tumour which led to a stroke that left him half-paralysed and using a wheelchair. With her two older brothers at college, Bonham Carter was left to help her mother cope. She would later study her father's movements and mannerisms for her role in "The Theory of Flight", before his death in January 2004.
Career.
Bonham Carter has not received any formal training in acting. In 1979, she won a national writing contest and used the money to pay for her entry into the actors' directory "Spotlight". She made her professional acting début at the age of 16 in a television commercial. She also had a part in a minor TV film, "A Pattern of Roses".
Her first starring film role was as Lady Jane Grey in "Lady Jane" (1986), which was given mixed reviews by critics. Her breakthrough role was Lucy Honeychurch in "A Room with a View", which was filmed after "Lady Jane", but released beforehand. Bonham Carter also appeared in episodes of "Miami Vice" as Don Johnson's love interest during the 1986–87 season and then, in 1987 opposite Dirk Bogarde in "The Vision" and Stewart Granger in "A Hazard of Hearts". Bonham Carter was originally cast in the role of Bess McNeill in "Breaking the Waves", but backed out during production due to "the character's painful psychic and physical exposure," according to Roger Ebert. The role went to Emily Watson, who was nominated for an Academy Award for the role. In 1994, Bonham Carter appeared in a dream sequence during the second season of the British comedy series "Absolutely Fabulous", playing Edina Monsoon's daughter Saffron. Throughout the series, references to physical similarities between Bonham Carter and Saffron had been made.
Her early films led to her to being typecast as a "corset queen," and "English rose," playing pre- and early 20th century characters, particularly in Merchant-Ivory films. She played Olivia in Trevor Nunn's film version of "Twelfth Night" in 1996. One of the high points of her early career was her performance as the scheming Kate Croy in the 1997 film adaption of "Wings of the Dove" which was highly acclaimed internationally and netted her first Golden Globe and Academy Award nominations. She has since expanded her range, with her more recent films being "Fight Club," "," and partner Tim Burton's "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory," "Corpse Bride," "Big Fish," "," and "Alice in Wonderland."
Bonham Carter speaks French fluently, starring in a 1996 French film "Portraits chinois." In August 2001, she was featured in "Maxim." She played her second Queen of England when she was cast as Anne Boleyn in the ITV1 mini-series "Henry VIII;" however her role was restricted, as she was pregnant with her first child at the time of filming. Bonham Carter was a member of the 2006 Cannes Film Festival jury that unanimously selected "The Wind That Shakes the Barley" as best film.
In May 2006, Bonham Carter launched her own fashion line, "The Pantaloonies," with swimwear designer Samantha Sage. Their first collection, called Bloomin' Bloomers, is a Victorian style selection of camisoles, mob caps and bloomers. The duo are now working on Pantaloonies customised jeans, which Bonham Carter describes as "a kind of scrapbook on the bum."
Bonham Carter played Bellatrix Lestrange in the final four Harry Potter films (2007-2011). While filming "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix", she accidentally ruptured the eardrum of Matthew Lewis (playing Neville Longbottom) when she stuck her wand in his ear. Bonham Carter received positive reviews as Lestrange, described as a "shining but underused talent". She played Mrs. Lovett, Sweeney Todd's (Johnny Depp) amorous accomplice in the film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's Broadway musical, "". The film was released on 21 December 2007 in the US and 25 January 2008 in the UK. Directed by Tim Burton, Bonham Carter received a nomination for the Golden Globe for Best Actress for her performance. She won the Best Actress award in the 2007 Evening Standard British Film Awards for her performances in "Sweeney Todd" and "Conversations With Other Women," along with another Best Actress award at the 2009 Empire Awards. Bonham Carter also appeared in the fourth "Terminator" film entitled "Terminator Salvation", playing a small but pivotal role.
Bonham Carter joined the cast of Tim Burton's 2010 film, "Alice in Wonderland" as The Red Queen. She appears alongside Johnny Depp, Anne Hathaway, Mia Wasikowska and Crispin Glover. Her role was an amalgamation of The Queen of Hearts, and The Red Queen. In early 2009, Bonham Carter was named one of "The Times" newspaper's top 10 British Actresses of all time. She appeared on the list with fellow actresses Julie Andrews, Helen Mirren, Maggie Smith, Judi Dench and Audrey Hepburn.
In 2010, Bonham Carter played Lady Elizabeth Bowes-Lyon in the film "The King's Speech." As of January 2011, she had received numerous plaudits for her performance, including nominations for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role and the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. She won her first BAFTA Award, but lost the Academy Award to Melissa Leo for "The Fighter."
Bonham Carter signed to play author Enid Blyton in the BBC Four television biopic, "Enid". It was the first depiction of Blyton's life on the screen, and Bonham Carter starred with Matthew Macfadyen and Denis Lawson. She also received her first Television BAFTA Nomination for Best Actress, for "Enid". In 2010, she starred with Freddie Highmore in the Nigel Slater biopic "Toast," which was filmed in the West Midlands and received a gala at the 2011 Berlin Film Festival. She has now been confirmed to be taking on the role of Miss Havisham in Mike Newell's adaptation of the Charles Dickens novel, "Great Expectations". She received the Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year from BAFTA LA in November 2011.
In April 2012, Bonham Carter appeared in Rufus Wainwright's music video for his single "Out of the Game," featured on the album of the same name. Bonham Carter co-starred in a film adaptation of the musical "Les Misérables", released in 2012. She played the role of Madame Thénardier.
On 17 May 2012, it was announced that Bonham Carter will be appearing in an adaptation of Reif Larsen's book "The Selected Works of T.S. Spivet", entitled "The Young and Prodigious Spivet". Her casting was announced alongside that of Kathy Bates, Kyle Catlett and Callum Keith Rennie, with Jean-Pierre Jeunet directing. She also appeared in a short film directed by Roman Polanski for the clothing brand Prada. The short was entitled "A Therapy" and she appeared as a therapy patient to Ben Kingsley's therapist.
Personal life.
In 2001, Bonham Carter began her relationship with director Tim Burton, whom she met while filming "Planet of the Apes". Burton has taken to casting her in his films, including "Big Fish", "Corpse Bride", "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory", "Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street", "Alice in Wonderland", and "Dark Shadows". They live in two adjoining houses in Belsize Park, London. Bonham Carter owned one of the houses, Burton later purchased the other and they connected the two. In 2006, they bought the Mill House in Sutton Courtenay, England. It was previously leased by her grandmother, Violet Bonham Carter, and owned by her great-grandfather Herbert Asquith.
Their son Billy Raymond Burton was born on October 4th 2003. Bonham Carter gave birth to her second child, a daughter named Nell Burton, on December 15th 2007 in Central London. She says she named her daughter Nell after all the "Helens" in her family. Bonham Carter told The Telegraph and several other interviewers of her struggles with fertility and the difficulties she had during her pregnancies. She also said that before the conception of her daughter, she and Burton had been trying for a baby for 2 years and although they conceived naturally, they were considering IVF. She was 41 when she had Nell and stated that she 'wouldn't recommend leaving it too long, if you can help it, because it takes a lot of time and effort.'
In August 2008, four of her relatives were killed in a safari bus crash in South Africa, and she was given indefinite leave from filming "Terminator Salvation", returning later to complete filming.
In 2008, Bonham Carter and Burton sold their American apartments for $8.75 million. In early October 2008, it was reported that Bonham Carter had become a patron of the charity Action Duchenne, the national charity established to support parents and sufferers of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
Bonham Carter is known for her unconventional sense of fashion, which has been described as "shabby chic". Despite her often controversial fashion choices, "Vanity Fair" named her on its 2010 Best-Dressed List and she was selected by Marc Jacobs to be the face of his autumn/winter 2011 advertising campaign. She cites Vivienne Westwood and Marie Antoinette as her main style influences.
Family background.
Paternal.
Bonham Carter's paternal grandparents were British Liberal politician Sir Maurice Bonham Carter and renowned politician and orator Violet Bonham Carter. Helena's paternal great-grandfather was Herbert Henry Asquith, 1st Earl of Oxford and Asquith, Prime Minister of Britain 1908–1916. She is the grand-niece of Asquith's son, Anthony Asquith, legendary English director of such classics as "Carrington V.C." and "The Importance of Being Earnest".
Bonham Carter is a distant cousin of fellow actor Crispin Bonham-Carter, who played Mr. Bingley in the 1995 BBC production of "Pride and Prejudice", and politician Jane Bonham Carter. Other prominent distant relatives include Lothian Bonham Carter, who played first-class cricket for Hampshire, his son, Vice Admiral Stuart Bonham Carter, who served in the Royal Navy in both world wars, and pioneering English nurse Florence Nightingale.
Maternal.
Her maternal grandfather, Spanish diplomat Eduardo Propper de Callejón, saved thousands of Jews from the Holocaust during World War II, for which he was recognised as Righteous among the Nations (his own father had been Jewish). He later served as Minister-Counselor at the Spanish Embassy in Washington, D.C.
Her maternal grandmother, Hélène Fould-Springer, was from an upper class Jewish family; she was the daughter of Baron Eugène Fould-Springer (a French banker, who was descended from the Ephrussi family and the Fould dynasty) and Marie Cecile von Springer (whose father was Austrian-born industrialist Baron Gustav von Springer, and whose mother was from the de Koenigswarter family). Hélène Fould-Springer converted to Catholicism after World War II. Hélène's sister was the French philanthropist Liliane de Rothschild (1916–2003), the wife of Baron Élie de Rothschild, of the prominent Rothschild family (who had also married within the von Springer family in the 19th century); her other sister, Therese Fould-Springer, was the mother of British writer David Pryce-Jones.
