"Home" is the tenth episode of the third season of the post-apocalyptic horror television series "The Walking Dead". It was written by Nichole Beattie and directed by Seith Mann, and aired on AMC in the United States on February 17, 2013.
Plot.
Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln) spots a woman in a long white satin gown standing by the graves. He then realizes that it is an apparition of his deceased wife Lori (Sarah Wayne Callies) and follows it outside the prison gates. Michonne (Danai Gurira) looks on with concern, and closes the gate.
In Woodbury, the Governor (David Morrissey) compliments Andrea (Laurie Holden) on her speech and asks her to take over leadership of Woodbury, believing that she is more fit to lead the people than he is. The Governor then visits head scientist Milton Mamet (Dallas Roberts), and asks him if he could still count on his allegiance. Milton reassures the Governor, who then asks him to keep tabs on Andrea. Later, Andrea asks Woodbury soldier Karen (Melissa Ponzio) and Milton for the whereabouts of the Governor and his right hand man, Ceasar Martinez (Jose Pablo Cantillo). Karen and Milton dodge Andrea's question, leading her to be suspicious of the Governor.
Daryl (Norman Reedus) and Merle Dixon (Michael Rooker) bicker in the forest. Daryl regrets his decision to leave the prison, but Merle predicts the Governor will slaughter everyone there. The two encounter and rescue a Hispanic family from walkers. Merle attempts to loot the family, but Daryl instead points his crossbow at him and lets the family leave. Merle then chastises Daryl for risking his life for strangers, and reminded him that they planned to rob Rick's group while they were in Atlanta, which was discontinued after Merle's initial disappearance. They grapple and Daryl's shirt rips, revealing childhood scars from their father's beatings, which Merle apologetically says that he was unaware of. Daryl counters him by saying he was also aware since he was also abused by their father. Daryl decides to return to the prison, while a tearful Merle complains that after all the things he did to them, he will never be accepted.
Due to Rick's absence, Glenn Rhee (Steven Yeun) assumes leadership and makes an executive decision to fortify the prison against the Governor, despite Hershel Greene's (Scott Wilson) suggestion that they flee, saying that having a newborn and Hershel's one leg makes them too vulnerable to flee. Glenn enlists Carl Grimes (Chandler Riggs) to help investigate the overlooked breach near the prison's administrative area, where Tyreese (Chad Coleman) and his group, as well as groups of walkers, found their way inside. Upon returning, the two inform the others that the boiler room is once again overrun with walkers. Hershel once again abides in his suggestion, but he is denied by Glenn, who decides to investigate the breach with Maggie Greene (Lauren Cohan). Glenn eventually goes alone after Maggie brushes him off and reveals that she was not raped by the Governor. Hershel finds the disoriented Rick and begs him to return, believing that Glenn in incapable of leading the group. Rick tells Hershel about hallucinating Lori, believing that there must be a reason why she continually appears to him.
Carol Peletier (Melissa McBride) and Axel (Lew Temple) converse about Axel's past. Axel confesses that he was arrested for "armed robbery" instead of dealing in narcotics, wanting to present himself to the group as a non-violent man. They continue to build their friendship and show a growing interest with one another, however this is cut short when Axel is sniped in the head by the Governor, who had arrived at the prison with his men, including Martinez. Axel's death and the resulting gunfire alert the group to mobilize, with Rick snapping back into reality and Hershel, who is still in the front yard, ducking for cover. The prison group returns fire, but only manage to kill one of the Governor's men. The Governor and his men cease fire as a bread truck driven by one the Governor's men crashes through the prison's inner and outer gates and stops in the yard. The Governor smiles as the back door opens and walkers stream out. The Governor and his men leave the premises as Glenn returns and rescues Michonne and Hershel. Left outside the prison, Rick is cornered by walkers, but he is narrowly saved by Daryl and Merle, who have returned to the group to the surprise of Rick. The survivors then look on at the prison yard, which is once again overrun by walkers.
