Tom Peter Odell is a British singer-songwriter. He released his debut extended play, "Songs From Another Love", in 2012. His debut studio album, "Long Way Down", will be available from 15 April 2013.
Early life.
Odell was born in Chichester, West Sussex to an airline pilot father and a primary-school teacher mother. He has an older sister. He spent part of his childhood in New Zealand because of his father's job. He was educated at the fee-paying Seaford College. He studied piano classically to Grade 7. He began writing his own songs at the age of thirteen but told no one, because he felt it was uncool. 
At the age of eighteen, Odell abandoned plans to attend the University of York and moved to Brighton to study at the Brighton Institute of Modern Music. He appeared at open-mic events nightly: "I could barely sing and I wrote bad songs. It was full of humiliation: dragging a keyboard round, turning up to find out I’d been taken off the bill, gangs of lads grabbing the mic off me and laughing ... I learnt to perform and learnt what songs work." After a year, he moved back to Chichester for financial reasons. Using his grandmother's car, he travelled regularly to London to play shows and to put advertisements in music schools. He then moved to London, performing shows as the frontman of Tom and The Tides.
Career.
2012–present: Breakthrough and debut album.
Odell is signed to In the Name Of, an imprint of Columbia Records run by Lily Allen. When he signed his record deal, he was given an advance: "I went out and bought an old Mini Cooper for cash. Then three weeks later I got back from a show in Scotland and the car was gone. So if you see a racing-green classic Mini Cooper, it’s mine. He released his debut extended play, "Songs From Another Love", on 15 October 2012. He made his television debut on 30 November 2012 as a performer on "Later... with Jools Holland". It was announced on 6 December 2012 that Odell had been shortlisted for the BRITs' Critics' Choice award, and was announced as the eventual winner on 20 December. Odell was also announced as one of fifteen nominees for the BBC Sound of 2013 poll. In January 2013, his single "Another Love" was used by the BBC to advertise their 2013 schedule. His debut studio album "Long Way Down" will be released on 15 April 2013.
Artistry.
Influences.
Odell "grew up listening to Elton John. One of the first albums I listened to was "Goodbye Yellow Brick Road" (1973)." He also cites David Bowie, Jeff Buckley, Bob Dylan, Arthur Russell, Leonard Cohen, Leon Russell, Billy Joel, Randy Newman, Tom Waits, Rodríguez and Bruce Springsteen as influences. He is a fan of Arcade Fire, James Blake, Cat Power, Blur, Beach House and Radiohead.
Odell has said his lyrics are inspired by his "inability to sustain a relationship with someone for longer than six months ... I find that I write much better songs when I’m being honest, and writing about things that happen to me. It can get a little weird though, when friends or girlfriends work out that a song is about them. But it’s amazing what you can get away with it. Artistic license I think they call it."
Discography.
Studio albums
Extended plays
Singles
Other charted songs
