Melissa Ann McCarthy (born August 26, 1970) is an American film and television actress, comedian, writer and producer.
McCarthy first gained recognition for her role as Sookie St. James on the television series "Gilmore Girls", where she starred from 2000 to 2007. From 2007 to 2009, she portrayed Dena on the ABC sitcom "Samantha Who?". McCarthy was then cast as Molly Flynn-Biggs on the CBS sitcom "Mike & Molly", a role that earned her an Emmy Award win, as well as another subsequent nomination. McCarthy was also nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her work as host on "Saturday Night Live".
McCarthy achieved major success and fame for her breakthrough role in the 2011 comedy hit "Bridesmaids," which garnered her numerous award nominations including an Academy Award nomination, a BAFTA nomination and a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. She has also appeared in films including "The Nines", "The Back-up Plan" and "Life as We Know It".
Early life.
Melissa Ann McCarthy was born in Plainfield, Illinois, the daughter of Sandra and Michael McCarthy. She is a first cousin of actress Jenny McCarthy. McCarthy was raised on a farm, in a "big, Irish-Catholic family". She graduated from St. Francis Academy (now Joliet Catholic Academy) in Joliet, Illinois. Her career started with stand-up comedy and includes film, television and theater. McCarthy is an alumna of "The Groundlings", an improvisational and sketch comedy troupe based in Los Angeles, California,
Career.
In 1997 she appeared in an episode of the NBC comedy series "Jenny". From 2000 to 2003 she played supporting roles in the films "Disney's The Kid", "Charlie's Angels", "Go", "The Third Wheel" and "The Life of David Gale". She also did voice work in three episodes of "Kim Possible", where she played DNAmy.
From 2000 to 2007 she played the role of Sookie St. James, the loveable control freak and scatterbrain/klutzy best friend of Lorelai Gilmore on the The WB television series "Gilmore Girls". In 2007, she acted opposite Ryan Reynolds in "The Nines", written and directed by John August. McCarthy played Dena on the ABC sitcom "Samantha Who?" from 2007 to 2009. She also was a guest star in TV series "Rita Rocks" in 2009 and "Private Practice" in 2010.
In 2010, she played character roles in films "The Back-Up Plan" and "Life as We Know It". Since 2010 McCarthy has played a leading role as Molly Flynn on the CBS hit sitcom "Mike & Molly". In 2011, she received her first Emmy award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her role on "Mike & Molly".
In 2011, McCarthy's career soared to new heights with her breakout comedic performance in the hit film "Bridesmaids" alongside Kristen Wiig, Maya Rudolph, Rose Byrne, Wendi McLendon-Covey and Ellie Kemper. McCarthy received critical acclaim and an Academy Award nomination for her performance. In June 2011, she hosted the "Women in Film Crystal + Lucy Awards". She appeared as the host of "Saturday Night Live" on October 1, 2011.
McCarthy plays a role in the 2012 movie "This Is 40", the sequel to Judd Apatow's film Knocked Up. She starred in the film "Identity Thief" with Jason Bateman. She will also star in the upcoming films "The Heat", with Sandra Bullock, and "Tammy". McCarthy is also the author and producer of an upcoming CBS pilot.
Personal life.
McCarthy married her longtime boyfriend, Ben Falcone, an actor and alumnus of The Groundlings, on October 8, 2005. They have two daughters, Vivian, born May 5, 2007, and Georgette, born in March 2010. McCarthy's pregnancy with Vivian was written into the last season of "Gilmore Girls".
