Chelyabinsk () is a city and the administrative center of Chelyabinsk Oblast, Russia, located in the northeast of the oblast, south of Yekaterinburg, just to the east of the Ural Mountains, on the Miass River, on the border of Europe and Asia.
 Population: 
History.
The fortress of Chelyaba, from which the city takes its name, was constructed on the site in 1736; town status was granted to it in 1781. Around 1900, it served as a center for the construction of the Trans-Siberian Railway. According to official statistics the population on January 1, 1913 was 45,000 inhabitants.
For several months during the Russian Civil War, Chelyabinsk was held by the White movement and Czechoslovak Legions, becoming a center for splinters of the Romanian Volunteer Corps in Russia. The city later fell to Bolshevik Russian forces.
In the decades after the Finnish Civil War in 1918, some 15,000 "Red" Finns defected into the Soviet Union. About 2000 of them were transferred to Chelyabinsk via railway. In 1938, during the Great Purge, around 1000 of them were executed, the largest single action being shooting of 252 Finns on March 10 and 13 in Chelyabinsk. Their mass grave is located near the Zolonyi Gora's former gold mine, and today bears a small memorial.
During the Soviet industrialization of the 1930s, Chelyabinsk experienced rapid growth. Several industrial establishments, including the Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant and the Chelyabinsk Metallurgical Plant, were built at this time. During World War II, Joseph Stalin decided to move a large part of Soviet factory production to places out of the way of the advancing German armies in late 1941. This brought new industries and thousands of workers to Chelyabinsk—still essentially a small city. Several enormous facilities for the production of T-34 tanks and Katyusha rocket launchers existed in Chelyabinsk, which became known as "Tankograd" (Tank City). Chelyabinsk was essentially built from scratch during this time. A small town existed before this, signs of which can be found in the centre of the city. The S.M. Kirov Factory no. 185 moved here from Leningrad to produce heavy tanks — it was transferred to Omsk after 1962.
Nuclear research.
Chelyabinsk has had a long association (since the 1940s) with top-secret nuclear research, though this is more properly applicable to Chelyabinsk "Oblast" as a whole, as nuclear facilities such as Chelyabinsk-70 (Snezhinsk) are, or were, located far outside the city. A serious nuclear accident occurred in 1957 at the Mayak nuclear fuel reprocessing plant, 150 km north-west of the city, which caused deaths in Chelyabinsk Oblast but not in the city. The province was closed to all foreigners until 1992 other than a British medical team following a two-train rail explosion in the mid 1980s.
2013 meteor.
Shortly after dawn on February 15, 2013, a meteor descended at over over the Ural Mountains, exploding at an altitude of in a momentary flash as bright as the sun and generating a shockwave that injured more than 1,000 people. Fragments fell in and around Chelyabinsk. Interior Ministry spokesman Vadim Kolesnikov said 1,100 people had called for medical assistance following the incident, mostly for treatment of injuries from glass broken by the explosions. One woman suffered a broken spine. Kolesnikov also said about of a roof at a zinc factory had collapsed. A spokeswoman for the Emergency Ministry told the Associated Press that there was a meteor shower, but another ministry spokeswoman was quoted by the Interfax news agency as saying it was a single meteor.
Administrative and municipal status.
Chelyabinsk is the administrative center of the oblast. Within the framework of administrative divisions, it is incorporated as the City of Chelyabinsk—an administrative unit with the status equal to that of the districts. As a municipal division, the City of Chelyabinsk is incorporated as Chelyabinsky Urban Okrug.
Education.
There are over a dozen universities in Chelyabinsk. The main ones are South Ural State University, Chelyabinsk State University and Chelyabinsk Medical Academy.
Economy.
Chelyabinsk is one of the major industrial centers of Russia. Heavy industry predominates, especially metallurgy and military machinery, notably the Chelyabinsk Metallurgical Combinate (CMK, ChMK), Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant (CTZ, ChTZ), Chelyabinsk Electrode plant (CHEZ), Chelyabinsk Tube Rolling Plant (ChTPZ) and Chelyabinsk Forge-and-Press Plant (ChKPZ).
Transportation.
Chelyabinsk Metro.
Chelyabinsk started construction of a three-line subway network in the early 1980s. It is proceeding slowly using the New Austrian Tunneling method. Pending financing, the opening of the first section is scheduled for 2017.
Airport.
The city is served by the Chelyabinsk Airport.
Pollution.
The city has been reported as being one of the most polluted places on Earth, having previously been a center of production of weapons-grade plutonium.
Sports.
Traktor Chelyabinsk are Chelyabinsk's professional hockey team, playing in the top-tier Kontinental Hockey League since 2008, having been founded in 1948. Traktor plays their home matches at the Traktor Sport Palace.
FC Chelyabinsk is an association football club which has played in the city since 1977. As of 2013, the club plays in the Russian Second Division, the third tier of Russian association football.
