The 20/20 Experience is the upcoming third studio album by American recording artist Justin Timberlake. It will be released on March 15, 2013 by RCA Records. "The 20/20 Experience" is the first studio album to be released by Timberlake since his musical hiatus and move to RCA Records. The album was recorded between June 2012 and 2013, during promotion of Timberlake's films. As executive producer, Timberlake enlisted previous collaborators Timbaland, Jerome "J-Roc" Harmon.
Background.
In September 2006, Timberlake released his second studio album "FutureSex/LoveSounds". Critically and commercially acclaimed, the album spawned six singles, including the worldwide hits "SexyBack", "My Love" and "What Goes Around... Comes Around". After wrapping up a worldwide concert tour in support of the album in 2007, Timberlake took a break from his music career to focus on acting. In addition, Timberlake worked behind-the-scenes with his record label Tennman Records (founded in 2007) and his production team The Y's (founded in 2008). He also provided guest vocals on several singles by other artists, such as "4 Minutes" by Madonna and "Carry Out" by Timbaland. In June 2011, Timberlake and Specific Media Group jointly purchased Myspace for approximately $35 million. Timberlake promised to put in the work to make Myspace, a once-dominant social network pioneer that "fell on hard times", relevant again.
In August 2012, producer Jim Beanz reported that Timberlake started working on his new music project. However, shortly after the announcement, Timberlake's publicist revealed that there were no current plans for a new Timberlake album, affirming instead that Timberlake was working with Timbaland on songs for his upcoming project "Shock Value III".
Title.
During an interview with American radio and television host Ryan Seacrest, Timberlake explained the meaning behind the albums title saying “It more or less came out of I was playing some of the stuff for my friends and they would come in and out of the studio and I’d say, ‘What do you think of this?’ And my best friend said, ‘This is music that you can see,’ and for some reason that stuck with me.”
Release and promotion.
Live performances.
Timberlake performed during the Super Bowl weekend, in which he debuted two new songs from the album, “Pusher Love Girl” and “That Girl”. Timberlake also performed Suit & Tie with Jay-Z at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards on February 10, 2013, followed by a sold-out concert at the Palladium in Los Angeles later that evening. Timberlake also performed second single "Mirrors" at the Brit Awards 2013 ceremony at the O2 Arena in London on February 20, 2013.
Singles.
"Suit & Tie" featuring rapper Jay-Z was released as the album's lead single on January 14, 2013. It is a mid-tempo R&B song that "floats along" like a song from the American band The Whispers. The single received generally positive reviews from music critics with some of them comparing to Timberlake's previous works including "Rock Your Body" and "SexyBack". The music video for "Suit & Tie" was shot on January 25, 2013. It was directed by David Fincher, who previously directed "The Social Network" (2010), a film in which Timberlake starred. Commercially, it was a success and managed to reach the top ten positions in ten countries. It reached number three on the UK Singles Chart and number four on the US "Billboard" Hot 100.
