Dallas is an American prime time television soap opera. The series is a continuation of the original series of the same name that aired on CBS from 1978 to 1991 (though it does not follow the events of the TV movies ' (1996) and ' (1998)). It includes several actors/characters from the original series and focuses mainly on Christopher Ewing and John Ross Ewing III, the adult sons of Ewing brothers Bobby and J.R., respectively and their relationships with their fathers. 
The series is made for TNT, sister company to Warner Bros. Television, which has owned the original series since its purchase of Lorimar Productions (the original show's production company) in 1989. On July 8, 2011, after viewing the completed pilot episode, TNT gave a green light for the series with a 10-episode order, which premiered on June 13, 2012. 
Advance screening reviews of the series were generally positive from critics on Metacritic.
On June 29, 2012, TNT renewed "Dallas" for a second season consisting of 15 episodes, which premiered on January 28, 2013.
On November 23, 2012, Larry Hagman (who played J.R. Ewing) died of acute myeloid leukemia. On December 11, the producers announced that J. R. Ewing's funeral will take place in the second season.
Plot.
The series revolves around the Ewings, a wealthy Dallas family in the oil and cattle-ranching industries. It focuses mainly on Christopher Ewing (Jesse Metcalfe), the adopted son of Bobby (Patrick Duffy) and Pamela (Barnes) Ewing. and John Ross Ewing III (Josh Henderson), the son of J. R. (Larry Hagman) and Sue Ellen Ewing (Linda Gray). Both John Ross and Christopher were born during the original series' run and were featured in it as children (although played by different actors). Now grown up, John Ross has become almost a carbon copy of his father, bent on oil, money, and greed. Christopher, meanwhile, has become a lot like Bobby, in that he is more interested in the upkeep of Southfork Ranch, much like his father and late grandmother, Miss Ellie. As an additional point of contention, Christopher is also becoming a player in alternative energy (methane clathrate recovery), thereby eschewing the oil business. However John Ross is determined to resurrect the Ewings' former position in the oil industry.
Alongside John Ross and Christopher, original series characters Bobby, J. R., and Sue Ellen return in full capacity for the new series. Additional familiar characters, including J. R.'s and Bobby's niece Lucy Ewing Cooper (Charlene Tilton), their half brother Ray Krebbs (Steve Kanaly), and Ewing family rival Cliff Barnes (Ken Kercheval) appear occasionally as guest stars.
New main characters include Bobby's third wife, Ann (Brenda Strong); Christopher's wife Rebecca (Julie Gonzalo); and Elena Ramos (Jordana Brewster), the daughter of the Ewing family cook, who is caught in a love triangle with Christopher and John Ross.
Development and production.
In 2010, TNT announced it would order a pilot for the continuation of the "Dallas" series. The pilot was filmed in and around the city of Dallas in early 2011. Production began in late August 2011 in Dallas on the remaining nine episodes in the first season order, based in studios constructed for the FOX television series "The Good Guys". During the 2012 SAG Awards on January 29, Patrick Duffy told "TV Guide" the cast was returning to the set the following Monday to film the season finale. 
Executive producer Cynthia Cidre wrote the pilot script, while Michael M. Robin served as the director and executive producer for the pilot. The pilot script is based on characters created by David Jacobs. A sneak preview of the series, including clips from the pilot episode, aired on July 11, 2011, during an episode of TNT's "Rizzoli & Isles". Duffy stated that the new show is "exactly the same the old show, but it's 2012. We consider this year 14 of the show. It's exactly as if forgot which channel we were on."
Jacobs reviewed the original pilot script and gave his blessing to the new series; he otherwise has chosen not to participate in its production. A dispute erupted when the opening credits were originally planned to read "Developed by Cynthia Cidre, based on "Dallas" created by David Jacobs". But upon the determination of the Writers Guild of America's screenwriting credit system, there are currently two separate credits: one listing Jacobs as the show's sole creator and another listing Cidre as the new show's developer.
Unlike the original series, which did limited location shooting in Texas but was filmed primarily in Los Angeles, principal photography for the new series takes place in and around Dallas. The new series is also doing location shooting at the actual Southfork Ranch in the northern Dallas suburb of Parker, Texas.
Continuity.
The new series is a continuation of the old series following a 20-year break, during which the characters and their relationships continued unseen until today. It does not take the events of the TV movies ' or ' into context. Instead, we find the characters having evolved over the last 20 years. Cynthia Cidre, show developer, has confirmed that the new series does not pick up from where the TV movies left off, because the movies had tried to resolve lingering plot lines in two hours. It continues from the events of the 14th season, their development and consequences extrapolated to 2012.
International broadcast.
In the UK, "Dallas" is screened on Channel 5 from September 5, 2012. In Canada, the series airs on Bravo. In Australia, the series aired on the Nine Network; however, after a few episodes, it was rested due to poor ratings. In Italy, the series was aired on Canale 5 as it was in the early 1980's, but after only two weeks it was cancelled due to poor ratings; the rest of season 1 was aired on La5, another Mediaset channel.
