"The Simpsons" is an American animated television sitcom created by Matt Groening for the Fox Broadcasting Company. It is a satirical parody of a middle class American lifestyle epitomized by its eponymous family, which consists of Homer, Marge, Bart, Lisa and Maggie. The show is set in the fictional town of Springfield, and lampoons American culture, society and television, and many aspects of the human condition. The family was conceived by Groening shortly before a pitch for a series of animated shorts with producer James L. Brooks. Groening created a dysfunctional family and named the characters after members of his own family, substituting Bart for his own name. The shorts became a part of the Fox series "The Tracey Ullman Show" on April 19, 1987. After a three-season run, the sketch was developed into a half-hour prime-time show that was an early hit for Fox.
Since its debut on December 17, 1989, "The Simpsons" has broadcast episodes and its twenty-fourth season premiered on September 30, 2012. The show holds several American television longevity records. It is the longest-running prime-time animated series and longest-running sitcom in the United States. In February 2012, "The Simpsons" reached its 500th episode in the twenty-third season. With its twenty-second season (2010/11), the series surpassed "Gunsmoke" in seasons to claim the spot as the longest-running American prime-time scripted television series. However, "Gunsmoke"'s episode count of 635 episodes surpasses "The Simpsons". 
Episodes of "The Simpsons" have won dozens of awards, including 27 Emmy Awards (with ten for Outstanding Animated Program), 30 Annie Awards, and a Peabody Award. "The Simpsons Movie", a feature-length film, was released in theaters worldwide on July 26 and July 27, 2007 and grossed US$526.2 million worldwide. The first fifteen seasons are available on DVD in Regions 1, 2 and 4, with the twentieth season released on both DVD and Blu-ray in 2010 to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the series.
Series overview.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
Ratings.
With its first season, "The Simpsons" became the Fox network's first series to rank among the top 30 highest-rated shows of a television season. Due to this success, Fox decided to switch "The Simpsons" timeslot in hopes that it would result in higher ratings for the shows that would air after it. The series moved from 8:00 p.m. on Sunday nights to the same time on Thursdays where it competed with "The Cosby Show", the number one show at the time. Many of the producers were against the move, as "The Simpsons" had been in the top 10 while airing on Sunday and they felt the move would destroy its ratings. Ratings wise, new episodes of "The Cosby Show" beat "The Simpsons" every time during the second season and "The Simpsons" eventually fell out of the top 10. At the end of the season "Cosby" averaged as the fifth highest-rated show on television while "The Simpsons" was 38th. The show continued in its Thursday timeslot until the sixth season, when it reverted back to its original Sunday slot. It has remained there ever since.
The difference between the rank from season 11 to 12 is not a reflection of a huge audience gain, but rather that the show did better in terms of actual viewers in comparison with other shows.
