Carey Hannah Mulligan (born 28 May 1985) is an English actress. She made her film debut as Kitty Bennet in "Pride & Prejudice" (2005). She had roles in numerous British programmes and, in 2008, made her Broadway debut in "The Seagull" to critical acclaim. 
In 2009, she gained widespread recognition for playing the lead role of Jenny in "An Education", winning a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role and also being nominated for a Golden Globe Award and an Academy Award for her performance. She went on to star in dramatic films such as "The Greatest", "", "Never Let Me Go", "Drive", and "Shame".
Early life.
Mulligan was born in Westminster, London, England to a middle-class family. Her father, Stephen, was originally from Liverpool, and her mother, Nano (née Booth), is from Llandeilo in West Wales. Her paternal great-grandfather emigrated from Ireland. She has an older brother, Owain, who is a captain in the British Army. He served in Iraq (Territorial Army) and Afghanistan (British Army). Mulligan's mother is a college lecturer and her father is a hotel manager. When she was three, her family moved to Germany when her father was hired to manage a hotel there. While living in Germany, Mulligan and her brother attended the International School of Düsseldorf. As a teenager, she was educated at Woldingham School in Surrey, England. Mulligan was the student head of the drama department there.
Her interest in acting sparked from watching her brother perform in a school production of "The King and I" when she was six. When Mulligan was 16, she attended a production of Henry V, starring Kenneth Branagh. His performance emboldened her and reinforced her belief that she wanted to pursue a career in acting. Mulligan wrote a letter to Branagh's mail listing asking him for advice. "I explained that my parents didn't want me to act, but that I felt it was my vocation in life", she said. Kenneth Branagh's sister wrote Mulligan back saying, "Kenneth says that if you feel such a strong need to be an actress, you must be an actress." 
At 17, without telling her disapproving parents, she applied to three London drama schools, but she was rejected by them. During her final year in Woldingham School, actor/screenwriter Julian Fellowes came to give a lecture at her school on the making of Gosford Park. Mulligan briefly talked to Fellowes after this lecture and asked him for advice in making a career out of acting. He told her not to bother with the profession, and that she should instead "marry a lawyer". Undeterred, she later sent Fellowes a letter, saying that she was serious about her acting. Several weeks later, Fellowes' wife, Emma, replied back, telling Mulligan that she and her husband were going to host a dinner for young, aspiring actors to help them out, and Mulligan was invited to join them. This led to Mulligan getting in touch with a casting assistant and getting a chance to audition for a role in Pride and Prejudice. Mulligan auditioned three times, eventually winning the part of Kitty Bennett. During her late teens and early 20's, Mulligan worked as a barmaid in several pubs and as an errand-runner for Ealing Studios in between acting jobs.
Career.
In 2004, at the age of 19, Mulligan made her professional acting debut on stage in the play "Forty Winks" at the Royal Court Theatre in London. She made her film debut following year in Pride & Prejudice, the 2005 period piece film adaptation of the Jane Austen novel, portraying Kitty Bennet. Later that year, she auditioned for and won the role of orphan Ada Clare in the BAFTA award-winning BBC adaption of Charles Dickens' "Bleak House", her television debut. Among her 2007 projects were "My Boy Jack", starring Daniel Radcliffe that features her in a supporting role. Mulligan identified with her role Elsie, who vociferously opposes her brother going to war. She earned a Constellation Award for playing the main character Sally Sparrow in an episode of "Doctor Who". She rounded out 2007 by appearing in an acclaimed revival of "The Seagull", in which she played Nina to Kristin Scott Thomas' Arkadina and Chiwetel Ejiofor's Trigorin. "The Daily Telegraph" said her performance was "quite extraordinarily radiating'" and "The Observer" called her "almost unbearably affecting." While in the middle of the production, she had to have an appendectomy, preventing her from being able to perform for a week. For her debut Broadway performance in the 2008 American transfer of "The Seagull", she was nominated for a Drama Desk Award, but lost to Angela Lansbury.
Her big breakthrough came when, at 22, she was cast in her first leading role as Jenny in the 2009 independent film "An Education", directed by Danish filmmaker Lone Scherfig and written by Nick Hornby. Over a hundred actresses auditioned for the part, but Mulligan's audition impressed Scherfig the most. The film and Mulligan's performance received rave reviews, and she was nominated for an Academy Award, Screen Actors Guild, Golden Globe, and won a BAFTA Award. Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" and Todd McCarthy of "Variety" both compared her performance to that of Audrey Hepburn. "Rolling Stone"'s Peter Travers described her as having given a "sensational, starmaking performance," while Claudia Puig of "USA Today" felt that Mulligan had one of the year's best performances, and Toby Young of "The Times" felt she anchored the film. Writing in "The Guardian", Peter Bradshaw concluded that she gave a "wonderful performance." For her work, she garnered Golden Globe, Academy Award and Screen Actors Guild Awards nominations, as well as receiving a British Academy Film Award. Mulligan was a recipient of the Shooting Stars Award from the 2009 Berlin International Film Festival and received a BAFTA Rising Star Award nomination, which is voted on by the British public.
She next starred in independent film "The Greatest" 2010) as the pregnant girlfriend of a boy who dies; her involvement with the project helped it "tremendously", according to the director. It opened to mixed reviews, but Mulligan's performance was generally praised. After being selected to join The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, she won a British Independent Award for "Never Let Me Go", an adaption of the 2005 Kazuo Ishiguro's novel, which she starred in and narrated and was released in September 2010 - competing against her other project, the Oliver Stone-directed film "". The latter, a sequel to the 1987 movie, is about a new story of greed and power. Screened out of competition at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival, it was her first major studio project. Later that year she also provided vocals for the song "Write About Love" by Belle & Sebastian.
2011-present.
Mulligan returned to the stage in the Atlantic Theater Company's off-Broadway play "Through a Glass, Darkly" from 13 May – 3 July 2011, acting as the central character, a mentally unstable woman, to glowing praise from reviewers. Ben Brantley, theater critic for "The New York Times", wrote that Mulligan's performance was "acting of the highest order"; he also described her as "extraordinary" and "one of the finest actresses of her generation.", She co-starred in the critically acclaimed 2011 neo-noir thriller "Drive", which was directed by Danish filmmaker Nicholas Winding Refn and starred Ryan Gosling and Albert Brooks Mulligan was nominated for her second BAFTA award for the film: Best Supporting Actress. Drive was nominated for a total of 4 BAFTA awards, including Best Picture and Best Director. Mulligan began filming Steve McQueen's sex-addiction drama "Shame" alongside Michael Fassbender in New York in January 2011. Both films were shown at the 2011 Toronto International Film Festival, and received vast critical acclaim. Of her performance in "Shame", "Rolling Stone" film critic Peter Travers wrote, "Mulligan is in every way sensational." Away from acting, Mulligan will be a co-chairmen alongside Anna Wintour for the 2012 Met Ball Gala. She will also star as Daisy Buchanan opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in "The Great Gatsby". 
Additionally, the actress will reunite with "Drive" filmmaker Nicolas Winding Refn for "I Walk With the Dead" and play the female lead in the Coen Brothers' "Inside Llewyn Davis". Other upcoming projects for her include the lead roles in an adaptation of "My Fair Lady" and "On Chesil Beach", as well as a part in the science fiction project titled, "Outback", developed by GK Films.
Personal life.
Mulligan dated American actor and "Wall Street: Money Never Sleeps" co-star Shia LaBeouf from August 2009 to October 2010. In August 2011, she became engaged to Mumford & Sons lead singer Marcus Mumford. The couple married on 21 April 2012 in Somerset, England.
In 2012, Mulligan became the ambassador of the Alzheimer's Society, with the goal of raising awareness and research funding for Alzheimers and dementia. Her grandmother suffers from Alzheimers and no longer recognizes her. Mulligan was among the actresses who took part in the Safe Project - each was photographed in the place she feels safest - for a series to raise awareness of sex trafficking. She donated the Vionnet gown she wore at the 2010 BAFTAs to the Curiosity Shop, which sells its donations to raise money for Oxfam.
