Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by immoderate food restriction and irrational fear of gaining weight, as well as a distorted body self-perception. It typically involves excessive weight loss and is usually found more in females than in males. Due to the fear of gaining weight, people with this disorder restrict the amount of food they consume. This restriction of food intake causes metabolic and hormonal disorders. Outside of medical literature, the terms anorexia nervosa and anorexia are often used interchangeably; however, anorexia is simply a medical term for lack of appetite, and people with anorexia nervosa do not in fact, lose their appetites. Anorexia nervosa has many complicated implications and may be thought of as a lifelong illness that may never be truly cured, but only managed over time. Patients suffering from Anorexia nervosa may experience dizziness, headaches, drowsiness and a lack of energy. 
Anorexia nervosa is characterized by low body weight, inappropriate eating habits, obsession with having a thin figure, and the fear of gaining weight. It is often coupled with a distorted self image which may be maintained by various cognitive biases that alter how the affected individual evaluates and thinks about her or his body, food and eating. Those suffering from anorexia often view themselves as "too fat" even if they are already underweight. They may practice repetitive weighing, measuring, and mirror gazing, alongside other obsessive actions to make sure they are still thin, a common practice known as "body checking". 
Anorexia nervosa most often has its onset in adolescence and is more prevalent among adolescent females than adolescent males. However, more recent studies show the onset age has decreased from an average of 13 to 17 years of age to 9 to 12. While it can affect men and women of any age, race, and socioeconomic and cultural background, anorexia nervosa occurs in ten times more females than males. 
People with anorexia nervosa continue to feel hunger, but they deny themselves all but very small quantities of food. The average caloric intake of a person with anorexia nervosa is 600–800 calories per day, but extreme cases of complete self-starvation are known. It is a serious mental illness with a high incidence of comorbidity and similarly high mortality rates to serious psychiatric disorders. People suffering from anorexia have extremely high levels of ghrelin (the hunger hormone that signals a physiological desire for food) in their blood. The high levels of ghrelin suggests that their bodies are trying to desperately switch the hunger aspect on; however, that hunger call is being suppressed, ignored, or overridden. Nevertheless, one small single-blind study found that intravenous administration of ghrelin to anorexia nervosa patients increased food intake by 12–36% over the trial period. 
The term anorexia nervosa was established in 1873 by Sir William Gull, one of Queen Victoria's personal physicians. The term is of Greek origin: "an-" (ἀν-, prefix denoting negation) and "orexis" (ὄρεξις, "appetite"), thus meaning a lack of desire to eat. However, while the term "anorexia nervosa" literally means "neurotic loss of appetite", the literal meaning of the term is somewhat misleading. Many anorexics do enjoy eating and have certainly not lost their appetites as the term "loss of appetite" is normally understood; it is better to regard anorexia nervosa as a self-punitive addiction to fasting, rather than a literal loss of appetite.
Signs and symptoms.
Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by attempts to lose weight, sometimes to the point of starvation. A person with anorexia nervosa may exhibit a number of signs and symptoms, the type and severity of which may vary in each case and may be present but not readily apparent. Anorexia nervosa, and the associated malnutrition that results from self-imposed starvation, can cause severe complications in every major organ system in the body.
Hypokalaemia, a drop in the level of Potassium in the blood, is a sign of anorexia nervosa. A significant drop in potassium can cause abnormal heart rhythms, constipation, fatigue, muscle damage and paralysis.
Between 50% and 75% of individuals with an eating disorder experience depression. In addition, one in every four individuals who are diagnosed with anorexia nervosa also exhibit Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Anorexia nervosa vs. bulimia nervosa.
Although anorexia nervosa has many similarities with Bulimia nervosa, a critical difference between the two is that anorexia nervosa is also partly caused by the personality traits of perfectionism and obsessive compulsive tendencies. Whereas the main reason motivating people with bulimia nervosa tends to be self-perceived body image, people affected with anorexia nervosa are also driven to diet based on their desperate need to retain some control in their lives. For many, monitoring their food intake is the only control they can have.
Causes.
Studies have hypothesized the continuance of disordered eating patterns may be epiphenomena of starvation. The results of the Minnesota Starvation Experiment showed normal controls exhibit many of the behavioral patterns of anorexia nervosa (AN) when subjected to starvation. This may be due to the numerous changes in the neuroendocrine system, which results in a self-perpetuating cycle. Studies have suggested the initial weight loss such as dieting may be the triggering factor in developing AN in some cases, possibly because of an already inherent predisposition toward AN. One study reported cases of AN resulting from unintended weight loss that resulted from varied causes, such as a parasitic infection, medication side effects, and surgery. The weight loss itself was the triggering factor. Even though anorexia does not affect males in comparison to females, studies have shown that males with a female twin have a higher chance of getting anorexia. Therefore anorexia may be linked to parental exposure to female hormones.
Environmental.
Sociocultural studies have highlighted the role of cultural factors, such as the promotion of thinness as the ideal female form in Western industrialized nations, particularly through the media. There is a necessary connection between anorexia nervosa and culture and whether culture is a cause, a trigger, or merely a kind of social address or envelope which determines in which segments of society or in which cultures anorexia nervosa will appear. The strong thesis of this connection is that culture acts as a cause by providing a blueprint for anorexia nervosa. A moderate thesis is that a specific cultural factors trigger the illness which is determined by many factors including family interactions, individual psychology, or biological predisposition. Culture change can trigger the emergence of anorexia in adolescent girls from immigrant families living in highly industrialized Western Societies. A recent epidemiological study of 989,871 Swedish residents indicated that gender, ethnicity and socio-economic status were large influences on the chance of developing anorexia, with those with non-European parents among the least likely to be diagnosed with the condition, and those in wealthy, white families being most at risk. People in professions where there is a particular social pressure to be thin (such as models and dancers) were much more likely to develop anorexia during the course of their career, and further research has suggested that those with anorexia have much higher contact with cultural sources that promote weight-loss.
Anorexia nervosa is more likely to occur in a person's pubertal years, especially for girls. Female students are 10 times more likely to suffer from anorexia nervosa than male students. According to a survey of 1799 Japanese female high school students, "85% who were a normal weight wanted to be thinner and 45% who were 10–20% underweight wanted to be thinner." Teenage girls concerned about their weight and who believe that slimness is more attractive among peers trend to weight-control behaviors. Teen girls are learning from each other to consume low-caloric, low-fat foods and diet pills. This results in lack of nutrition and a greater chance of developing anorexia nervosa.
It has also been noted that anorexia nervosa is more likely to occur in populations in which obesity is more prevalent. It has been suggested that anorexia nervosa results from a sexually selected evolutionary drive to appear youthful in populations in which size becomes the primary indicator of age.
There is also evidence to suggest that patients who have anorexia nervosa can be characterised by alexithymia and also a deficit in certain emotional functions. A research study showed that this was the case in both adult and adolescent anorexia nervosa patients.
There is a high rate of reported child sexual abuse experiences in clinical groups of who have been diagnosed with anorexia. The connection between eating disorders and abuse has been convincingly evidenced by a number of studies, including one published in Epidemiology (and strengthened by blind hypothesis survey), which showed in a comparison of women with no history of eating disorders, women with a history of eating disorders were twice as likely to have reported childhood sexual abuse. While the joint effect of both physical and sexual abuse resulted in a nearly 4-fold risk of eating disorders that met DSM-IV criteria. It is thought that links between childhood abuse and sexual abuse are complex, such as by influencing psychologic processes that increase a woman's susceptibility to the development of an eating disorder, or perhaps by producing changes in psychobiologic process and neurotransmitting function, associated with eating behaviour.
Recent efforts have been made to dispel some of the myths around anorexia nervosa and eating disorders, such as the misconception that families, in particular mothers, are responsible for their daughter developing an eating disorder.
Media effects.
Media are among the principal social agents in many societies around the world. Television, magazines, newspapers, radio, cinema, advertising, the Internet, and other so-called "new media" or "new technologies" are the principal factors behind body dissatisfaction, concerns about weight, and disordered eating behaviour. Mass media interventions frequently offer a distorted vision of the world, and it may be difficult for children and adolescents to distinguish whether what they see is real or not, so that they are more vulnerable to the messages transmitted. Field, Cheung, et al's survey of 548 preadolescent and adolescent girls found that 69% acknowledged that images in magazines had influenced their conception of the ideal body, while 47% reported that they wanted to lose weight after seeing such images. There was also the survey by Utter et al. who studied 4,746 adolescent boys and girls demonstrating the tendency of magazine articles and advertisements to activate weight concerns and weight management behaviour. He discovered that girls who frequently read fashion and glamour magazines and girls who frequently read articles about diets and issues related to weight loss were seven times more likely to practice a range of unhealthy weight control behaviours and six times more likely to engage in extremely unhealthy weight control behaviours (e.g., taking diet pills, vomiting, using laxatives, and using diuretics) from magazines, websites that stress the message of thinness as the ideal have surfaced the internet and has managed to embed itself as an increasing source of influence. The possibility that pro-anorexia websites may reinforce restrictive eating and exercise behaviours is an area of concern. Pro-anorexia websites contain images and writing that support the pursuit of an ideal thin body image. Research has shown that these websites stress thinness as the ideal choice for women and in some websites ideal images of muscularity and thinness for men It has also been shown that women who had viewed these websites at least once had a decrease in self esteem and reports also show an increased likelihood of future engagement in many negative behaviours related to food, exercise, and weight. Evidence of the value of thinness in majority U.S culture is found in Hollywood's elite and the media promotion of waif models in fashion and celebrity circles (e.g. Nicole Richie, Mary Kate Olsen, and Kate Moss). indeed, being underweight or severely thin has become synonymous with being sexy, and the social scrutiny for individuals who do not conform to this expectation is also obvious. The recent case of negative media attention focused on the 5-lb weight gain of Cheryl Burke, a professional dancer on a popular television reality show, or the recent media attention on the weight of talk show hostess and former supermodel, Tyra Banks; this negative attention brings upon the importance for public education against the residue of anorexia 
Relationship to autism.
Since Gillberg's (1983 & 1985) and others' initial suggestion of relationship between anorexia nervosa and autism, a large-scale longitudinal study into teenage-onset anorexia nervosa conducted in Sweden confirmed that 23% of people with a long-standing eating disorder are on the autism spectrum. Those on autism spectrum tend to have a worse outcome, but may benefit from the combined use of behavioural and pharmacological therapies tailored to ameliorate autism rather than anorexia nervosa "per se". Other studies, most notably research conducted at the Maudsley Hospital, UK, furthermore suggest that autistic traits are common in people with anorexia nervosa; shared traits include, "e.g.", poor executive function, autism quotient score, central coherence, theory of mind, cognitive-behavioural flexibility, emotion regulation and understanding facial expressions.
Zucker "et al." (2007) proposed that conditions on the autism spectrum make up the cognitive endophenotype underlying anorexia nervosa and appealed for increased interdisciplinary collaboration (see figure to right). A pilot study into the effectiveness cognitive behaviour therapy, which based its treatment protocol on the hypothesised relationship between anorexia nervosa and an underlying autistic like condition, reduced perfectionism and rigidity in 17 out of 19 participants.
Diagnosis.
Medical.
The initial diagnosis should be made by a competent medical professional. There are multiple medical conditions, such as viral or bacterial infections, hormonal imbalances, neurodegenerative diseases and brain tumors which may mimic psychiatric disorders including anorexia nervosa.
Psychological.
Not only does starvation result in physical complications, but mental complications as well. It has been shown that eating disorders such as anorexia nervosa are reinforced by reward and attention. P. Sodersten and colleagues suggest that effective treatment of this disorder depends on re-establishing reinforcement for normal eating behaviours instead of unhealthy weight loss.
Anorexia nervosa is classified as an Axis I disorder in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Health Disorders (DSM-IV), published by the American Psychiatric Association. The DSM-IV should not be used by laypersons to diagnose themselves.
Dr. Hilde Bruch, in her 1973 book, "Eating Disorders: Obesity, Anorexia Nervosa, and the Person Within", explains that Anorexia Nervosa is "not a static condition," but one that continually provokes new problems with its various stages. She writes, "The state of starvation is associated by marked psychological changes... camouflaged by rationalizations." She identifies the family interaction becomes difficult, marked by rising anxiety, annoyance and resentment. It also brings about social isolation. (Bruch 215).
Dr. Bruch believed that anorexia, which is simply not eating enough, as a result from schizophrenia, depression, or esophageal problems often were misdiagnosed as "anorexia nervosa". In her assessment, this blurred the definition of anorexia nervosa. For this reason, she distinguished between, what she calls "atypical" and "primary" cases of anorexia nervosa. The atypical cases of anorexia were brought about by a range of stimuli (from schizophrenia to depression, as noted above). (Bruch 227).
In contrast to the atypical group, Bruch observed "primary", or "genuine anorexia nervosa", "amazingly uniform". The first outstanding symptom is "disturbance of delusional proportions in the body image". The second outstanding characteristic is "disturbance in the accuracy of their perception or cognitive interpretation of stimuli arising from the body... failure to recognize hunger and denial of fatigue". The third outstanding characteristic is a "paralyzing sense of ineffectiveness". "Anorexics struggle against a feeling of enslaved, exploited, and not being permitted to lead a life of their own. They would rather starve than continue a life of accommodation. In this blind search for a sense of identity and selfhood they will not accept anything that their parents, or the world around them, has to offer." It is a "desperate struggle for a self respecting identity". She understood that the personality disorder (struggle for control, for a sense of identity, competence, and effectiveness) precedes the somatic disorders (such as emaciation, amenorrhea, constipation, etc.) (Bruch 250–255).
Differential diagnoses.
There are various medical and psychological conditions that have been misdiagnosed as anorexia nervosa, in some cases the correct diagnosis was not made for more than ten years. In a reported case of achalasia misdiagnosed as AN, the patient spent two months confined to a psychiatric hospital.
There are various other psychological issues that may factor into anorexia nervosa, some fulfill the criteria for a separate Axis I diagnosis or a personality disorder which is coded Axis II and thus are considered comorbid to the diagnosed eating disorder. Axis II disorders are subtyped into 3 "clusters", A, B and C.The causality between personality disorders and eating disorders has yet to be fully established. Some people have a previous disorder which may increase their vulnerability to developing an eating disorder. Some develop them afterwards. The severity and type of eating disorder symptoms have been shown to affect comorbidity.
BDD is a chronic and debilitating condition which may lead to social isolation, major depression, suicidal ideation and attempts. Neuroimaging studies to measure response to facial recognition have shown activity predominately in the left hemisphere in the left lateral prefrontal cortex, lateral temporal lobe and left parietal lobe showing hemispheric imbalance in information processing. There is a reported case of the development of BDD in a 21 year old male following an inflammatory brain process. Neuroimaging showed the presence of new atrophy in the frontotemporal region.
The distinction between the diagnoses of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS) is often difficult to make as there is considerable overlap between patients diagnosed with these conditions. Seemingly minor changes in a patient's overall behavior or attitude can change a diagnosis from "anorexia: binge-eating type" to bulimia nervosa. It is not unusual for a person with an eating disorder to "move through" various diagnoses as his or her behavior and beliefs change over time.
Treatment.
There is no conclusive evidence that any particular treatment for anorexia nervosa work better than others, however, there is enough evidence to suggest that early intervention and treatment are more effective. Treatment for anorexia nervosa tries to address three main areas. 
Although restoring the person's weight is the primary task at hand, optimal treatment also includes and monitors behavioral change in the individual as well. Not all anorexia nervosa patients recover completely. About 20% of the patients develop anorexia nervosa as a chronic disorder. If anorexia nervosa is not treated, serious complications such as heart conditions and kidney failure can initiate and eventually lead to death. "As many as 6 percent of people with the disorder die from causes related to it."
Dietary.
Diet is the most essential factor to work on in patients with anorexia nervosa, and must be tailored to each patient’s needs. Initial meal plans may be low in calories, about 1200, in order to build comfort in eating, and then food amount can gradually be increased. Food variety is important when establishing meal plans as well as foods that are higher in energy density. Other more specific dietary treatments are listed below.
Prognosis.
The long term prognosis of anorexia is more on the favorable side. The National Comorbidity Replication Survey was conducted among more than 9,282 participants throughout the United States, the results found that the average duration of anorexia nervosa is 1.7 years. ""Contrary to what people may believe, anorexia is not necessarily a chronic illness; in many cases, it runs its course and people get better..."" However, there is still a percentage of 5%-20% of people diagnosed with anorexia nervosa who die from it, and the cause of death is mostly because of the direct health effects of the eating disorder to the body.
In cases of adolescent anorexia nervosa that utilize family-based treatment 75% of patients have a good outcome and an additional 15% show an intermediate yet more positive outcome. In a five year post treatment follow-up of Maudsley Family Therapy the full recovery rate was between 75% and 90%.
Some remedies, however, are proven to not have any value in resolving anorexia – "incarceration in hospital", which prohibits the patient from many basic privileges, such as using the bathroom independently, has been seen as catalysts in increasing weight and pushing patients away from the path to recovery.
Even in severe cases of AN, despite a noted 30% relapse rate after hospitalization, and a lengthy time to recovery ranging from 57 to 79 months, the full recovery rate was still 76%. There were minimal cases of relapse even at the long term follow-up conducted between 10–15 years. The long-term prognosis of anorexia nervosa is changeable: a fifth of patients stay severely ill, another fifth of patients recover fully and three fifths of patients have a fluctuating and chronic course (Gelder, Mayou and Geddes 2005).
Although overall the prognosis may seem favorable, this is not the case for all patients of Anorexia Nervosa. Among psychiatric disorders, Anorexia Nervosa has one of the highest mortality rates because of side effects of the disorder, such as cardiac complications or suicide. In intermediate to long-term studies with juveniles, death rates, on average, have ranged anywhere from 1.8-14.1%. Recovery can be lifelong for some, energy intake and eating habits may never return to normal. Many studies have attempted to study relapse and recovery through longitudinal studies but this is difficult, time consuming, and costly. 
Recovery is also viewed on a spectrum rather than black and white. According to the Morgan-Russell criteria patients can have a good, intermediate, or poor outcome. Even when a patient is classified as having a “good” outcome, weight only has to be within 15% of average and normal menstruation must be present in females. The good outcome also excludes psychological health. Recovery for patients with Anorexia Nervosa is undeniably positive, but recovery does not mean normal.
Relapse.
According to the Eckert study, relapse is greatest in the first year after normal body weight is obtained. This includes right after release from inpatient institutions. Relapse includes a return to food restriction as well as a shift to binge eating habits. 
As stated above, higher energy density in dietary plans is important. Patients with lower dietary energy density in their meals, prior to being discharged, had worse outcomes within the year, therefore a higher likelihood of relapse. This is speculated to be due to fat and fluid consumption. Patients who’s dietary plans included fats and foods containing fats were forced to eat a more realistic and “normal” plan than those with lower energy density. Therefore, when released from inpatient treatment, the patients with higher dietary energy density plans had adopted healthier and more balanced eating habits. A greater food variety in inpatient dietary plans may help lower rates of relapse as well.
Epidemiology.
Anorexia has an average prevalence of 0.3–1% in women and 0.1% in men for the diagnosis in developed countries. The condition largely affects young adolescent women, with between 15 and 19 years old making up 40% of all cases. Approximately 75% of people with anorexia are female. Anorexia nervosa is more prevalent in the upper social classes and it is thought to be rare in less-developed countries (Gelder, Mayou and Geddes 2005). Anorexia is more prevalent in females and males born after 1945 ( Attia and Walsh 2007).
History.
The history of anorexia nervosa begins with descriptions of religious fasting dating from the Hellenistic era and continuing into the medieval period. A number of well known historical figures, including Catherine of Siena and Mary, Queen of Scots are believed to have suffered from the condition.
Of interest in terms of anorexia nervosa is the medieval practice of self-starvation by women, including some young women, in the name of religious piety and purity. This is sometimes referred to as anorexia mirabilis. By the thirteenth century, it was increasingly common for women to participate in religious life . Many women who ultimately became saints engaged in self-starvation, including Saint Hedwig of Andechs in the thirteenth century and Catherine of Siena in the fourteenth century. By the time of Catherine of Siena, however, the Church became concerned about extreme fasting as an indicator of spirituality and as a criterion for sainthood. Indeed, Catherine of Siena was told by Church authorities to pray that she would be able to eat again, but was unable to give up fasting.
The earliest medical descriptions of anorexic illnesses are generally credited to English physician Richard Morton, in 1689. Case descriptions fitting anorexic illnesses continued throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th century. They include the cases of an 18 year old girl treated by Richard Morton in 1689 who refused to eat and died 3 months later. Noah Webster writes of an instructor at Yale College in the 1770s who refused to eat because he believed food was "dulling his mind." 
However it was not until the late 19th century that anorexia nervosa was to be widely accepted by the medical profession as a recognised condition. In 1873, Sir William Gull, one of Queen Victoria's personal physicians, published a seminal paper which established the term "anorexia nervosa" and provided a number of detailed case descriptions and treatments. However, Gull was unable to provide an explanation for anorexia nervosa In the same year, French physician Ernest-Charles Lasègue similarly published details of a number of cases in a paper entitled "De l'Anorexie Histerique".
Awareness of the condition was largely limited to the medical profession until the latter part of the 20th century, when German-American psychoanalyst Hilde Bruch published her popular work "The Golden Cage: the Enigma of Anorexia Nervosa" in 1978. This book created a wider awareness of anorexia nervosa among lay readers. A further important event was the death of the popular singer drummer Karen Carpenter in 1983, which prompted widespread ongoing media coverage of eating disorders. Anorexia has the highest mortality rate of any mental illness and continues to be in the public eye. "Pro-ana” websites range from those claiming to be a safe-space for anorexics to discuss their problems, to those supporting anorexia as a lifestyle choice and offering “thinspiration,” or photos and videos of thin or emaciated women. A survey by Internet security firm Optenet found a 470% increase in pro-ana and pro-mia sites from 2006 to 2007. Many celebrities have come forward discussing their struggles with anorexia, increasing awareness of the disease. Celebrities who have come forward publicly to discuss their experiences with anorexia include singer Fiona Apple, who purposely lost weight to discourage unwanted sexual advances after being raped at age 12, Portia de Rossi, Calista Flockhart, Tracey Gold, whose difficult recovery was well publicized by the media after her weight dropped to 80 pounds on her 5'3 frame and she was hospitalized, Mary-Kate Olsen, Alanis Morissette, and French model Isabelle Caro, who recently died due to complications connected to anorexia.
