Aditi Rao Hydari is an Indian film actress. A classical bharatanatyam dancer, she made her acting debut with Sharada Ramanathan's acclaimed film "Sringaram" (2007) and rose to fame after her performance in Sudhir Mishra's 2011 film "Yeh Saali Zindagi". In 2012 she played the female lead in the movie "London, Paris, New York" opposite Ali Zafar.
Early life.
Aditi Rao was born in Hyderabad in 1978. She is from two royal lineages of Muhammad Saleh Akbar Hydari and Raja J Rameshwar Rao of erstwhile Wanaparthi princely state of Andhra Pradesh. She is the great granddaughter of Akbar Hydari and the grand niece of Muhammad Saleh Akbar Hydari, former Governor of Assam. Her maternal grandfather and grandmother are Raja J Rameshwar Rao, who headed the administration of Wanaparthi state during its day, and Shanta Rameshwar Rao, a much respected educationist in the city of Hyderabad and is the Chairperson of publishing house Orient Blackswan. 
She started learning Bharatanatyam at age six she became a disciple of acclaimed dancer Leela Samson.
Career.
Hydari made her acting debut with the 2007 Tamil film "Sringaram", in which she enacted the lead character, as a devadasi. The film itself was based on classical dance, being directed by Sharada Ramanathan and produced by Padmini Ravi, two noted bharatanatyam dancers. Hydari was approached and offered the role, after Ramanathan saw her dance performance at a conference for three days. The film received critical acclaim and fetched several accloades, including three National Film Awards. Her first film to release in theatres, however, was the 2006 Malayalam film "Prajapathi", in which she starred alongside Mammootty. In 2009, she essayed a supporting role in "Delhi-6", directed by Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra. She has appeared in the film "Yeh Saali Zindagi" in 2011, for which she won the screen award. and was seen in Bollywood film "Rockstar". She has also appeared in Airtel 3G advertisement in April 2011 She stars in Fox Star Studios film titled "London, Paris, New York" as the female lead opposite Ali Zafar. In this movie the actor made her singing debut by singing two of the songs.
Personal life.
Aditi Rao Hydari and Aamir Khan’s wife Kiran Rao are first (maternal) cousins. The sisters, though very fond of each other, hardly meet given their hectic schedules. Her maternal grandfather J Rameshwar Rao was the Raja of Wanaparthy in Andhra Pradesh while her paternal great grandfather Sir Akbar Hydari was the Chief Minister of Hyderabad State.
In 2005 and 2009 it was reported that she was married to Satyadeep Mishra, a former bureaucrat. However in a 2012 interview the actress declined to comment on her marital status.
