Sonakshi Sinha (born 2 June 1987) is an Indian Bollywood actress. She marked her debut in the Hindi film industry with 2010's "Dabangg" opposite Salman Khan, which went onto become the highest grossing Bollywood film of the year. Sinha received positive reviews for her performance, as well as the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut. Post her debut, she went on to star in some of Bollywood's biggest hits, including "Rowdy Rathore", "Son of Sardar" and "Dabangg 2".
Early life.
She is the daughter of an actor and a politician Shatrughan Sinha and Poonam Sinha. She has two brothers, Luv Sinha and Kussh Sinha. She studied Fashion Designing at Shreemati Nathibai Damodar Thackersey Women's University in Mumbai.
Career.
Early career & film debut (2008–2011).
Sinha started her career as a model and walked the ramp at the Lakme Fashion Week 2008 and then again in Lakme Fashion Week 2009. Sonakshi Sinha is also a fashion designer. She designed costumes for movie "Mera Dil Leke Deko" in 2005.
She made her acting debut in the 2010 film "Dabangg" co-starring Salman Khan. It went on to become one of the highest grossing Bollywood films. Salman had seen her dancing at a function and offered her the role. Speaking about it, she said that she had lost 30 kg over two years to prepare for her character of a village girl by "a combination of proper diet and vigorous exercise". She added that she had been "observing people and trying to pick up nuances" as a step of further preparation.
She featured as the cover girl of Indian edition of "Maxim" magazine for the month December 2010.
Although Sinha had no film release in 2011, she won quite a few awards for her debut. This included the Filmfare Award as well as the IIFA Awards among many others.
Breakthrough & initial success (2012–present).
Sinha had four releases in 2012, her first being Prabhu Deva's "Rowdy Rathore", opposite Akshay Kumar. The film opened to mixed reviews from critics, although had a strong opening at the box office, collecting approx. on the first day and eventually becoming a "Blockbuster". Her next film, Shirish Kunder's "Joker", also opposite Akshay Kumar proved to be unsuccessful at the box office, and received overwhelmingly negative reviews. Her last two films, Ashwni Dhir's "Son Of Sardar" alongside Ajay Devgan, and Arbaaz Khan's "Dabangg 2", the sequel to her immensely successful debut, were both successful at the box office, despite receiving mixed reviews. 
Sinha will be next seen in Vikramaditya Motwane's romance-drama "Lootera" opposite Ranveer Singh. She is currently filming for "Once Upon a Time Again", the sequel to "Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai", once again alongside Akshay Kumar, as well as Imran Khan; Prabhu Deva's "Rambo Rajkumar" opposite Shahid Kapoor; and the remake of "Thuppakki". also opposite Akshay Kumar.
In the media.
Sinha's weight has been in frequent discussion in the media. She is one of the few actress who are comfortable in their "curvy", "well-rounded" body. She also likes breaking the size zero mould.
