Benedict Timothy Carlton Cumberbatch (born 19 July 1976) is an English actor. His most acclaimed roles include Stephen Hawking in the BBC drama "Hawking" (2004); William Pitt in the historical film "Amazing Grace" (2006); protagonist Stephen Ezard in the miniseries thriller "The Last Enemy" (2008); Paul Marshall in "Atonement" (2007); Bernard in "Small Island" (2009); and Sherlock Holmes in the modern BBC adaptation series "Sherlock" (2010).
In February 2011, he began playing both Victor Frankenstein and his creature opposite Jonny Lee Miller in Danny Boyle's stage adaptation of Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein." The play had a three-month run at the Royal National Theatre. In late 2011, he played Major Stewart in Steven Spielberg's "War Horse" (2011). He also played Peter Guillam, one of the pivotal roles in Tomas Alfredson's "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy" (2011).
He reprised the role of Sherlock Holmes in the second series of the BBC's "Sherlock", which aired in the United Kingdom in January 2012 and was broadcast on PBS in the United States in May 2012. He also stars as Christopher Tietjens in the BBC/HBO co-production television miniseries "Parade's End", which first aired August 2012. He portrayed Smaug the Dragon through voice and motion capture and also provided the motion capture for the Necromancer in Peter Jackson's "The Hobbit" (2012). He will also portray the main antagonist, John Harrison, in J. J. Abrams' "Star Trek Into Darkness", which is scheduled to be released in May 2013, and WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange in "The Fifth Estate", scheduled for release in November 2013.
Early life and education.
Benedict Cumberbatch was born on 19 July 1976 in London, the son of actors Timothy Carlton (birth name Timothy Carlton Cumberbatch) and Wanda Ventham. He was educated at Brambletye School in West Sussex and had an arts scholarship to Harrow School. At Harrow he was introduced to the works of playwright Sir Terrence Rattigan and began acting in school plays. He was involved in numerous Shakespearean works and made his acting debut as Titania Queen of the Fairies in "Midsummer Night's Dream" when he was 13. His school drama teacher called him "the best schoolboy actor I've ever worked with". He was also part of the rugby team and painted oil canvases while at Harrow. After school, he took a gap year to teach English in a Tibetan monastery. He then attended the University of Manchester, where he studied drama. After graduating, Cumberbatch continued his training as an actor at the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art, the oldest drama school in the United Kingdom.
Career.
Theatre.
Since 2001, Cumberbatch has had major roles in a dozen classic plays at the Open Air Theatre, Regent's Park, Almeida Theatre, Royal Court Theatre and the Royal National Theatre. He was nominated for an Olivier Award for Best Performance in a Supporting Role for his performance as Tesman in "Hedda Gabler", a role he performed at the Almeida Theatre on 16 March 2005, as well as at the Duke of York's Theatre when it transferred to the West End on 19 May 2005.
Cumberbatch acted in "The Children’s Monologues", a star-studded theatrical event at London's Old Vic Theatre on 14 November 2010. The show was produced by Dramatic Need. In February 2011, he began playing, on alternate nights, both Victor Frankenstein and his creature, opposite Jonny Lee Miller, in Danny Boyle's stage production of Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein" at the National Theatre. "Frankenstein" was broadcast to cinemas as a part of National Theatre Live in March 2011. "The Children's Monologues" was directed by Danny Boyle as well.
In April 2012, Cumberbatch won the Olivier Award for Best Actor (jointly with Jonny Lee Miller) for the acclaimed "Frankenstein" at the National Theatre, directed by Danny Boyle, with the two lead actors alternating the roles of Victor Frankenstein and the Creature.
Television.
Cumberbatch's television roles include two separate guest roles in "Heartbeat" (2000, 2004), Freddy in "Tipping the Velvet" (2002), Edward Hand in "Cambridge Spies" (2003) and Rory in the ITV comedy drama series "Fortysomething" (2003). He was also featured in "Spooks" and "Silent Witness".
In 2004, he starred as Stephen Hawking in "Hawking". He was nominated for the BAFTA TV Award for Best Actor and won the Golden Nymph for Television Films – Best Performance by an Actor. (He later provided Hawking's voice in the first episode of the television series "Curiosity".) He also appeared in the BBC miniseries "Dunkirk" as Lieutenant Jimmy Langley.
In 2005, Cumberbatch starred as the protagonist Edmund Talbot in the miniseries "To the Ends of the Earth", based on William Golding's trilogy.
He also made brief appearances in the comedy sketch show "Broken News" in 2005.
Cumberbatch next starred alongside Tom Hardy in the television adaptation of the book "", which aired on the BBC in September 2007. In 2008, he starred in the BBC miniseries drama "The Last Enemy", for which he was nominated for a Satellite Award for Best Actor in a Miniseries or TV Film.
In 2009, Cumberbatch starred in "Marple: Murder Is Easy" as Luke Fitzwilliam. He played Bernard in the TV adaptation of "Small Island"; the performance earned him a nomination for BAFTA Television Award for Best Supporting Actor. He also starred in Michael Dobbs' play "The Turning Point" which aired as one of a series of TV plays broadcast live on Sky Arts channel. The two-hander
depicted a little-known October 1938 meeting between Soviet spy Guy Burgess, then a young man working for the BBC, and Winston Churchill. Cumberbatch portrayed Burgess; Churchill was played by Matthew Marsh, who had played a supporting role in "Hawking".
Cumberbatch narrated the 6-part series "South Pacific" (U.S. title: "Wild Pacific"), which aired May to June 2009 on BBC 2.
Cumberbatch, a fan of long-running British science fiction series "Doctor Who", suggested in a July 2010 interview that he would be interested in appearing as a main or recurring character on the show, run by "Sherlock" producer and personal friend Steven Moffat. In 2008 he had discussed with David Tennant taking over the part of the Doctor but had decided not to try for the role.
In 2010, Cumberbatch portrayed Vincent van Gogh in "Van Gogh: Painted with Words". "The Telegraph" called his performance " treat ... vividly bringing Van Gogh to impassioned, blue-eyed life." Also in 2010, Cumberbatch began playing Sherlock Holmes in the first series of the BBC television programme "Sherlock", to critical acclaim. A second three-part series began on New Years Day 2012 in England and was broadcast on PBS in the United States in May 2012. For this role, Cumberbatch was nominated for an Emmy in the Lead Actor in A Miniseries or Movie category on 19 July 2012.
Cumberbatch co-stars with Rebecca Hall as Christopher and Sylvia Tietjens in "Parade's End", a BBC/HBO television miniseries airing on BBC2 in 2012. It is an adaptation of the tetralogy of novels of the same name by Ford Madox Ford. Its five episodes are directed by Susanna White and written by Tom Stoppard.
Film.
In 2006, Cumberbatch played William Pitt the Younger in "Amazing Grace". The film is the story of William Wilberforce's intense and lengthy political fight in the late 18th century to eliminate the slave trade in the British Empire. Pitt was Wilberforce's closest friend and staunchest political ally, and became Prime Minister at an early age. The role garnered Cumberbatch a nomination for the London Film Critics Circle British Breakthrough Acting Award.
Cumberbatch subsequently appeared in supporting roles in "Atonement" (2007) and "The Other Boleyn Girl" (2008). In 2009, he appeared in the Darwin biopic "Creation" as Darwin's friend Joseph Hooker. In 2010, he appeared in "The Whistleblower".
He played Peter Guillam, George Smiley's right-hand man, in the 2011 adaptation of the John le Carré novel "Tinker, Tailor, Soldier, Spy". The film was directed by Tomas Alfredson and starred Gary Oldman and Colin Firth. Cumberbatch also portrayed Major Stewart in Steven Spielberg's "War Horse" (2011).
He will provide the voice and motion-capture for both Smaug the Dragon and the Necromancer in "The Hobbit". Cumberbatch will also play the villain in the upcoming J. J. Abrams-directed "Star Trek Into Darkness".
Radio.
In May 2009, BBC Radio 4 broadcast an adaptation of John Mortimer's novel "Rumpole and the Penge Bungalow Murders". Cumberbatch played the "young Rumpole", and Timothy West took the part of the "old Rumpole". Cumberbatch plays Capt Martin Crieff in the BBC's Cabin Pressure.
Miscellaneous.
Cumberbatch has also read for several audiobooks, including "The Tempest", "The Making of Music", "Death in a White Tie", "Artists in Crime", and "Sherlock Holmes: The Rediscovered Railway Mysteries and Other Stories". He does the voice overs of several commercials, major names like Jaguar, Sony, Pimms, and Google+ doing the "Seven Ages of Man" monologue. For the 2012 London Olympics, he did a short film on the history of London for the BBC coverage to kick off the opening ceremony. He made appearances for two Cheltenham Festivals, in July 2012 for Music wherein he read WWI poetry and prose accompanied by piano pieces and in October 2012 for Literature wherein he discussed "Sherlock" and "Parade's End" at The Centaur.
Personal life.
For over 12 years, Cumberbatch was in a relationship with actress Olivia Poulet, whom he met at university. They broke up in March 2011.
Charity work.
Cumberbatch is an ambassador of The Prince's Trust, a charity founded by Charles, Prince of Wales that aims to help disadvantaged young people of the UK. During the "2012 Prince's Trust Palace to Palace" cycling event in which he participated in, the actor stated that "The Prince's Trust is a charity which I am passionate about helping. Young people are our future, and with so many struggling to find work in the UK, I feel it is vital we do everything we can to make sure all young people have the opportunities to succeed."
He is also a supporter of Dramatic Need, a charity that promotes creative expression as a tool for conflict resolution, social development, gender empowerment and the assimilation of health messages in underprivileged communities.
