"South Park" is an American animated television series created by Trey Parker and Matt Stone for Comedy Central. The series originated from a pair of animated shorts titled "The Spirit of Christmas", and the first episode of "South Park" originally aired on August 13, 1997 on Comedy Central. , a total of 237 episodes have aired, concluding the sixteenth season. Comedy Central renewed "South Park" through 2016, bringing the show to 20 seasons.
Intended for mature audiences, the show has become famous for its crude language and dark, surreal humor
that lampoons a wide range of topics. The story revolves around four boys—Stan Marsh, Kyle Broflovski, Eric Cartman, and Kenny McCormick—and their bizarre adventures in and around the titular Colorado town. The show remains Comedy Central's highest rated and is the network's second longest running program, behind "The Daily Show".
Each episode bar the very first one, which was produced by cutout animation, is created with software that emulates the paper cutout technique. Parker and Stone continue to perform most of the voice acting, and Parker is the primary writer and director. Except for the earliest seasons, each episode is typically written and produced during the week preceding its broadcast. Each episode is assigned a production code number. However, certain episodes sometimes air out of order, due to requiring extra production time, scheduling considerations, and other reasons. The later seasons of the show regularly consist of 14 episodes, with a run of seven episodes airing in spring, and another seven episodes in autumn.
Besides the main series itself, originally produced "South Park" segments have appeared in other works, such as sketches for talk shows and award ceremonies. In 1999, "", a full length musical film, debuted in theaters. The eleventh season three-part "Imaginationland" story arc was also released as a combined direct-to-video film in 2008. "South Park" seasons are regularly released on DVD, and starting with the twelfth season, on Blu-ray Disc. Almost every episode of "South Park" is available to watch for free in the United States on the show's official website.
Series overview.
<onlyinclude>
Episode list.
Season 17 (2013).
Season 17 will begin on September 25, 2013 and consist of 10 episodes.
Future seasons.
On November 3, 2011, an agreement was reached to keep "South Park" going through season 20 in 2016.
