Kerry Washington (born January 31, 1977) is an American actress. She is known for her roles as Ray Charles's wife, Della Bea Robinson, in the film "Ray" (2004), as Idi Amin's wife Kay in "The Last King of Scotland," and as Alicia Masters, love interest of Ben Grimm/The Thing in the live-action Fantastic Four films of 2005 and . She has also starred in the critically acclaimed independent films "Our Song" and "The Dead Girl", and is the lead actress in the 2012 ABC drama "Scandal", a Shonda Rhimes series in which Washington plays Olivia Pope, a former crisis management expert to the President. Her most recent role was as Broomhilda von Shaft, Django's wife, in Quentin Tarantino's film "Django Unchained".
Early life.
Washington was born in the The Bronx, New York City, the daughter of Valerie, a professor and educational consultant, and Earl Washington, a real estate broker. Her mother is of Jamaican descent. Washington performed with the Tada theater teen group and attended the Spence School in Manhattan, graduating in 1994. She attended George Washington University, graduating in 1998 Phi Beta Kappa with a double major in anthropology and sociology. She is one of the most famous graduates of the Department of Theatre and Dance. She also studied at Michael Howard Studios in New York City.
Career.
Washington made her screen debut in the ABC telefilm "Magical Make-Over" (1994). She was in the cast of the 1996 PBS sketch comedy-style educational series "Standard Deviants", and she appeared in the short "3D" and the feature film "Our Song" in 2000. She went on to appear in several movies, including "Save the Last Dance" (2001), "The Human Stain" (2003), Spike Lee's "She Hate Me" (2004), "Ray" (2004), "Mr. & Mrs. Smith" (2005), "Little Man" (2006), "I Think I Love My Wife" (2007), and as a wife of 1970s Ugandan dictator Idi Amin in the UK historical drama "The Last King of Scotland" (2006). Washington has also appeared in the recurring role of Chelina Hall on the ABC television series "Boston Legal", and in several episodes of the A&E cable-TV series "100 Centre Street". 
She is the new spokesperson for L'Oréal, appearing in commercials and ads alongside fellow actresses, Scarlett Johansson and Eva Longoria, and model Doutzen Kroes. 
She also co-directed and appeared in the music video for hip-hop artist Common's song, "I Want You", the fourth single from his album "Finding Forever". 
Washington narrated the critically acclaimed documentary about the New Orleans-based teenage TBC Brass Band, "From the Mouthpiece on Back". She also appears in Maxwell's "Bad Habits" video. In 2009 Washington performed in "The People Speak", a documentary feature film that uses dramatic and musical performances of the letters, diaries, and speeches of everyday Americans, based on historian Howard Zinn's "A People's History of the United States".
In 2010, she made her Broadway debut in David Mamet's "Race", alongside James Spader, David Alan Grier, and Richard Thomas. She also appeared in Tyler Perry's 2010 film "For Colored Girls".
In October 2011, it was confirmed that she would star in Quentin Tarantino's film "Django Unchained", which was released in 2012.
Washington was presented with the NAACP President's Award at the 44th NAACP Image Awards on February 1, 2013.
Personal life.
Washington was engaged to actor David Moscow from October 2004 to March 2007.
As a sort of souvenir or memento, she usually tries to keep something from every character that she plays, such as an item of wardrobe or a piece of furniture from the house the character lived in. 
Other projects.
Activism.
In 2007, Washington and other celebrities joined for the 2007 Lee National Denim Day, supporting the Women’s Cancer Programs of the Entertainment Industry Foundation. She is a member of V-Day, a global movement that brings awareness to violence against women and girls.
Politics.
She is at times referred to as a political activist and was a supporter of Barack Obama's presidential candidacy. Washington has also spent time volunteering through the Adopt-a-Classroom program in New York as well as with Co-Op America, now known as Green America. Washington also spoke at the 2012 Democratic National Convention. 
