Rashida Leah Jones (born February 25, 1976) is an American film and television actress, comic book author, screenwriter and occasional singer. She played Louisa Fenn on "Boston Public" and Karen Filippelli on "The Office" as well as roles in the films "I Love You, Man"; "Our Idiot Brother"; "The Social Network"; "The Muppets"; and "Celeste and Jesse Forever", which she also co-wrote. In 2009 Jones began appearing on the NBC comedy series "Parks and Recreation" as Ann Perkins.
Early life.
Jones was born in Los Angeles, the younger daughter of media mogul, producer, and musician Quincy Jones, and actress Peggy Lipton. She has an older sister, Kidada Jones, and five half-siblings by her father's other relationships. Her father is of mostly African-American, as well as Welsh, ancestry. Her mother is Ashkenazi Jewish (a descendant of immigrants from Russia and Latvia). Rashida was raised in Reform Judaism and attended Hebrew school. She grew up in Bel Air, Los Angeles, California. Jones has stated of her mixed race parentage, "It was the 1970s and still not that acceptable for them to be together."
In his autobiography, Quincy Jones recalled how he would often find his six-year-old daughter under the covers after bedtime with a flashlight reading five books at a time. Jones maintains she grew up a "straight-up nerd ... I had a computer with floppy disks and a dial-up modem before it was cool." Jones also displayed musical ability from a young age and can play classical piano. Her mother told "Entertainment Tonight" that Jones is "also a fabulous singer and songwriter, so she has inherited it (from Quincy), there's no question about it. Her dad's teaching her how to orchestrate and arrange too."
Jones attended The Buckley School in Sherman Oaks, California, where she made the National Honor Society and was voted "Most Likely To Succeed" by her classmates. She was a schoolmate of Paris Hilton and Kim Kardashian. Jones's parents divorced when she was 14 years old; her sister subsequently remained with their father while she moved to Brentwood with their mother.
In 1994, Jones garnered attention with an open letter responding to scathing remarks made by Tupac Shakur about her parents' interracial marriage. She later befriended Shakur, who was engaged to her sister before he was killed. After high school, Jones left California to attend Harvard University.
At Harvard, Jones was a resident of Eliot House and belonged to the Hasty Pudding Theatricals, Harvard Radcliffe Dramatic Club, Harvard-Radcliffe Opportunes, Black Students Association and the Signet Society. She was initially interested in becoming a lawyer but lost interest after being disillusioned by the O. J. Simpson murder case. Instead, she became involved in the performing arts, and served as musical director for the Opportunes a cappella group, co-composed the score for the 149th annual Hasty Pudding Theatricals performance, and acted in several plays. In her second year at college, she performed in "For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf", which she said was "healing" because she was seen by many blacks as not being "black enough." She studied religion and philosophy and graduated in 1997.
Career.
Jones made her professional acting debut in "The Last Don", a 1997 mini-series based on the novel by Mario Puzo. She then appeared in "Myth America", "East of A" and "If These Walls Could Talk 2". In 2000, she guest starred as Karen Scarfolli in an episode of "Freaks and Geeks" before landing the role of Louisa Fenn on "Boston Public". Between 2000 and 2002, she appeared in 26 episodes, earning an NAACP Image Award nomination in her final year. Although she only had a minor supporting role in the series, film opportunities quickly surfaced. She had a small role in "Full Frontal", directed by Steven Soderbergh, and starred in "Now You Know", written and directed by Kevin Smith regular Jeff Anderson. She also starred in the short film "Roadside Assistance" with Adam Brody.
After Jones left "Boston Public", she appeared in "Death of a Dynasty", directed by Damon Dash, and two episodes of "Chappelle's Show" on Comedy Central. In 2004, she was cast in "Strip Search", an HBO film directed by Sidney Lumet, but her scenes were cut from the final broadcast version. Later that year, she played Dr. Rachel Keyes in "Little Black Book" and starred as Edie Miller in British drama series "NY-LON". In 2005, Jones played Karen in the "Stella" pilot on Comedy Central and special government agent Carla Merced in the TNT police drama "Wanted".
Jones joined the ensemble cast of "The Office" in September 2006, playing the role of Karen Filippelli. She appeared regularly during the third season and then returned as a guest star for two episodes in season four and another in season five. Jones had been considering leaving the acting profession and pursuing a graduate degree in public policy before she was offered the part on "The Office". Jones also played Karen in the February 2007 "Saturday Night Live" episode hosted by Rainn Wilson, appearing briefly in the opening monologue's "Office" parody. Jones filmed cameo roles in "The Ten" and "Role Models", both directed by David Wain, with the latter appearing on the Blu-ray release. She then co-starred in "Unhitched", the short-lived 2008 comedy series produced by the Farrelly brothers. She also appeared as the love interest in the Foo Fighters music video "Long Road To Ruin."
In January 2009, Jones voiced several characters in an episode of the Adult Swim show "Robot Chicken". She played Hannah in "Brief Interviews with Hideous Men", an independent film by John Krasinski that screened during the 2009 Sundance Film Festival. She also co-starred as Zooey Rice in "I Love You, Man", a Dreamworks comedy with Paul Rudd and Jason Segel. Jones then accepted a role in "Parks and Recreation", a mockumentary-style sitcom on NBC. The show was created by Greg Daniels and Michael Schur, with whom she previously worked on "The Office." She has played nurse Ann Perkins since its primetime debut in April 2009.
Jones had a small role in the Kevin Smith film "Cop Out". She appeared in "The Social Network", alongside Jesse Eisenberg, Andrew Garfield and Justin Timberlake, which is set at Harvard, coincidentally the school from which she graduated in 1997. She played Marylin Delpy, a second year legal associate assisting with the defense of Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg.
She has a starring role opposite Chris Messina in "Monogamy", a drama directed by Dana Adam Shapiro. The film premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival in April 2010 and was released theatrically on March 11, 2011.
Jones' other 2011 films were "Friends with Benefits", starring Justin Timberlake and Mila Kunis, "The Big Year", with Steve Martin, Owen Wilson, and JoBeth Williams, "The Muppets", with Jason Segel, Amy Adams and Chris Cooper, and "Our Idiot Brother", with Paul Rudd, Elizabeth Banks, and Emily Mortimer. In the latter she played a lesbian lawyer named Cindy, the caring, responsible girlfriend of a flaky bisexual played by Zooey Deschanel. Jones also has a cameo in the Beastie Boys' short film "Fight For Your Right Revisited", which premiered at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival.
Jones also appeared on an episode of "Wilfred" as Lisa, a hospice volunteer. The episode aired on July 21, 2011 on FX.
In 2012, she starred opposite Andy Samberg in the film "Celeste and Jesse Forever", which she also co-wrote.
Along with Danny DeVito, she was a voice guest star on The Changing of the Guardian episode of The Simpsons (aired on January 27, 2013. season 24 episode 11).
Other work.
Jones created "Frenemy of the State", a comic book series about a socialite who is recruited by the CIA. The comics are published by Oni Press and co-written with husband-and-wife writing team Nunzio DeFilippis and Christina Weir. In October 2009, before the first issue had been released, Jones sold the screen rights to Universal Pictures and Imagine Entertainment. Brian Grazer and Eric Gitter will produce the film and Jones will co-write the screenplay with writing partner Will McCormack. Jones sold her first screenplay, a comedy titled "Celeste and Jesse Forever", in March 2009. She co-wrote the script with McCormack and is attached to star in the film. Jones' other written work has appeared in "Teen Vogue" magazine, where she worked as a contributing editor. She also wrote chapter 36 of her father's biography, "", published in 2001.
As a singer, Jones has provided backing vocals for the band Maroon 5. She appears on the tracks "Tangled", "Secret" and "Not Coming Home" from their debut record, "Songs About Jane", and on "Kiwi" from the follow-up album "It Won't Be Soon Before Long". Jones was a guest vocalist on the Tupac Shakur tribute album "The Rose That Grew from Concrete", released in 2000. The track, "Starry Night", also featured her father's vocals, Mac Mall's rapping, and her half-brother QD3's production. Jones contributed vocals to songs on "The Baxter", "The Ten" and "Reno 911!: Miami" soundtracks. She also sang in some episodes of "Boston Public" and for charitable events such as the What A Pair Benefit to raise money for breast cancer research.
As a model, Jones has appeared in print campaigns for Triple 5 Soul, television commercials for The Gap, and editorials for "In Style" and "O Magazine", among others. She has been chosen as one of "People" magazine's "Most Beautiful People in the World" three times, in the years 2002, 2007, and 2009, and as one of "Harper's Bazaars "Best Dressed Women In America".
Jones has appeared in music videos for Aaliyah, The Boy Least Likely To song "Be Gentle With Me" and the Foo Fighters' single "Long Road to Ruin". In the latter she was credited as Racinda Jules and played the role of Susan Belfontaine.
Jones has appeared in several online comedy series projects. She starred in Funny or Die's "Speak Out" series with Natalie Portman and guest starred in two episodes of "Web Therapy" with Lisa Kudrow. She also played David Wain in disguise for an episode of My Damn Channel's "Wainy Days". In 2008, Jones appeared with several other celebrities in , an all-star video satirising California's anti-gay marriage initiative, written by Marc Shaiman.
In 2011, Dove selected Jones as its spokeswoman for its "Dove Nourishing Oil Care Collection."
Personal life.
Jones had a 3½ year relationship with actor Tobey Maguire, ending in 2000. She became engaged to the Grammy Award-winning music producer Mark Ronson in February 2003. He proposed on her 27th birthday, using a custom-made crossword puzzle spelling out "Will you marry me?" Their relationship ended approximately one year later. She also dated speechwriter Jon Favreau, the Director of Speechwriting for President Barack Obama.
Though raised Jewish, Jones, like her mother, began practicing Hinduism in her early teens after the two visited an Ashram in India. Today, however, she practices Judaism, and told a reporter, "In this day and age, you can choose how you practice and what is your relationship with God. I feel pretty strongly about my connection, definitely through the Jewish traditions and the things that I learned dating the guy that I dated. My boyfriends tend to be Jewish and also be practicing ... I don't see it as a necessity, but there's something about it that I connect with for whatever reason." On her multifaceted identity, she remarked "I have gone through periods where I only feel black or Jewish. Now I have a good balance".
Philanthropic efforts.
Jones has worked to promote Peace First (formerly Peace Games), a nonprofit that teaches children to resolve conflict without violence. She has been a board member since 2004 and holds several annual benefits to raise money for the organization. Jones has participated in Stand Up to Cancer events, EDUN and ONE: The Campaign to Make Poverty History and The Art of Elysium's volunteer program, which runs artistic workshops for hospitalized children. In 2007, she was honorary chair of the annual Housing Works benefit, which fights AIDS and homelessness in New York City. She has also been involved in fundraising for St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, the EB Medical Research Foundation and New York's Lower Eastside Girls Club.
Political work.
Jones campaigned for Barack Obama during the 2012 and 2008 presidential election. In 2012, she campaigned in Iowa along with co-star Adam Scott. In 2008, along with Kristen Bell, she visited college campuses in Missouri to discuss the candidates and to encourage voter registration for the Democratic Party. She previously campaigned for Democratic candidate John Kerry during the 2004 election, speaking at student rallies and a public gallery in Ohio.
Awards.
Jones was nominated for an NAACP Image Award, and was recognized as a 2011 Influential Multiracial Public Figure runner-up. She also contributed to the Grammy Award-winning audio version of "Q: The Autobiography Of Quincy Jones".
