Oblivion is an upcoming 2013 science fiction film based on the Radical Comics graphic novel "Oblivion" by Joseph Kosinski and directed and co-produced by Kosinski. It stars Tom Cruise, Olga Kurylenko, Andrea Riseborough, Morgan Freeman, Melissa Leo, Zoë Bell, and Nikolaj Coster-Waldau. The film was initially scheduled to release on July 10, 2013. Since the 3D re-release of "Jurassic Park" was set for a July 19, 2013 release date, the project was moved forward to April 19, 2013.
The film will be released exclusively in IMAX on April 12, 2013, one week ahead of its wide release. 
According to Kosinski, "Oblivion" pays homage to science fiction films of the 1970s. It also combines alien invasion, politics, and outer space to create a unique futuristic environment.
Plot.
In 2073, a 37 year-old former-Marine Commander Jack Harper (Tom Cruise) is one of the last few drone repairmen stationed at an Earth nearly destroyed by an alien invasion 60 years ago. As part of a massive operation to extract the planet's remaining vital resources, he lives in an airborne "town" floating thousands of feet above the Earth.
His mission nearly complete, Jack's soaring existence comes crashing down when he rescues a 22 year-old female stranger from a downed spacecraft. Her arrival triggers a series of events that forces Jack to question everything he knows about the war and its aftermath. In addition, after being captured by an insurgency led by 102 year-old Malcolm Beech (Morgan Freeman), Jack is told that the society in which he lives may in fact be a police state.
Production.
Development.
Kosinski wanted to film a cinematic adaptation of the graphic novel "Oblivion" which he wrote with Arvid Nelson. Disney, which produced Kosinski's previous direction "", acquired the film adaptation rights to "Oblivion" in August 2010 after a heated auction. Disney subsequently released the rights after realizing the PG-rated film they envisioned, in line with their family-oriented reputation, would require too many story changes. Universal Pictures, which had also bid for the original rights, then bought them from Kosinski and authorized a PG-13 film version.
The script for the film was originally written by Kosinski and William Monahan and underwent a first rewrite by Karl Gajdusek. When the film passed into Universal's hands, a final rewrite was done by Michael Arndt. Universal was particularly appreciative of the script, saying "It's one of the most beautiful scripts we’ve ever come across."
Filming.
Tom Cruise had expressed interest in the film for a considerable period of time, and officially committed to it on May 20, 2011. 
For casting one of the lead roles opposite Cruise, the producers considered five actresses: Jessica Chastain, Olivia Wilde, Brit Marling, Noomi Rapace and Olga Kurylenko, and all five auditioned on August 27, 2011. It was subsequently announced that Chastain would play one of the film's two female leads. In January 2012 Chastain entered into talks for a part in the Kathryn Bigelow film "Zero Dark Thirty" and subsequently dropped out of "Oblivion" contention. It was later announced that the role had been given to Kurylenko. 
For the other leading role, the producers initially considered Hayley Atwell, Diane Kruger and Kate Beckinsale. The three actors traveled to Pittsburgh to screen-test with Cruise, who was filming "Jack Reacher". The role finally went to Andrea Riseborough. Melissa Leo was cast at a later date.
Production began on March 12, 2012 and wrapped on July 14, 2012. Filming locations included Baton Rouge and New Orleans, Louisiana. 
"Oblivion" was filmed with Sony's CineAlta F65 camera, which was shipped in January 2012.
Marketing.
Details about "Oblivion" were kept in secrecy, though the studio was said to have been "very excited" about the film. Promotions of the film began in April 2012, with a part of the film's footage being screened at the 2012 CinemaCon, despite the fact that filming had begun just one month prior to the event. The footage was described as "a combination of early concept art, rough animation, and unfinished dailies", showcasing a glimpse of the film's landscapes.
