Sridevi Kapoor (born on 13 August 1963, known mononymously as Sridevi), is an Indian film actress who has worked in Tamil, Telugu, Hindi, Malayalam and a few Kannada films. She is considered to be one of India's most successful actresses.
She started her career as a child artist in M.A. Thirumugham’s devotional Thunaivan at a tender age of four and continued to act as a child artist in Tamil, Telugu, Malayalam and Kannada films. She made her Bollywood debut as a child artist in the hit "Julie" (1975) and played her first adult role at age 13 in "Moondru Mudichu" (1976). Sridevi quickly established herself as the leading actress in the South Indian industry with roles such as "16 Vayathinile" (1977), "Sigappu Rojakkal" (1978), "Varumayin Niram Sivappu" (1980), "Meendum Kokila" (1981) and "Moondram Pirai" (1982). However, her national success came in Bollywood with acclaimed roles in films including "Sadma" (1983), "Nagina" (1986), "Mr. India" (1987), "Chandni" (1989), "ChaalBaaz" (1989), "Lamhe" (1991), "Khuda Gawah" (1992), "Gumrah"(1993) and "Judaai" (1997). 
In 2012, Sridevi returned to films after a 15 year long hiatus with "English Vinglish" and became the only actress in the history of Hindi Cinema to make a highly successful comeback. After the release of this film, the international press also dubbed Sridevi as the 'Meryl Streep of India'. During her career, she has won four Filmfare Best Actress Awards, two for Hindi films, and one each for Tamil and Telugu films. 
In 2013, Sridevi was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian honour by the Government of India.
Family and personal life.
Sridevi was born to Ayyapan and Rajeswari on 13 August 1963 in Meenampatti village near to Sivakasi of Virudhunagar district, Tamil Nadu. Her mother tongue is Tamil. Her father was a lawyer. She has a sister and two step brothers. Sridevi married Boney Kapoor, a film producer and the elder brother of actors Anil Kapoor and Sanjay Kapoor, in 1996. They have two daughters, Jhanvi and Khushi.
Career.
1967–1974: Child Artist.
Sridevi started her career as a child actor at the age of four in Tamil movie Thunaivan playing the role of young Muruga and acted in many Tamil and Telugu movies from then on. Baby Sridevi’s performance in Poombatta (1971) in Malayalam won her the Kerala State Government Award for Best Child Artist. Her roles with Sivaji Ganesan, Gemini Ganesan & Dr J.Jayalalithaa showed the way for a very illustrious career in Indian cinema. Kandhan Karunai (1967); Thunaivan (1967); Nam Naadu (1969); Prarthanai (1970) Babu (1971); Vasantha Maaligai (1972) are the most notable films of her career as a child artiste.1976 she acted in a malayalam movie Alinganam as Raghavan in leading role.
1975: Bollywood Debut.
In 1975, Sridevi debuted in Hindi cinema with a child role in "Julie", where she played the role of younger sister to the protagonist.
1976–1982: Rise to Stardom in the South.
Got her first big break in 1976 in a malayalam movie Alinganam as Raghavan in leading role.In 1976, Sridevi 
got first break in Tamil industry as heroine with K. Balachander's film "Moondru Mudichu", where she starred opposite rising stars, Rajinikanth and Kamal Haasan. The film became a hit and Sridevi followed with a succession of blockbuster films with both Haasan and Rajnikanth in the Tamil industry.
Sridevi's first release of 1977 was "Gayathri" followed by "Kavikkuyil" and the superhit "16 Vayathinile" starring opposite Kamal Haasan and Rajnikanth. She played the role of a young girl who is caught between her two lovers. The movie was a success earning $1 million at the box office. The movie proved to be a major breakthrough in her career. Sridevi starred opposite Chandra Mohan in the movie's Telugu remake "Padaharella Vayasu" in 1978.
Sridevi continued to rise as a leading actress of the Tamil industry with Bharathi Raja's "Sigappu Rojakkal" opposite Kamal Haasan. She next starred in SP. Muthuraman's "Priya" opposite Rajnikanth. In 1979, Sridevi debuted as an adult in Bollywood with "Solva Sawan" opposite Amol Palekar. The film was a remake to Tamil hit 16 Vayathinile (Padhinaaru Vayathinile)(1977) which starred Kamal Hassan and Sridevi. The movie was also remade in Telugu, again starring Sridevi as 16 Vayasu or Padaharella Vayasu (1978).
In 1979, Sridevi had only one successful release with "Karthika Deepam". In 1980, Sridevi appeared in the hit movie "Johnny" opposite Rajnikanth. Later that year, she was paired with Kamal Haasan in K. Balachander's "Varumayin Niram Sivappu", which turned out to be a hit at the box office. With her string of successful movies at the box office, Sridevi established herself as the top actress in the Tamil industry as well as also making a name in Telugu films.
In 1981, Sridevi continued to rise as an actress with "Aakali Rajyam" opposite Kamal Haasan. "Aakali Rajyam" became a super hit movie at the box office. It was the Telugu remake of "Varumayin Niram Sivappu". Later that year, she starred opposite Kamal Haasan in the Tamil film "Meendum Kokila", for which she earned critical acclaim and won the Filmfare Award for Best Actress – Tamil.
In 1982, Sridevi starred in the superhit "Moondram Pirai" opposite Kamal Haasan. She received critical acclaim for her performance as a woman who is rescued by a schoolteacher (after a car accident and head injury leave her forgetting her past and behaving like a small child of 3 or 4), and is looked after by him in his hillside home. This same movie, later remade as "Sadma" in Hindi, firmly established her as a force to reckon with in that industry.
1983–1992: Superstardom in Bollywood.
Sridevi entered Bollywood that same year with "Himmatwala" (1983) where she starred alongside Jeetendra. This film became a box office success and established Sridevi as a commercially viable actress in Bollywood. She starred in many commercially hit films opposite Jeetendra like "Tohfa", "Mawaali", "Justice Chaudhry".
"Sadma" changed her image from a dancing star to an actor. Sridevi's child-woman performance brought her nominations at the Filmfare Best actress award as well as state awards national awards. The film achieved cult status over the years. She continued to achieve acclaim and moderate yet definitive success via films such as "Aakhree Raasta" (1986), "Karma" (1986), "Jaag Utha Insan" and "Ram Avtar". In the same period, her cameo in Feroz Khan's "Janbaaz", especially the song 'Har kisiko nahi milta' became a huge hit and is a cult classic. 
In 1986 came "Nagina", one of the biggest hits of that year that established Sridevi as the top-most actress. Sridevi's snake dance in the climax song 'Main Teri Dushman' became very popular. In the following year, Shekhar Kapur’s "Mr. India" (1987) re-inforced her position in the industry and enhanced her popularity. Many remember her brilliant dance number ‘Hawa Hawaii,’ which is perhaps one of Sridevi’s best and most memorable songs to date. Her successful imitation of Charlie Chaplin also established her sharp comic timing. 
With the success of "Mr India", Sridevi had reached the peak of her career and went on to star in one her most memorable films of the late 1980s. This was Yash Chopra’s "Chandni" (1989). Sridevi's white costumes became popular as the 'Chandni Look' and the songs of the film became widely popular. Sridevi was nominated for the Filmfare Best Actress Award for the movie. During that same year, Sridevi was also part of another noteworthy film titled "Chaalbaaz" (1989). She starred opposite Rajnikanth and Sunny Deol and her performance in a double role where she played twin sisters won her the first Filmfare Best Actress Award of her career. "Chaalbaaz" is also regarded as a great Sridevi film which is popular even today. 1991 was another pivotal moment in Sridevi’s career, as she starred in Yash Chopra’s "Lamhe". She played a double role which won her major critical acclaim. Although "Lamhe" was a commercial failure in India (though it did well overseas), it came to be regarded as one of the all-time classics of Sridevi's career. She won her second Filmfare Best Actress Award for Lamhe. 
Sridevi was also a part of many other big-ticket films during the 1990s. This included a double role in "Khuda Gawah" (1992), where she displayed excellent on-screen chemistry with Amitabh Bachchan. The film was a moderate success at the box-office and Sridevi was again nominated for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.
1993–1997: Later Films.
Despite the big budget disaster "Roop Ki Rani Choron Ka Raja" in 1993, Sridevi continued to remain an in-demand star. Another memorable film is Mahesh Bhatt’s Gumrah (1993 film). In this film, Sridevi plays a woman falsely accused of drugs smuggling in Hong Kong. Her performance was widely acclaimed and won her another Filmfare Best Actress Award Nomination.
Sridevi saw moderate box-office success in 1994 with Laadla, which led to her seventh Filmfare Best Actress Award nomination. Sridevi played the role of a power hungry business woman who values her pride and success above all else. The film was notable for Sridevi's ability to successfully portray a negative character. Sridevi's notable performances in other films of this period were "Chandra Mukhi", "Army", "Gurudev" and "Mr. Bechara". They won her acclaim but commercial success eluded her. 
The last major film Sridevi starred in before she left the film industry was Judaai (1997 film). Directed by the late Raj Kanwar, Sridevi played the role of an Indian housewife, whose infatuation with money and wealth prompts her to sell her husband (Anil Kapoor) to another woman who is in love with him (Urmila Matondkar). In addition to receiving commercial success, Sridevi was praised for her performance in the film, which led to her eighth Filmfare Best Actress Award nomination. 
At the same time, Sridevi started acting in Telugu movies, a number of which were made by K. Raghavendra Rao. With N. T. Rama Rao, she acted in movies such as "Konda Veeti Simham", "Vetagadu", "Sardar Paparayudu" and "Bobbili Puli". With A. Nageswara Rao, she appeared in movies such as "Mudulla Koduku", "Premabhishekham", "Bangaru Kanku" and "Premakanuka". With Krishna, she acted in movies such as "Kanchu Kagada", "Kalavari Samsaram", "Krishnavatharam", "Burripalem Bolludu" and "Khaidi Rudrayya". She acted in more than 30 films with Telugu actor Krishna. With Chiranjeevi, she acted in movies such as "Jagadeka Veerudu Atiloka Sundari" and "S. P. Parasuram". With Nagarjuna, she appeared in movies "Aakhari Poratam", "Govinda Govinda", and with Venkatesh, she acted in "Kshana Kshanam".
Hiatus Years.
After a six-year hiatus, Sridevi briefly returned to the small screen in the Sahara sitcom "Malini Iyer" (2004–2005). She also appeared on "Jeena Isi Ka Naam Hai" (2004) and as a judge in the TV show "Kaboom" (2005). She performed a medley of some of her musical numbers at the 52nd Filmfare Awards 2007. She is also a member of the Board of Directors at the Asian Academy of Film & Television.
On 19 September 2009, Sridevi appeared on the Sony TV show "10 Ka Dum" hosted by Salman Khan. On the episode, she and her husband, Boney Kapoor, were guests, along with actor-director Prabhu Deva, actress Ayesha Takia and the musical duo Sajid-Wajid, all of whom had come to promote their film "Wanted".
Sridevi has also appeared on ramps in Lakme Fashion Weeks 2008 and 2010 and the HDIL Couture Week 2009 as Showstopper for prestigious designers like Neeta Lulla, Queenie Dhody and Priya-Chintan.
Sridevi also developed passion for painting which has since brought her foreign attention. In March 2010, her paintings were chosen by an international art auction house. The auction started in April 2010, and the money raised was donated.
In 2011, Kareena Kapoor paid a tribute to Sridevi by performing to a selection of the actress's hit numbers at the Global Indian Film and Television Awards. Kareena called Sridevi her hero and the reason why most girls of her generation became actresses. 
In May 2012, Sridevi appeared in Aamir Khan's TV show "Satyamev Jayte" as a surprise to an interviewee who had been sexually abused as a child. She also signed a letter to the government in support of passing a law criminalizing sexual abuse of children initiated by Aamir Khan.
Comeback and Success with "English Vinglish".
Sridevi announced her comeback in early 2011, while working in a new film "English Vinglish". directed by Gauri Shinde (R. Balki's wife). Her return was officially announced at the IIFA Awards 2011 held in Toronto with a montage of Bollywood stars welcoming her back. After the Toronto premiere,some international media outlets hailed Sridevi as the "Meryl Streep of India." Two weeks later America's entertainment weekly "Variety" wrote in its review of "English Vinglish" that it found Sridevi "Disarmingly charming in a manner that recalls Audrey Hepburn." Another 4/5 came from Raja Sen of Rediff who found the film "a winner all the way...Sri excels in fleshing out her character."
On release, the film and Sridevi's performance received positive response. "The Times of India" gave it 4/5 calling it "Easily one of the best films of 2012...Sri's performance is a masterclass for actors...Request you to make a little place next to you, Rajkumar Hirani; Gauri Shinde has taken a bow in mainstream Bollywood." Another 4/5 came from Raja Sen of Rediff who found the film is "a winner all the way...Sri excels in fleshing out her character." Critic Subhash K Jha gave a 4.5 saying Sridevi "makes the contemporary actresses, even the coolest ones, look like jokes...If you watch only two films every year make sure you see "English Vinglish" twice!" 
Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave it 3.5 stars saying Sridevi delivers "a performance that is nothing short of perfect...It's warm and fuzzy, and leaves you with a big smile on your face." Anupama Chopra also gave it 3.5 calling it "that rare thing...Sridevi doesn't miss a beat. Her performance is a triumph." Firstpost's Rubina Khan gave the film a full 5/5 saying "Sridevi brings acting back in English Vinglish." Komal Nahta said it was 'beyond stars' applauded Sridevi saying she "makes the best comeback in Bollywood history and delivers a landmark performance." Social movie rating site MOZVO gave it 4.1 out of 5 putting it in 'Must Watch' category. Amer Shoib of "The Cinema Journal" gave it 4/5 and called the film "a hilarious, touching, sensitive, and sweet film that marks the triumphant come back of India's biggest female star...Sridevi." Indian columnist Shobha De tweeted "Paresh Rawal and Sridevi – Actors of the Year! The rest are just successful stars!" and wrote a column titled 'What is that something about Sridevi?'
With the worldwide triumph of "English Vinglish", Sridevi, most probably, became the only actress in Bollywood to make a successful comeback as a leading lady after marriage and a long hiatus. Box Office Capsule hailed the film and Sridevi's return as "Golden Comeback of the Queen." Director Gauri Shinde featured in the "Financial Times" 2012 list of '25 Indians To Watch'. Film critic Raja Sen from Rediff explained why she is ranked as No. 1 "This is a simple film where things are credible, never melodramatic, and Sridevi – in a range of well-picked cotton sarees – always judges the tone right. It's the sort of performance younger actresses, including the ones on this list, should learn from." 
Sridevi emerged as the most-admired Bollywood actress of 2012 in a mobile survey conducted by Vuclip, world's largest mobile research company.
