Hawaii Five-0 is an American police procedural drama television series and a re-imagining of the original 1968–80 television series. The series is produced by K/O Paper Products and 101st Street Television in association with CBS Productions, originally an in-name-only unit of but folded into CBS Television Studios, which produce the series since the beginning of season three. The title of the new show uses a zero in place of the letter "O" in the original title.
"Hawaii Five-0" debuted on CBS, the same network that aired the original version. Like the original version, it follows an elite state police unit/task force set up to fight crime in the state of Hawaii. It premiered on Monday, September 20, 2010, 42 years to the day from the premiere of the original show, September 20, 1968. On October 21, 2010, CBS announced that "Hawaii Five-0" had been given a full season order of 24 episodes.
On March 14, 2012, CBS renewed "Hawaii Five-0" for a third season, which premiered on September 24, 2012.
Episodes.
The series covers the actions of a small special state task force created by the Governor of Hawaii, Gov. Pat Jameson, to investigate serious crimes throughout the Islands, as Hawaii does not have a conventional state police force. The team is headed by Lieutenant Commander Steve McGarrett, USNR as it investigates crimes ranging from terrorism to kidnapping. McGarrett chooses as his partner Honolulu PD Detective Danny "Danno" Williams. He fills out the team by selecting Chin Ho Kelly, and Chin's cousin, a rookie HPD cop named Kono Kalakaua. The task force does not follow the normal chain of command and instead reports directly to the Governor's office. One unexplained part of the story concerns the name Five-0. Taken from a shirt worn by the young Steve McGarrett in a video that the team watches, Kono decides that Five-0 would be a good name for their task force. However, it is not explained how everyone (including tourists) seems to know what Five-0 is despite it being an unofficial name coined in a private meeting, although the name appears to have been made official in later episodes. Five-0's headquarters are apparently located in Aliiolani Hale, site of a famous Kamehameha Statue, which features prominently in the series; in real life Aliiolani Hale serves as the central headquarters of the Hawai'i State Judiciary and where the Supreme Court of Hawaii regularly convenes.
Each episode typically begins with a crime being committed or a body being discovered (although in one episode the team was assigned to provide protection for a foreign dignitary), and assignment of the subsequent criminal investigation to the unit by either the governor herself or her representative. The task force uses the authority of the governor's office to gain access to crime scenes and investigations involving the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) when they cross paths. To assist them in their investigations, the team is granted immunity from prosecution for actions committed in the line of duty, although this immunity is revoked by the lieutenant governor following the governor's assassination.
A major character arc set up in the pilot episode revolves around the murder of McGarrett's father, who was working on a corruption case even after retiring from the HPD. After the terrorist responsible for his father's murder is apprehended, a mysterious figure interrogates him about Steve's investigation into his father's old cases. This figure is later revealed to be Wo Fat, a criminal with ties to the Japanese Yakuza, and is possibly connected to the suspected car-bomb murder of Steve's mother (a death originally ruled an accident). When his father investigated this as the head of the HPD Organized Crime Task Force, he began to dig too far into the corruption, forcing him to lay off the investigation. He nonetheless saved all his evidence in a toolbox, all of which was left to his son in the hope that he would someday conclude his father's work.
Another character arc involves the reasons behind Chin Ho's departure from the Honolulu Police Department (HPD) after being accused of stealing cash from the HPD asset forfeiture locker. McGarrett accepts Chin Ho onto the task force, as he was his father's protégé. As the series progresses, it is revealed that a mole within HPD framed Chin Ho for the theft, and that this mole was also possibly connected to McGarrett Sr.'s old corruption probe.
In the season one finale, the Five-0 task force is disbanded after McGarrett is arrested for Governor Jameson's murder. However, in the second season, the new governor, Sam Denning, reinstates the task force after McGarrett is proven innocent; but the team no longer has absolute immunity and must follow the Governor's rules. Governor Denning appoints Lori Weston from the Department of Homeland Security to the Five-0 task force in episode 2 to monitor the team; she resigns after the task force is involved in a diplomatic incident at the Russian consulate.
In season two, Masi Oka's Dr. Max Bergman, M.E., discovers his biological mother was the victim of a serial murderer who has started killing again. There was a cooling of relations between Rachel and Danny to the point, by the end of the season, where Danny was about to fight Rachel and her current husband Stan's plan to take Danny's daughter Grace with them on their move to the mainland. Kono is involved in an undercover assignment, for five episodes, where she appeared to have lost her badge, but was actually working HPD Internal Affairs Capt. Vincent Fryer, who was investigating a group of former cops engaged in illegal activities. Chin Ho and his former fiancée reunite and marry, with the Five-0 task force and Kamekona as members of their wedding party.
McGarrett continues to try to learn more about the death of his father and the mysterious Shelburne. His former SEAL Commander, Joe White (who was also a friend of McGarrett's father), arrives in the islands and appears to be helping McGarrett at times and getting in his way at others. Wo Fat returns and is involved in a series of murders, including the leader of the Yakuza, Hiro Noshimuri, and is being hunted down by them. At the end of the season, Joe takes McGarrett to see Shelburne in Japan; Shelburne turns out to be his mother, who was presumed dead for 20 years.
Production.
History.
The idea to bring "Hawaii Five-O" back to television had been under consideration well before the 2010 version was announced. The first attempt was a one-hour pilot for a new series that was made in 1996 but never aired, although a few clips were found years later and are available online. Produced and written by Stephen J. Cannell, it was intended to star Gary Busey and Russell Wong as the new Five-0 team. Original cast member James MacArthur briefly returned as Dan Williams, this time as governor of Hawaii, with cameos made by other former "Five-O" regulars. Another attempt was made to turn the project into a film by Warner Bros. but that also was scrapped.
On August 12, 2008, CBS announced that it would bring "Hawaii Five-O" back to the network schedule for the 2009–2010 television season. The new version would be an updated present-day sequel, this time centering around Steve McGarrett, who succeeds his late father Steve (Jack Lord's character in the original series) as the head of the unit. Ed Bernero, executive producer and showrunner of "Criminal Minds", was to helm the new take, which he described as ""Hawaii Five-O", version 2.0". It was also to incorporate most of the iconic elements from the original, including the "Book 'em, Danno" catchphrase, into the remake. Bernero, who was a fan of the original, and had a ring tone of the series' theme song on his cell phone, had always wanted to bring the series back to TV. This version did not go beyond the script stage.
In October 2009, it was announced that Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci had signed on to script a pilot episode, and that Peter M. Lenkov would serve as the series showrunner. Kurtzman and Orci decided to reboot the original concept similar to their work on the 2009 "Star Trek" film, rather than a sequel to the original series. Production on the pilot was shot in and around Honolulu from February to April 2010.
On May 17, 2010, the "Hawaii Five-O" remake was picked up by CBS, which scheduled it for Monday nights in the 10–11 pm timeslot. The news was good for the state of Hawaii, which hopes that the remake will pump new life into the economy. Production of the remainder of the first season started in June 2010. On June 24, 2010, the producers announced that it will use the warehouse at the former "Honolulu Advertiser" building as the official soundstage studio for the series starting in July 2010. Exteriors representing Five-0 headquarters in the series are located at the Judiciary History Center of the Supreme Court Building in Honolulu, directly across the street from Iolani Palace, which represented Five-O headquarters in the original series.
This revival series uses a "zero" as the last character in its title instead of the letter "O" that is used in the title of the original series. According to "The Los Angeles Times", a CBS insider said that the disambiguation was necessary because of search engine results. When "Variety" conducted its own search engine test on Google, it found that "Hawaii Five-0" (with the zero) had 263,000 results while "Hawaii Five-O" (with the letter O) had over 1.7 million.
On August 18, 2011, CBS announced that "Hawaii Five-0" would cross over with "" by having Daniela Ruah guest star as Kensi Blye from the latter series. The crossover aired on October 24, 2011, in episode 6 of season 2. A two-part crossover was aired on the April 30, 2012 episode of "Hawaii Five-0" and the May 1, 2012 episode of "NCIS: Los Angeles", with two characters from each show visiting the other (Callen and from "NCIS: Los Angeles" and Danny and Chin Ho from "Five-0").
Online voting by viewers determined the ending of the January 14, 2013 episode "Kapu" ("Forbidden"), with two zones, Eastern and Central Time Zones, and Mountain and Pacific Time Zones, each getting their own result. Each alternative ending could be seen online after the episode aired.
Casting.
In February 2010, it was announced that Daniel Dae Kim had been cast to play Chin Ho Kelly, an ex-cop trained by Steve McGarrett's father. He was the first actor cast for the remake. Several days later, Alex O'Loughlin was cast as Steve McGarrett, the son of ex-cop John McGarrett (portrayed by William Sadler). The producers pay homage to the original series throughout the first year, by making one of Steve's hobbies restoring his father's 1974 Mercury Marquis, which is in fact the actual car driven by Jack Lord in the latter half of the original series' run. Actress Grace Park was later cast as rookie detective Kona "Kono" Kalakaua, and Scott Caan was cast as Danny "Danno" Williams. In the recurring cast are Jean Smart as Governor Pat Jameson and Masi Oka as the medical examiner Max Bergman. Oka was upgraded to series regular for the second season.
Of note, several recurring roles have been filled by surviving members of the original cast. Al Harrington, who played Det. Ben Kokua in the original series, now plays a friend of McGarrett's, Mamo Kahike. Dennis Chun, who had various guest roles in the original series and is the son of Kam Fong Chun (the actor that portrayed the original Chin Ho), has a recurring role as HPD Sgt. Duke Lukela in the remake. James MacArthur, the last surviving main cast member from the original series, agreed to guest star in a first season episode; however, he died on October 28, 2010, before filming his appearance.
Larisa Oleynik was cast as Jessica Kaye (changed to Jenna Kaye in the episode broadcast), scheduled to join the Five-0 task force in the show's 19th episode. Oleynik appeared on a recurring basis for the remainder of the 2010–11 season, with an option to become a regular in season 2; however, her character was killed off in season 2, episode 10. It was also announced that Terry O'Quinn would be joining the cast of the show in season two, along with Lauren German, who would play Lori Weston, a former Homeland Security (and FBI agent) official assigned by the new governor to keep an eye on the team.
For season three, Christine Lahti has been cast in a recurring role as Doris McGarrett, the thought-to-be-deceased mother of Steve McGarrett. Also, Michelle Borth who plays Lt. Catherine Rollins will become main cast for season 3.
Music.
"Hawaii Five-0" uses the original show theme song composed by Morton Stevens. Critics received an early copy of the pilot with a synthesizer and guitar-based version of the theme. After negative reaction to the reworked song spread quickly online, Kurtzman said he and others realized that changing the music was a mistake, and arranged for studio musicians, including three who had worked on the original from 1968, to rerecord the theme "exactly as it was", except shortened to 30 seconds from its original length of about 60 seconds. Original instrumental music is composed by Brian Tyler and Keith Power.
Soundtrack.
Hawaii Five-0: Original Songs from the Television Series is a soundtrack album featuring music used in the CBS television series Hawaii Five-0. The first volume in the series received attention for how show producers integrated these new and previously unreleased tracks from major-name artists into the second season episodes. This method contrasted with the norm for TV soundtracks, which tend to be compilations of previously released music that is already available individually or on other albums. "Hawaii Five-0: Original Songs from the Television Series" was released on October 4, 2011, according to
[http://www.amazon.com/Hawaii-Five--Original-Songs-Television/dp/B005HS00MS] Amazon.com.
Broadcast.
The series premiered in the U.S. on CBS on September 20, 2010. Canada's Global TV and NTV premiered the show at the same time as the United States premiere. "Hawaii Five-0" has been syndicated for broadcast in several countries worldwide, including Australia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Spain, the Middle East, the Netherlands, and South Africa.
Reception and impact.
Critical reception.
The show has received mostly positive reviews, scoring a 65 out of 100 aggregate score on Metacritic as of October 12, 2010. On May 19, 2010, "The Honolulu Advertiser" offered an opinion about the new version: "A smart script, slick production values and maybe a splash of nostalgia got the remake of "Hawaii Five-O" placed on the CBS prime-time lineup this fall, but it will take more than beefcake and a remixed theme song to keep the show on the air." The piece also pointed out that times have changed since the original left the air, citing other shows that were set in Hawaii which have come and gone. It expressed a hope that the producers will succeed in bringing a new life to the title with this remake. The show also has a large, hugely devoted fanbase, often called an "ohana".
Hawaii Five-0 was also in the Guinness World Records 2012 for "Highest-Rated New Show in the U.S." with a record 19.34 million viewers for its January 23, 2011 episode ("Kai eʻe").
Awards and nominations.
Series star Scott Caan was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor - Series, Miniseries or Television Film for his role as Danny on "Hawaii Five-0". "Hawaii Five-0" also won the "Favorite New TV Drama" at the 37th People's Choice Awards on January 5, 2011.
The "Five-0 Effect".
"Hawaii Five-0" made several positive effects on the state's economy since it began airing. Known as the "Five-0 Effect" by "Hawaii News Now" reporter Steve Uyehara, various Hawaii-based businesses saw an increase in sales after they were featured in episodes of the show. Visitor numbers to the USS "Missouri" Memorial Association, after being featured in some of the episodes, increased 25 percent, helping the site achieve a record year in 2010. Waiola Shave Ice, the business run by Kamekona on the show, saw a 20 percent increase in shave ice sales, along with a 30 percent rise in t-shirt sales. Kona Brewing Company also saw a 60 percent increase in sales after their beers were featured as McGarrett's favored alcoholic beverage in several episodes. In addition, residents from other states visit Hawaii based on viewing the series.
Syndication.
TNT has acquired the off network rights to air the series. Episodes will begin on the cable channel in 2014.
