Far Cry 3 is an open world first-person shooter video game developed by Ubisoft Montreal in conjunction with Ubisoft Massive, Ubisoft Red Storm, Ubisoft Reflections, and Ubisoft Shanghai and published by Ubisoft for Microsoft Windows, Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3. It is the sequel to 2008's "Far Cry 2". The game was originally set for release on September 4, 2012 in North America and September 6 in Europe; however, it was subsequently delayed until November 29, 2012 for Australia, November 30 for Europe, and December 4 for North America due to the developers tweaking the final release version of the game.
"Far Cry 3" is set on a tropical island somewhere in the vicinity of the Malay Archipelago, between the Indian and Pacific Oceans. After a vacation goes awry, protagonist Jason Brody must save his friends, who have been kidnapped by pirates and escape from the island and its unhinged inhabitants.
Gameplay.
"Far Cry 3" is a first-person shooter, which also features role-playing game elements including experience points, skill trees, and a crafting system. The player has the ability to take cover behind objects to break enemies' lines of sight and also to peek around and over cover and blindfire. The player also has the ability to perform silent "takedowns" by performing melee attacks from above, below, or close behind. The game's narrative director, Jason Vandenberghe, said that the story mode map is around ten times larger than in the game's previous installments. Players are given the ability to survey and plan out their attacks with stealth takedown combinations and also tag enemies with the camera in order to track their movement once they break the player's line of sight.
The game also includes a variety of side-quests. One such side-quest involves the player hunting the many different wildlife species on the island for upgrading purposes. There are even some rare hunts that the player must undertake to reach the highest level hunt upgrades. The rare hunts feature wildlife not typically found during normal play.
Plot.
Jason Brody is on vacation with a group of friends in Bangkok when they decide to take a skydiving trip. They all land on a pirate-infested island, and are taken prisoner by a pirate lord named Vaas. Vaas plans to extort ransom money from their parents, then sell them into slavery. With the help of his older brother Grant, Jason breaks out of captivity, but Grant is killed in the escape. Jason is rescued by a man named Dennis, who is part of the Rakyat, the island natives who suffer under the boot of the pirates. The leader of the Rakyat, a priestess named Citra, initiates Jason into their tribe and he is given warrior tattoos. He runs a series of missions where he rescues his captive friends one by one (excluding only Grant's girlfriend Daisy, who is discovered to have also escaped) while simultaneously helping the Rakyat retake their island, helped at times by Dr. Earnhardt, a man who is an expert on fungi and various native remedies and drugs. Throughout the adventure, Jason matures into a fearsome warrior and is revered by the Rakyat, though his old friends are disturbed by his transformation into a killer, especially when he contemplates staying on the island permanently.
After tracking down and killing Vaas, Jason then moves on to the southern island, which is controlled by Hoyt Volker, a slave trader and Vaas' employer, swearing to Citra that he will kill Hoyt for what he did to both the islanders and his brother. After Jason kills Hoyt and rescues his younger brother Riley, he returns to find Dr. Earnhardt's house on fire. He looks for survivors and finds Dr. Earnhardt lying in a patio mortally wounded. He tells Jason before dying that he tried to save Jason's friends but they were taken by Citra and her warriors back to the temple. He returns to Citra to find that she has taken his friends captive. She has become absolutely enamored with him, seeing him as the reincarnation of the Rakyat's mythical warrior ancestor. After Jason walks through a hallucination, the player must then choose whether to execute his friends and remain with Citra or save them and leave the island.
If the player chooses to join Citra, Jason executes his friends and has sex with Citra. Just after it, Citra stabs him, saying that their child will lead the tribe, and that he dies as the warrior he has become. If the player chooses to save Jason's friends, Jason comes to his senses and saves his friends from execution. Citra attempts to convince Jason to stay by claiming his friends will move on, and that he should stay in the jungle and become king. Jason states that the violence is over and that there will be no more blood. Dennis arrives claiming that Citra saved him and the other followers. He attempts to kill Jason for betraying Citra, but Citra moves in front of Jason and is stabbed, mortally wounding her. Citra tells Jason she loves him and begs him to not leave before she dies, with Jason sadly apologizing to her. Dennis, shocked at what he has done, breaks down in tears over Citra's body. Soon, Jason and his friends leave the island by boat. Jason narrates that he can't come back from what he has done, as he believes he's a monster and feels the anger inside him, though he also believes that there is still somewhere inside him that's more and better than that.
Development.
In August 2010, PC Gamer reported that development of "Far Cry 3" was in "full swing" at Ubisoft Montreal. In the same month, Game and Swedish retailer Webhallen listed the game for a 2010 release, which didn't happen. In January 2011, Ubisoft declined to comment on speculation that "Far Cry 3" would be hitting shelves in October after "Game Informer" listed the game as an October arrival in its 2011 preview feature.
In February, the "Official PlayStation Magazine" suggested that the game was due for release at the end of 2011 as the following quote suggested, "Start taking the malaria medicine in preparation: Far Cry 3 could be arriving before the end of the year." This statement was withdrawn in next month's edition where it was stated that the game would be shown on 2011's E3 and that the release date would be bumped back to 2012. In May, the CVs of a couple of stuntmen listed "Far Cry 3" as one of their previous projects.
"Far Cry 3" features a sandbox editor. Furthermore, after confirmations of PC split screen on the "Far Cry 3" official site as well as content delivery service Steam, the feature was dropped days before release.
The game's writer Jeffrey Yohalem claimed that the intention of the game's plot was to make a statement about "what shooting means and what it does to humanity". The game's protagonist Jason Brody is not a trained soldier, but rather an everyman who is forced to become a killer over the course of the game. Yohalem claims that as a result the game examines "what happens when that guy is put into a situation where he has to survive minute by minute and save his friends? Will he pick up a gun and how does that effect him? [...] This is a story about a normal guy who picks up a gun and that can't end well". Producer Dan Hay emphasized that the emotional "turns" in the characters were a major theme in the game, stating that "that was the emotional thing we wanted and when we first saw it, it was with Vaas." Hay further commented that the game merged the systemic feel and emotional feel from the previous two "Far Cry" games in order to take the game in a "very, very surprising direction."
Marketing.
Players who pre-ordered "Far Cry 3" received The Lost Expeditions Edition of the game. It contains two exclusive missions not available in the regular version. These missions, "The Forgotten Experiment" and "Ignition in the Deep", offer 40 minutes of additional playtime, plus a Type 10 Japanese World War 2 flare gun for use in the game's multiplayer modes.
Players in North America who pre-order "Far Cry 3" from GameStop will receive "The Monkey Business" bonus pack. It includes four more missions "hosted by Hurk and his bomb-carrying monkeys." and "two bonus ways to humiliate your friends" in multiplayer.
The Insane Edition of the game includes all pre-order bonuses and all other forms of launch DLC, along with a Vaas bobblehead.
Ubisoft commissioned Michael Lambert, a well-known "Minecraft" enthusiast, and artists Axel Janssen and Yohann Delcourt to create a custom map and texture pack mimicking "Far Cry 3"s setting and characters within the popular indie game "Minecraft". The "Far Cry 3" "Minecraft" mod was released on October 26, 2012 on the official "Far Cry 3" website.
Ubisoft also released the free exclusive DLC "High Tides" for the PS3 version of "Far Cry 3". The DLC was later released for PC on February 1, 2013 as a free Uplay reward.
Reception.
"Far Cry 3" received widespread acclaim from critics. Aggregating review websites GameRankings and Metacritic gave the Xbox 360 version 89.65% and 90/100, the PlayStation 3 version 89.18% and 90/100 and the PC version 88.12% and 88/100 As of February 2013, "Far Cry 3" had sold about 4.5 million units.
G4TV gave the game a 5/5, praising the game's open world, long and satisfying campaign missions, solid gunplay with a variety of weapons to unlock and customize, and a compelling story. IGN gave the game a 9.0/10, praising the game's excellent cast of characters, unpredictable enemy encounters, and its open world environment. Edge also added to the praise, calling the game "wild, reactive and unpredictable," giving "Far Cry 3" an 8/10. Game Informer gave the game a score of 9.0/10, praising the game's story, characters, open world exploration, and gameplay. GameTrailers gave the game an 8.6/10, criticizing the repetitive feel of the island, but praising the story, characters and its likeness to "Assassin's Creed". The game was highly praised by Eurogamer, who awarded it a 10/10, claiming that 'Far Cry 3 is all the best things about open-world gaming. For the 2013 D.I.C.E. Interactive Achievement Awards, "Far Cry 3" was nominated for seven awards including: Game of the Year, Action Game of the Year, Outstanding Character Performance for Vaas Montenegro, and Outstanding Achievement awards for Game Direction, Animation, Art Direction, and Original Music Composition. "Far Cry 3" also received two Game Developer's Choice Awards nominations for Best Visual Arts and Best Technology.
