World War Z: An Oral History of the Zombie War is a 2006 post-apocalyptic horror novel by Max Brooks. It is a follow-up to his 2003 book, "The Zombie Survival Guide". Rather than a grand overview or narrative, "World War Z" is a collection of individual accounts in the form of first-person anecdotes. Brooks plays the role of an agent of the United Nations Postwar Commission, who published the report a decade after the ten-year Zombie War. The United Nations left much of his research out of the official report, choosing to focus on facts and figures from the war rather than the individual stories that form the bulk of Brooks' novel. The interviews chart a decade-long war against zombies from the view point of many different people of various nationalities. The personal accounts also describe the religious, geo-political, and environmental changes as a result of the Zombie War.
"World War Z" was inspired by "The Good War", an oral history of World War II by Studs Terkel; and by the zombie films of director George A. Romero. Brooks used "World War Z" to comment on social issues like government ineptitude and American isolationism, while also examining themes of survivalism and uncertainty. Critics have praised the novel for reinventing the zombie genre; the audiobook version, performed by a full cast including Alan Alda, Mark Hamill and John Turturro, won an Audie Award in 2007. A film based upon the book is in production, and is set for a June 2013 release.
Development.
Brooks designed "World War Z" to follow the "laws" set up in "The Zombie Survival Guide", and explained that the guide may exist in the world of the novel as a precursor to the Zombie War. The zombies of "The Zombie Survival Guide" are undead humans reanimated by an incurable virus, Solanum. They are devoid of intelligence and are motivated only by the desire to consume living flesh. The only way to destroy them is to destroy the brain, by any means. Although zombies do not tire and are as strong as the humans that they infect, they are slow-moving and incapable of planning or cooperation in their attacks. Zombies usually reveal their presence by moaning.
Brooks conducted copious research while writing "World War Z" to make the novel as realistic as possible: "Everything in "World War Z" (as in "The Zombie Survival Guide") is based in reality... well, except the zombies. But seriously, everything else in the book is either taken from reality or 100% real. The technology, politics, economics, culture, military tactics... it was a LOT of homework." Brooks used a variety of reference books and consulted with friends who were experts in several fields when writing the novel. He also cites the U.S. Army as a reference on firearm statistics.
Plot.
Through a series of oral interviews, Brooks, as an agent of the United Nations Postwar Commission, describes the history of 'World War Z'. Although the origin of the zombie pandemic is unknown, the story begins in China after a young boy is bitten; he becomes the pandemic's "patient zero". The Chinese government attempts to contain the infection and concocts a crisis involving Taiwan to mask their activities. The infection is spread to other countries by the black market organ trade and by refugees, before an outbreak of "South African rabies" finally brings the plague to public attention.
As the infection spreads, Israel is the only country to take the reports of zombies seriously, initiating a nationwide quarantine and closing its borders to everyone except uninfected Jews and Palestinians. Pakistan and Iran destroy each other in a nuclear war after the Iranian government attempts to stem the flow of Pakistani refugees. The United States of America does little to prepare; although special forces teams are used to contain initial outbreaks, a widespread effort never starts as the nation is sapped of political will by several "brushfire wars", and a rabies vaccine, marketed as effective created a false sense of security. When the world recognizes the true scope of the problem, a period known as the "Great Panic" begins. Following the fall of New York City, the United States Army sets up a high-profile defense at Yonkers, New York to restore American morale. The U.S. military uses obsolete Cold War tactics on the zombies, including anti-tank weapons and demoralization through wounding. These are ineffective against zombies, which "can't be shocked and awed", have no self-preservation instincts, and can only be stopped if shot in the head and killed. The soldiers are routed on live television, while other countries suffer similarly disastrous defeats, and human civilization teeters on the brink of collapse.
In South Africa, the government adopts a plan drafted by ex-apartheid government official Paul Redeker, which calls for the establishment of small safe zones, areas surrounded by natural boundaries and cleared of zombies. Unable to save everyone, the plan calls for large groups of refugees to be abandoned, but kept alive outside the safe zones to distract the hordes of undead, allowing those within time to regroup and recuperate. Governments worldwide adopt their own versions of the "Redeker Plan", or relocate the populace to safer foreign territory, such as the complete evacuation of the Japanese Home Islands. As zombies freeze solid in the cold, many civilians in North America flee to the wildernesses of northern Canada and the Arctic, where some 11 million people, unprepared to deal with the cold Canadian winter, die from starvation and exposure.
The United States is eventually able to stem the bulk of the pandemic, using the terrain and natural barriers created by the Rocky Mountains, and establishes safe zones west of the Rocky Mountains. The US spends the better part of the next decade completely eradicating the pandemic west of the Rockies and rebuilding American civilization. All aspects of civilian life are now devoted to supporting the war effort against the pandemic. Much of it resembles total war strategies employed during the Second World War such as: rationing of fuel and food, cultivation of private gardens, and civilian neighborhood patrols.
Seven years after the start of the zombie pandemic, a conference is held off the coast of Honolulu, Hawaii, aboard the , where most of the world's leaders indicate they want to wait out the zombie plague, but the U.S. President successfully argues that the only way to survive physically and psychologically is to go on the offensive. Determined to lead by example, the U.S. military reinvents itself to meet the specific challenges involved in fighting the living dead: automatic weapons and mobility are replaced by semi-automatic rifles and formation firing; troops are retrained to focus on head shots and slow, steady rates of fire, and a multipurpose hand tool, the "Lobotomizer" or "Lobo", is designed to destroy zombie heads close up. In three north, central, and south lines stretching across North America, the U.S. military leaves its safe zone west of the Rocky Mountains and crosses the continent in a three-year campaign, systematically destroying the zombies and reclaiming outposts of survivors (whether they want to be reclaimed or not). The only cases in which the US resurrected its modern technology was during situations where survivors refused to be reclaimed (often having create fiefdoms for themselves). One such case was the retaking of Chicago where the army had to use tanks, artillery, and other similar weapons to eliminate a secessionist stronghold in the Sears Tower.
Ten years after the official end of the zombie war, millions of zombies are still active and the Earth's geopolitical landscape has been forever transformed. A democratic Cuba has become the world's most thriving economy and the international banking capital. China has also become a democracy, following a civil war sparked by the collapse of the Three Gorges Dam and ending after a mutinying Chinese Navy submarine destroys the Communist leadership with submarine-launched ballistic missiles. Tibet, freed from Chinese rule, hosts the world's most populated city. Following a religious revolution, Russia is now an expansionist theocracy. North Korea is completely empty, with the entire population presumed to have disappeared into underground bunkers; it is unknown if they survived or have become zombies. Iceland has been completely depopulated, and is the world's most heavily infested country. The United Nations fields a large military force to eliminate the remaining zombies from overrun areas, defeat hordes that surface from the ocean floor, and kill frozen zombies before they thaw. Overall, there is a drastic reduction in the human population, which is alluded to have been brought to the brink of extinction, and many environments and animal species have been devastated, as much by desperate humans as by marauding zombies.
Themes.
Social commentary.
Reviewers have noted that Brooks uses "World War Z" as a platform to criticize government ineptitude, corporate corruption and human short-sightedness. At one point in the book, a Palestinian youth living in Kuwait refuses to believe that the dead are rising, fearing it is a trick by Israel. Many American characters blame the United States' inability to counter the zombie threat on low confidence in the government due to conflicts in the Middle East. Brooks also shows his particular dislike of government bureaucracy. One character in the novel tries to justify lying about the zombie outbreak to avoid widespread panic, while at the same time failing to develop a solution for fear of arousing public ire. Alden Utter, a reviewer for "The Eagle", notes similarities between the government's response in the novel and the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina: "Early warnings are missed, crucial reports go unheeded, profiteers make millions selling placebos, the army equips itself with tools perfect for the last war they fought and populations ignore the extent of threat until it is staring them in the face — this is, surprisingly, a post-Katrina zombie tale."
Survivalism.
Survivalism and disaster preparedness are other prevalent themes in the novel. Several interviews, especially those from the United States, focus on policy changes designed to train the surviving Americans to fight the zombies and rebuild the country. For example, when cities were made to be as efficient as possible in order to fight the zombies, the plumber could be a higher status than the former CEO. Throughout the novel, characters demonstrate the physical and mental requirements needed to survive a disaster. In a 2008 interview, Brooks described the large amount of research needed to find optimal methods for fighting a worldwide zombie outbreak. He also pointed out that Americans like the zombie genre because they are a nation of individualists who believe that they can survive anything with the right tools and talent.
Reception and literary significance.
Reviews for the novel have been generally positive. Steven H. Silver identified Brooks' international focus as the novel's greatest strength. He also commented favorably on Brooks' ability to create an appreciation for the work needed to combat a global zombie outbreak. Silver's only complaint was with "Good-Byes" –the final chapter– in which characters get a chance to give a final closing statement. Silver felt that it was not always apparent who the sundry, undifferentiated characters were.
Gilbert Cruz of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the novel an "A" rating, commenting that the novel shared with great zombie stories the use of a central metaphor, describing it as "an addictively readable oral history." "The Eagle" described the book as being "unlike any other zombie tale", "sufficiently terrifying for most readers, and not always in a blood-and-guts way, either." Keith Phipps of "The Onion"'s "The A.V. Club" stated that the format of the novel makes it difficult for it to develop momentum, but found the novel's individual episodes gripping. In his review for "Time Out Chicago", Pete Coco declared that "ending horror to the form of alternative history would have been novel in and of itself. Doing so in the mode of Studs Terkel might constitute brilliance."
Ron Currie Jr. named "World War Z" one of his favorite apocalyptic novels and praised Brooks for illustrating "the tacit agreement between writer and reader that is essential to the success of stories about the end of the world ... agree to pretend that this is not fiction, that in fact the horrific tales of a war between humans and zombies are based in reality". Patrick Daily of the "Chicago Reader" said the novel transcends the "silliness" of "The Zombie Survival Guide" by "touching on deeper, more somber aspects of the human condition". Drew Taylor of the "Fairfield County Weekly" credits "World War Z" with making zombies more popular in mainstream society. The hardcover version of "World War Z" spent four weeks on the "New York Times" Best Seller list, peaking at number nine. In 2009, according to "Publishers Weekly", "World War Z" has sold 600,000 copies in all formats.
References to other works.
In an October 2006 interview with Eatmybrains.com, Brooks discussed the cultural influences on the novel. He claimed inspiration from "The Good War" by Studs Terkel. Brooks stated: "book is an oral history of World War II. I read when I was a teenager and it's sat with me ever since. When I sat down to write "World War Z", I wanted it to be in the vein of an oral history."
Brooks also cited renowned zombie film director George A. Romero as an influence, and criticized "The Return of the Living Dead" films: "They cheapen zombies, make them silly and campy. They've done for the living dead what the old "Batman" TV show did for the Dark Knight." Brooks acknowledged making several references to popular culture in the novel, including one to alien robot franchise "Transformers", but declined to identify the others so that readers could discover them independently.
Audiobook.
An abridged audiobook was published in 2007 by Random House, directed by John McElroy, produced by Dan Zitt, with sound editing by Charles De Montebello. The book is read by Brooks, but includes many other actors taking on the roles of the many individual characters who are interviewed in the novel. Brooks' previous career in voice acting and voice-over work meant he could recommend a large number of the cast members. On March 18, 2012, Max Brooks announced at WonderCon in Anaheim that a full-length audiobook had been approved.
Critical reception and recognition.
In her review of the audiobook for "Strange Horizons", Siobhan Carroll called the story "gripping" and found the listening experience evocative of Orson Welles's famous narration of "The War of the Worlds". Carroll had mixed opinions on the voice acting, commending it as "solid and understated, mercifully free of "special effects" and "scenery chewing" overall, but lamenting what she perceived as undue cheeriness on the part of Max Brooks and inauthenticity in the Chinese accent of Steve Park. "Publishers Weekly" also criticized Brooks' narration, but found that the rest of the "all-star cast; deliver their parts with such fervor and intensity that listeners cannot help but empathize with these characters". In an article in "Slate" concerning the mistakes producers make on publishing audiobooks, Nate DiMeo used "World War Z" as an example of dramatizations whose full casts contributed to making them "great listens", and described the book as a "smarter-than-it-has-any-right-to-be zombie novel." The "World War Z" audiobook won the 2007 Audie Award for Multi-Voiced Performance and was nominated for Audiobook of the Year.
Film adaptation.
In June 2006, the movie rights for "World War Z" were secured by Paramount Studios for Brad Pitt's production company, Plan B Entertainment to produce. The screenplay was written by J. Michael Straczynski, with Marc Forster directing, and Pitt starring as the main character, United Nations employee Gerry Lane. Despite being the draft that got the film green-lit, Straczynski's script was tossed aside, so that production, which was to begin at the start of 2009, was delayed while the script was completely re-written by Matthew Michael Carnahan to set the movie in the present, leaving behind much of the premise of the book to make it more of an action film. In April, 2010, Paramount Studios renewed its option on the movies rights. Filming finally commenced mid-2011. Initial filming occurred in Malta before moving on to Glasgow, (which was used to represent Philadelphia as the production team avoided the American city because of uncertainty over whether they would be given tax credits for filmmakers). Some scenes were shot in Cornwall, before production moved to Budapest in October. The morning before filming commenced, a Hungarian counter-terrorism unit raid seized the firearms that had been brought in for use as props, as their import had not been cleared, and, contrary to documentation, the weapons were fully functional.
"World War Z" was initially slated for release by Paramount Pictures on December 21, 2012. In March 2012, the film's release was pushed back to June 21, 2013, with Paramount electing to release "Jack Reacher" on the December 2012 date.
