Xbox 360 Dashboard (or System Software), is the updatable software and operating system for the Xbox 360. It resides on a 16 MB file system and has access to a maximum of 32 MB of the system's memory. While the system software updates may sometimes provide updates to the system's firmware, it is unlikely that this occurs with many, if any, updates. The updates can be downloaded from the Xbox Live service directly to the Xbox 360 and subsequently installed. Microsoft has also provided the ability to download system software updates from their respective official Xbox website to their PCs and then storage media, from which the update can be installed to the system.
The Xbox 360 game system allows users download applications that add to the functionality of the dashboard. Most apps require that the user be signed into a valid Xbox Live Gold account in order to use the features advertised for the given app. With the exception of a few early apps, Microsoft has added partners to develop apps for the Xbox 360 system since the NXE Dashboard update in 2008.
The current public version of the Xbox 360 system software is 2.0.16203.0, released February 19, 2013.
Xbox Live Preview Program.
Starting with the NXE Dashboard (2.0.7357.0), Larry Hryb (Xbox Live's Major Nelson) and other team members hosted a new segment using Microsoft Connect to allow members of the Xbox Live Community to get a chance to have a preview of the next dashboard. Small bug fixes & minor improvements are not included with the Preview Program, this is only limited to major releases (NXE, Kinect, Metro) which only seem to be released in the month of November of each year since the console's launch in November 2005, as well as the Preview Program's inauguration during the NXE Dashboard being rolled out in November 2008. In 2009, the Preview Program returned in August for a summer update (3 months earlier than the regular annual update). Then, the incentive returned in 2010 for the Kinect Dashboard, but users were unable to grasp the full concept of the dashboard because the Kinect sensor was not hitting store shelves until 3 days after the Kinect dashboard had rolled out to all Xbox 360 owners.
The Preview Program incentive enrollment usually starts in (approximately) March/April, or it can happen between August & September, depending on when a major dashboard release is being planned. Those who applied would be notified no later than 2 weeks after the enrollment date with the new Preview Program dashboard launching as early as 24 hours after acceptance. Any Xbox Live member may apply, but those who are Gold Members get higher priority due to the many Gold Member incentives already in place. All details for an upcoming Preview Program can be located on MajorNelson.com when the time is near.
Backwards compatibility.
The Xbox 360 system software includes built in software emulation support for the original Xbox game system. Software emulation is achieved with downloadable emulation profiles, which require a hard drive.The last reported update to the list was in 2007 and support has since been discontinued for adding new titles.
