Studio Ghibli has produced seventeen feature films, beginning with "Castle in the Sky" in 1986. It was followed by "Grave of the Fireflies" (1988), "My Neighbor Totoro" (1988), "Kiki's Delivery Service" (1989), "Only Yesterday" (1991), "Porco Rosso" (1992), "Pom Poko" (1994), "Whisper of the Heart" (1995), "Princess Mononoke" (1997), "My Neighbors the Yamadas" (1999), "Spirited Away" (2001), "The Cat Returns" (2002), "Howl's Moving Castle" (2004), "Tales from Earthsea" (2006), "Ponyo" (2008), "Arrietty" (2010), and "From Up on Poppy Hill" (2011). Sixteen of the films received both critical and financial success, with the notable exception being "Tales from Earthsea", which, in spite of its commercial success, achieved less critical praise than Ghibli's other productions. The studio has also produced several short films and television commercials, as well as "Ocean Waves", a television film. Eight of Studio Ghibli's films are among the 15 highest-grossing anime films, with "Spirited Away" being the highest, grossing over $274 million worldwide.
Many anime features created by Studio Ghibli have won the Animage Anime Grand Prix award and three have won the Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year. In 2002, "Spirited Away" won a Golden Bear and an Oscar for Best Animated Feature.
Name.
The name is based on the Arabic name for the sirocco, or Mediterranean wind, the idea being the studio would "blow a new wind through the Japanese anime industry".
Although the Italian/Arabic word is pronounced with a very hard , the Japanese pronunciation of the studio's name is with a soft "g," 
History.
Founded in June 1985, the studio is headed by the directors Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata and the producer Toshio Suzuki. Prior to the formation of the studio, Miyazaki and Takahata had already had long careers in Japanese film and television animation and had worked together on "" and "Panda! Go, Panda!"; and Suzuki was an editor at Tokuma Shoten's "Animage" manga magazine.
The studio was founded after the success of the 1984 film "Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind", written and directed by Miyazaki for Topcraft and distributed by Toei Company. The origins of the film lie in the first two volumes of a serialized manga written by Miyazaki for publication in "Animage" as a way of generating interest in an anime version. Suzuki was part of the production team on the film and founded Studio Ghibli with Miyazaki, who also invited Takahata to join the new studio.
The studio has mainly produced films by Miyazaki, with the second most prolific director being Takahata (most notably with "Grave of the Fireflies"). Other directors who have worked with Studio Ghibli include Yoshifumi Kondo, Hiroyuki Morita and Gorō Miyazaki. Composer Joe Hisaishi has provided the soundtrack for all of Miyazaki's Studio Ghibli films.
Many of Ghibli's works are distributed in Japan by Toho. Internationally, The Walt Disney Company has rights to all of Ghibli's output that did not have previous international distribution, including the global, non-Japan distribution rights to "Princess Mononoke" and "Spirited Away". As of September 2011, they share North American theatrical rights with GKids while domestic right remain with Disney.
Over the years, there has been a close relationship between Studio Ghibli and the magazine "Animage", which regularly runs exclusive articles on the studio and its members in a section titled "Ghibli Notes." Artwork from Ghibli's films and other works are frequently featured on the cover of the magazine. Between 1999 and 2005 Studio Ghibli was a subsidiary of Tokuma Shoten, the publisher of "Animage".
In October 2001, the Ghibli Museum opened in Tokyo. It contains exhibits based on Studio Ghibli films and shows animations, including a number of short Studio Ghibli films not available elsewhere.
The studio is also known for its strict "no-edits" policy in licensing their films abroad due to "Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind" being heavily edited for the film's release in the United States as "Warriors of the Wind". The "no cuts" policy was highlighted when Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein suggested editing "Princess Mononoke" to make it more marketable. A Studio Ghibli producer is rumoured to have sent an authentic Japanese sword with a simple message: "No cuts".
On February 1, 2008, Toshio Suzuki stepped down from the position of Studio Ghibli president, which he had held since 2005, and Koji Hoshino (former president of Walt Disney Japan) took over. Suzuki said he wanted to improve films with his own hands as a producer, rather than demanding this from his employees. Suzuki decided to hand over the presidency to Hoshino because Hoshino has helped Studio Ghibli to sell its videos since 1996, also helping to release the "Princess Mononoke" film in the United States. Suzuki still serves on the company's board of directors.
Two Studio Ghibli short films created for the Ghibli Museum were shown at the Carnegie Hall Citywise Japan NYC Festival: "House Hunting" and "Mon Mon the Water Spider" were screened on March 26, 2011.
As of 2012, Takahata is developing a project for release after Gorō Miyazaki's (director of "Tales from Earthsea" and Hayao's son) "From up on Poppy Hill". Takahata is working on an adaptation of the tale of "The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter". Hayao Miyazaki is developing a project about the Mitsubishi A6M Zero and its founder.
Works.
Films.
While "Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind" is often considered one of the Studio Ghibli films, it was produced and released before the studio's founding.
Other works.
The works listed here consist of works that do not fall into the above categories. All of these films have been released on DVD in Japan as part of the "Ghibli Gakujutsu Library".
Related works.
These works were not created by Studio Ghibli, but were produced by a variety of studios and people who went on to form or join Studio Ghibli. This includes members of Topcraft that went on to create Studio Ghibli in 1985; works produced by Toei Animation, Tokyo Movie Shinsha, Nippon Animation or other studios and featuring involvement by Hayao Miyazaki, Isao Takahata or other Ghibli staffers. The list also includes works created in cooperation with Studio Ghibli.
Distributive works.
These Western animated films (plus one Japanese film) have been distributed by Studio Ghibli, and now through their label, Ghibli Museum Library.
