Amy Macdonald (born 25 August 1987 in Bishopbriggs, East Dunbartonshire) is a Scottish recording artist. Macdonald rose to fame in 2007 with her debut album, "This Is the Life" (2007) and its fourth single, "This Is the Life". The single charted at number one in six countries, while reaching the top ten in another eleven countries.
The success of the single achieved Macdonald success in the American music market, where she was a guest on shows such as "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" and "The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" in 2008, where she performed two singles from the album, leading her album, "This Is the Life" to reach ninety-two on the "Billboard" 200. In the European Union, "This Is the Life" reached number one in six European countries, including the United Kingdom, Denmark and the main European album charts. "This is the Life" has sold three million copies worldwide.
"Don't Tell Me That It's Over" was released in March 2010 as the lead single from Macdonald's second studio album, "A Curious Thing", which was released on 8 March 2010. Five singles have since been released from "A Curious Thing". Macdonald's third album, "Life in a Beautiful Light", was released on 11 June 2012.
Early life.
Macdonald attended Bishopbriggs High School. She is a self-taught musician, playing her father's guitar after being inspired by Travis at the T in the Park Festival in 2000, where she heard Travis' song "Turn" and wanted to play it herself.
She started playing in pubs and coffee houses around Glasgow at 15, including the Brunswick Cellars on Sauchiehall Street.
Career.
Breakthrough.
Macdonald sent a demo CD in response to an advertisement placed in the "NME" by a new production company set up by songwriters Pete Wilkinson and Sarah Erasmus.
In an interview with HitQuarters, Wilkinson said he was "literally aghast" at her songwriting abilities when first he heard Macdonald play the songs "This is the Life" and "Mr Rock n Roll".
Wilkinson then spent around eight or nine months recording demos with Amy at his home studio with a view to securing a record deal for his new client. In 2007, Macdonald signed a contract with Vertigo.
Macdonald received her first major press coverage when she questioned whether the 2007 winner of "The X Factor", Leon Jackson, was suffering from tonsillitis, referring to it as "lazyitis". Macdonald had tonsillitis at the same time but still performed at Glasgow and at the BBC's "Hogmanay Live" show the same night.
"This Is the Life" (2007–2009).
In 2007, Macdonald released her debut album, titled "This Is the Life". The album sold 3 million copies, and reached #1 in the UK, the Netherlands, Switzerland and Denmark. The first single from the album, "Poison Prince", was only a limited release. The second single, "Mr. Rock and Roll", became Macdonald's first top 40 song charting at #12 in the United Kingdom. However the third single, "L.A.", missed the top 40 at #48, but managed #5 in the Scottish singles chart.
The fourth and most successful single, "This Is the Life", charted at #28 in the UK, but was #1 in five other European countries. The single was awarded Platinum in Germany and Belgium and Gold in Spain and Switzerland. The fifth single, "Run", gave Macdonald her second lowest chart position in the UK at #75. However, "Run" charted at #36 in Germany. The sixth and final single was the re-release of "Poison Prince", but charted at #148 in the UK, Macdonald's lowest chart position.
The album's track "Youth of Today" was chosen as the first single featured on Bebo/iTunes' "Free Single of the Week" program.
She appeared as a musical performing guest on British and foreign shows including "The Album Chart Show", "Loose Women", "Friday Night Project", "Taratata" (France), and "This Morning". She won the best newcomer award at the Silver Clef Awards.
"A Curious Thing" (2010–2011).
Macdonald began writing songs for her second album in spring 2009, in a brief break from her touring commitments. For the first time she began poring through her old notebooks, looking at song ideas, unlike her debut which consists mainly of songs that she wrote straight away. Many of the tracks were inspired by real-life personalities or events from her everyday life. Contrary to some reports, she did not write "Spark" for murdered toddler James Bulger after watching a TV programme on his murder. "What Happiness Means To Me" is dedicated to her footballer fiancé Steve Lovell, while "An Ordinary Life" is inspired by the "Z-list celebs" she saw flocking around Scots-born Hollywood actor Gerard Butler at a party he held in Glasgow late 2009 to mark the opening of his film "Law Abiding Citizen". There is also a track about Michael Jackson and one dedicated to her late grandparents. The tracks were recorded at Paul Weller's BlackBarn Studios in Surrey.
Macdonald started working on her second album in the year of 2009. She said "Some of the sounds are just amazing and we've managed to persuade one of my favourite artists to whack some stuff down on them, but you'll have to wait and see." The second album, titled "A Curious Thing", was released on 8 March 2010.
It was preceded by the release of the first single, "Don't Tell Me That It's Over", a week earlier on 1 March 2010. The single was released to UK radio on 11 January. Amy performed the new single on the Simon Mayo Show on BBC Radio 2 on the same day. "Don't Tell Me That It's Over" has been released to radio in countries like UK, Switzerland, Germany and France. The album's second single "Spark" was released on 10 May 2010 on digital download format. Macdonald also confirmed that she would tour the United Kingdom and other parts of Europe in 2010.
The album's third single "This Pretty Face" was released on 19 July 2010. Also, Macdonald confirmed she would embark on a tour, entitled "The Love Love Tour". Amy MacDonald is one of a number of artists who appear with Ray Davies in his 2010 album "See My Friends". She sings with him on "Dead End Street".
"Life in a Beautiful Light" (2011–2012).
In May 2011, it was confirmed by the Bournemouth Echo that Amy had already started 'planning to start work on her third album at the end of this year'. On 13 April 2012, Macdonald's official website confirmed the title of the album was "Life in a Beautiful Light", and will be released on 11 June 2012. One song has been confirmed so far, titled "Slow it Down", which was first played on the morning of 13 April on Zoë Ball's Radio 2 show, and released on Macdonald's Official YouTube account on 13 April.
Popularity in the United States.
Macdonald has moderate success in the United States music market. She has appeared on several US talk shows such as "The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" (2008), where she performed "Mr. Rock and Roll" and also "The Ellen DeGeneres Show" (2008) where she performed her hit single, "This Is the Life".
Her debut album, "This is the Life", reached #92 on the US "Billboard" 200. The single, "This is the Life" reached #25 on the US "Billboard" Triple-A radio airplay charts.
Artistry.
Musical style.
Reviewers have described Amy as softly spoken but with a booming singing voice. Her vocal range is contralto.
Macdonald cites Travis as her biggest influence. Other influences include The Killers and the Libertines.
Personal life.
In 2008, Macdonald became engaged to retired football player Steve Lovell. The couple split amicably in June 2012.
Macdonald is also a supporter of Rangers F.C..
Awards and nominations.
Macdonald won Best Newcomer at the 2008 Tartan Clef Awards and Best Newcomer at the 2008 Silver Clef Awards. In December 2008 she was voted "Scottish person of the year" by "The Daily Record".
Macdonald performed, along with U2, at the German 2009 Echo Awards, where she won an award in the category "Best International Newcomer". She also won Best International Album and Best International Song at the 2009 Swiss Music Awards.
In 2010 Macdonald won "best album" for "A Curious Thing", at the annual Tartan Clef awards on 20 November in Glasgow. Also, Macdonald won "best international album Rock/Pop" with "A Curious Thing" at the Swiss music awards in March 2011. Furthermore, Macdonald won "best international Rock/Pop Female" at the Echo Awards.
