The Amazing Race 22 is the twenty-second installment of the reality television show "The Amazing Race". It features eleven teams of two, each with a pre-existing relationship, in a race around the world.
The season premiered on February 17, 2013, at 8:05 p.m. ET/PT on CBS.
Production.
Development and filming.
This season will be broadcast in the mid-season of 2012–13 TV season. In an interview with "TV Guide", Keoghan revealed that the Double Your Money prize introduced in the previous season would not be included in season 22. Instead, the first team to arrive at the initial pit stop would again receive an Express Pass for themselves, but in a new twist, an additional express pass to be given to another team of their choosing before the end of the fourth leg.
The season will span through nine countries in five different continents. The season features the Race's first visit to the French overseas country of French Polynesia, where teams skydived above the island of Bora Bora. Other confirmed tasks and travel destinations include "Shemozzle racing" in New Zealand, hunting scorpions with Bushmen in Botswana, and climbing the north face of the Eiger in Switzerland.
Cast.
Applications for "The Amazing Race 22" were closed on November 2, 2012.
The contestants include YouTube vloggers Joey Graceffa and Meghan Camarena, hockey-playing brothers Bates (an unrestricted free agent) and Anthony Battaglia (CHL's Tulsa Oilers), father & son cancer survivors, roller derby moms, and Stealing Angels vocalists Caroline Cutbirth (descendant of Daniel Boone) and Jennifer Kuhle (granddaughter of John Wayne).
Episode title quotes.
Episode titles are often taken from quotes made by the racers.
Prizes.
The prize for each leg is awarded to the first place team for that leg. Trips are sponsored by Travelocity.
Race summary.
Leg 1 (United States → French Polynesia, France).
Airdate: February 17, 2013
In the first Roadblock of the Race, one team member had to sign up for one of six helicopter flights, with only room for two racers per flight. They then tandem skydived from over above the island while their partner would make their way to the landing location on Anau via water taxi. When the team reunited, they would receive their next clue. In the second Roadblock, the other team member had to search among 400 sandcastles for a clue buried underneath them. If they did not find the clue, they had to rebuild the sandcastle before continuing.
</ref>
Airdate: March 10, 2013
Ratings.
Canadian ratings.
Canadian broadcaster CTV also airs "The Amazing Race" on Sundays. Episodes air at 8:00 p.m. Eastern, Central, and Atlantic (9:00 p.m. Pacific and Mountain). The only exception to this will be the broadcast of the second episode which will conflict with CTV's broadcast of the 85th Academy Awards; The Amazing Race instead will be shown at 8:00 p.m. in the Atlantic time zone, at 7:00 p.m. in the Eastern time zone, & at 6:00 p.m. in the Central time zone, and immediately after the broadcast of the Oscars in the Pacific and Mountain time zones. 
