The second season of the fantasy TV series "Game of Thrones" premiered in the U.S. on HBO on 1 April 2012. Like the first season, it consists of ten episodes. It mostly covers the events of "A Clash of Kings", the second book of the "A Song of Ice and Fire" novels by George R. R. Martin, of which the series is an adaptation.
Production.
HBO ordered a second season of "Game of Thrones" on 19 April 2011, two days after the series premiere. The second season obtained a 15% increase in budget in order to be able to stage the war's most important battle, the Battle of the Blackwater, in episode nine. 
Filming took place during 106 shooting days. During three-quarters of those, two crews ("Dragon" and "Wolf") were working simultaneously in different locations. 
Casting.
Emerging as the fourth claimant to the throne is the estranged brother of the late king Robert, Stannis Baratheon (Stephen Dillane). The foreign priestess Melisandre, portrayed by Carice van Houten poses as an influential, yet manipulative advisor to Stannis. Van Houten was previously asked (but unable) to audition for the role of Cersei in season one. While her character retains her signature red robes and hair, unlike in the novels Melisandre is not portrayed as having red eyes, making her appear somewhat more human. Readers argued over Melisandre's representation as a very black and evil character as opposed to the more enigmatic persona she exhibits in the novels. Liam Cunningham stars as Ser Davos Seaworth, the "Onion Knight", a bannerman of Stannis and a former smuggler. Cunningham had already been in talks for a role in the first season. As he is left-handed, his Davos has the fingers of the right hand shortened, unlike in the novels where his left hand is crippled. In an interview, Cunningham said that a lot of new dialogue had to be written for his character, because in the novels Davos, a point-of-view character, is portrayed more through his thoughts than through his actions. These three characters headed a new storyline set on a different location, that by the end of the season merged with the main plot.
Theon Greyjoy (Alfie Allen), a main cast member from the first season, but with lesser importance than the others, came to prominence during the second season, as his story unfolded and his character become more central. A great role in his development played his father and sister, as well as his homeland. Gemma Whelan appeared as his sister, Yara Greyjoy. Named "Asha" in the novels, the character's name was changed to avoid confusion with the Wildling Osha, Bran Stark's companion. "Asha" is portrayed as a fairly provocative and independent woman, a captain of thirty ships, as opposed to her television counterpart Yara, who did not retain "Asha's" traits, although her rivalry with Theon remained untacked. Their father Balon Greyjoy was played by Patrick Malahide. Many of the characters involved in the Greyjoys' storyline weren't introduced, most notably Balon's brother Aeron Greyjoy. Nonetheless, the storyline faced enormous praise, with the alternation of Yara's name and persona being the only criticism.
Tom Wlaschiha is cast as Jaqen H'ghar, a mysterious prisoner who develops a murderous relationship with young Arya Stark (Maisie Williams). Wlaschiha's pronunciation of his character's name, "Jack-in", was adopted for use in the show. Natalie Dormer, best known for her portrayal as seductive Anne Boleyn in Showtime's "The Tudors", was cast in a similar role as Margaery Tyrell, a noblewoman and the wife of the third claimant to the throne, Renly Baratheon. Gwendoline Christie played, to much praise, Brienne of Tarth, a female warrior who joins Renly Baratheon's guard, but later becomes a follower of Catelyn Stark. To prepare for the role, Christie took up an intense training regimen, adding over a stone (6.4 kg) of muscle mass. So that she could be mistaken for a man, her armor was decorated with lines that slant away from her hips. On the other side of the fictional world, two female roles with rising prominence were added to the cast: "Skins" star Hannah Murray filled the role of Craster's daughter Gilly, a love interest to Samwell Tarly; while the second role, the one of Ygritte, Jon Snow's love interest among the Wildlings, was played by Rose Leslie.
Daenerys Targaryen's (Emilia Clarke) stay at Qarth, opened the way for several recurring characters. Nonso Anozie played Daenerys's host at Qarth, Xaro Xhoan Daxos. The character differed a lot from his novel counterpart. Xaro's homosexuality, femininity and caucasian origin were overshadowed by dark skined Anozie's masculinity and heterosexuality. Acting as one of her suitors is the treacherous warlock Pyat Pree portrayed by Ian Hanmore. Her third and final suitor was the masked priestess Quaithe (Laura Pradelska). Specially created for the television series was the so-called "Spice King", a rich merchant from Qarth, played by Nicholas Blane. Also an original creation of the show is the character of Talisa (Oona Chaplin), a healer from Volantis and a romantic interest for Robb. She fills the role of another female interest of Robb's, called Jeyne Westerling, who has no similarities with Talisa whatsoever. In addition to Talisa, Michael McElhatton joins the cast in the role of Roose Bolton, an important character in Robb Stark's storyline. Lastly, Simon Armstrong plays the legendary Night's Watch ranger Qhorin Halfhand.
Others were also added to the cast. Either in a small recurring role or with reduced prominence. The most notable example is Tony Way's Ser Dontos Hollard, a drunkard knight, who had a pivotal role in Sansa Stark's storyline that ran in the course of two books, while in the series the role was reduced to a small scene in the opening episode. Others include: Ben Crompton as "Dolorous Edd" Tollet, a man of the Night's Watch. Robert Pugh as the Wildling Craster, father and husband to Gilly. Kerr Logan as Davos Seaworth's pious son Matthos.
Karl Davies as Ser Alton Lannister, a character created for the series who replaces Cleos Frey as envoy from the Starks to the Lannisters. Daniel Portman took the role of Podrick Payne, the squire to Tyrion Lannister. The 19-year-old Portman plays Podrick as about 16 years old, instead of about 12 as in the novels. To be able to portray Podrick as awkward, shy and weak, Portman, previously a sportsman, stopped his fitness regimen and gained some weight to appear more endearing. Lucian Msamati played Salladhor Saan, a Lysene pirate and friend of Davos Seaworth. Finally, Edward Dogliani appeared briefly as the "Lord of Bones" (or "Rattleshirt" in the novels), a Wildling leader and Oliver Ford Davies as Stannis's maester Cressen.
All of the recurring characters from the first season returned, with one notable exception: Conan Stevens, whose role of Gregor Clegane was recast with Ian Whyte did not return. Interestingly enough, Roy Dotrice, a friend of George R.R. Martin, known for reading the audio versions of the books, having previously rejected a role due to health reasons, appears this season as Pyromancer Hallyne, an elderly alchemist at King's Landing.
Locations.
For the second season, the city of Dubrovnik, Croatia, was used instead of Malta for scenes in King's Landing and elsewhere. Scenes set north of the Wall were filmed in Iceland, on the Vatnajökull glacier, in November 2011. New shooting locations in Northern Ireland include The Linen Mill Film & Television Studios, Banbridge, Ballintoy Harbour, Gosford Castle, outside Markethill in County Armagh and at Downhill Strand.
Promotion.
HBO released numerous teaser trailers for the second season, beginning on 11 December 2011. The second trailer, published on 29 January 2012, was viewed 3.5 million times in the first three days after publication, a record for HBO promotional content. Other trailers were released on 24 February, 3 March (set to Florence and the Machine's "Seven Devils") as well as subsequently. 
HBO also published other promotional material, such as cast photographs and teaser posters, prior to the airing of the first episode. The second issue of "Entertainment Weekly" in March 2012 had four alternative covers dedicated to in-costume photographs of Peter Dinklage (Tyrion), Emilia Clarke (Daenerys), Kit Harington (Jon Snow) or Nikolaj Coster-Waldau and Lena Headey (Jaime and Cersei Lannister).
Music.
The music for the second season, again composed by Ramin Djawadi, was published as a soundtrack album in June 2012. It contains a rendition of a song often mentioned or sung in the novels, "The Rains of Castamere", by the indie rock band "The National".
Reception.
Thanks to the critical and commercial success of the first season, as well as HBO's marketing efforts, the second season received intensive media coverage well before it started airing. "Sunday is Coming", a two-minute short film for "Funny or Die", satirized viewers' excitement about the return of "Game of Thrones".
Critical response.
Several media reviewed the season's first four episodes before they were broadcast, and rendered almost uniformly positive verdicts. The season holds a Metacritic score of 88 out of 100, indicating "universal acclaim". 
"Entertainment Weekly" rated the new season "A-" and praised the "vivid, vital, and just plain fun" storytelling. In the reviewer's opinion, the greatly enlarged cast did not feel like bloat and the show remained accessible to those who had not read the novel. "The Huffington Post" called the start of the second season "far more elegant and engaging" than that of the first, and appreciated the show's maturation, increased assurance and momentum as well as the visually improved settings and the new actors' performance. "Newsday"s review gave it an "A+", calling it the "best show on television" and warranting the preparation required by viewers. 
"The Hollywood Reporter" also wrote that "Game of Thrones" made a "strong case for being one of TV's best series". Impressed that the series continued to improve in quality as it breathed life into its vast web of interconnected storylines, the reviewer considered that, unlike other genre shows, "Game of Thrones" had gravitas such that it should not be considered dramatically inferior to shows like "Mad Men" or "Breaking Bad". "HitFix"s Alan Sepinwall gave the new, "bigger and better" season an "A", praising its increased confidence and smoothness despite its even greater use of "sexposition". New to the series, the "Chicago Sun-Times"s reviewer found the season premiere "engrossing" and praised the "top-notch" acting, writing, sets and storytelling. The "New York Times" was the only major publication to publish a mixed review. It criticized the lack of complexity in the characters apart from Dinklage's, the confusing multitude of characters and the meandering plot.
Awards.
The second season has been nominated for 12 Primetime Emmy Awards, which include Outstanding drama series and Outstanding supporting actor for Peter Dinklage.
DVD, Blu-ray and download release.
DVD/Blu-ray box sets and digital downloads of the second season are to be made available by 19 February 2013. The DVD set is to contain a 30-minute feature covering the production of the episode "Blackwater", actor interviews, character profiles, twelve audio commentaries by cast and crew, and a discussion about Westerosi religions by the showrunners and George R.R. Martin. The Blu-ray set is additionally to contain a feature about the "War of the Five Kings" that breaks out in season two, as well as 19 animated histories of the mythology of Westeros and Essos.
Cast.
Main cast.
Peter Dinklage in the role of Tyrion Lannister headlines the main cast, replacing Sean Bean. Dinklage, who in the first season was featured at the end of the cast list, signed on to the series for six seasons. Following Dinklage is Lena Headey as the Queen Regent Cersei Lannister with Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as her brother Ser Jaime Lannister. Coster-Waldau appeared in only four episodes despite him being part of the main cast. The reason for this was his character's imprisonment, that ended near the end of the season. Michelle Fairley returns as matriach Lady Catelyn Stark. Emilia Clarke also returns as Princess Daenerys Targaryen.
Aidan Gillen is credited next, as Lord Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish. Iain Glen follows as Ser Jorah Mormont, Daenerys's advisor. Kit Harington returns to play Jon Snow, while Charles Dance is upgraded to the main cast in the role of Lord Tywin Lannister, the Lannister's patriarch. As mentioned before Liam Cunningham joins the main cast as Ser Davos Seaworth, a knight in the service of King Stannis. Isaac Hempstead-Wright, Richard Madden, Sophie Turner and Maisie Williams all return as the four Stark children, Bran, Robb, Sansa and Arya respectively. Alfie Allen becomes central in this season in the role of disgraced prince Theon Greyjoy. Natalie Dormer of "The Tudors" fame is added to the cast as Queen Margaery Tyrell. John Bradley's recurring role of Samwell Tarly, a friend of Jon Snow, as of the second season is credited in the main cast.
Jack Gleeson resumes his portrayal as devious King Joffrey Baratheon, with Rory McCann as Sandor "The Hound" Clegane, his bodyguard. Stephen Dillane and Carice van Houten appear as new characters, Stannis Baratheon, a new claimant to the throne and Melisandre, a foreign priestess and Stannis' advisor respectively. Of the remaining cast, all of the four are upgraded to the main cast as of the second season: James Cosmo as Lord Commander Jeor Mormont, Jerome Flynn as Tyrion's right hand Bronn, Conleth Hill as the eunuch Lord Varys and finally Sibel Kekilli as Tyrion's concubine Shae.
Guest cast.
In the court of Joffrey Baratheon at King's Landing, many characters appear in a recurring manner. Callum Wharry and Aimee Richardson appear as Joffrey's brother and sister, Prince Tommen and Princess Myrcella Baratheon. Concurrently, Julian Glover and Dominic Carter star as Grand Maester Pycelle and Lord Janos Slynt, members of the Small Council. Ian Beattie plays Ser Meryn Trant, a knight of the Kingsguard, while Eugene Simon returns as Ser Lancel Lannister, a cousin to the ruling Lannisters and lover to Cersei. Roy Dotrice stars in the small role of alchemist Hallyne, while Daniel Portman stars as Tyrion's squire Podrick "Pod" Payne. Esmé Bianco returns as prostitue Ros with Sahara Knite and Maisie Dee as other women from the brothel.
At the court of Stannis Baratheon at Dragonstone, Oliver Ford Davies stars briefly as Maester Cressen, until his emminent death. Kerr Logan plays Matthos Seaworth, Davos' son, and Lucian Msamati pirate Salladhor Saan. At Robb Stark's camp, new faces surface during the course of the season. Michael McElhatton and John Stahl as Lord Roose Bolton and Lord Rickard Karstark, are bannerman to Robb Stark, while Oona Chaplin's Talisa Maegyr is Robb's love interest. In Winterfell, Robb's home, Art Parkinson returns as Prince Rickon Stark, who together with his brother Bran rule the castle. Due to age, they are aided by Maester Luwin (Donald Sumpter) and Ser Rodrik Cassel (Ron Donachie), while half-giant Hodor (Kristian Nairn) and Wilding Osha (Natalia Tena) serve as their companions.
Renly Baratheon (Gethin Anthony) and Balon Greyjoy (Patrick Malahide) emerge as another claimants to the throne. Renly has his knight and lover Loras Tyrell (Finn Jones) as his most trusted companion, until adept female warrior Brienne of Tarth (Gwendoline Christie) enters his service. On the Iron Islands, Balon is aided by his loving daughter Yara (Gemma Whelan). When Balon's son Theon returns to his homeland he is given Dagmer "Cleftjaw" (Ralph Ineson) and Black Lorren (Forbes KB) as his followers. 
In her adventures, Arya Stark is accompanied by Lommy Greenhands (Eros Vlahos), Hot Pie (Ben Hawkey) and Gendry (Joe Dempsie). At first she is bound to the wall, with a group of people led by 
Francis Magee's Yoren. In the group she acquaints three prisoners, Tom Wlaschiha as the mysterious Jaqen H'ghar and Andy Beckwith as Rorge with Gerard Jordan as Biter. Once the group is captured and brought to Harrenhal, they are met by Ian Whyte as Ser Gregor Clegane, Fintan McKeown as Ser Amory Lorch, Anthony Morris as The Tickler and Andy Kellegher as Polliver. Beyond the Wall, Jon Snow joins a group of rangers led by Simon Armstrong as Qhorin Halfhand, while his friends at the Night's Watch camp include: Ben Crompton as Eddison "Dolorous Edd" Tollett and Mark Stanley as Grenn. On their journey they stop at Wilding Craster (Robert Pugh), where they meet his daughter Gilly (Hannah Murray). Finally Jon meets and falls for Wilding Ygritte, played by "Downton Abbey" alumni Rose Leslie.
Daenerys is greeted at the city of Qarth where she spends her time in the second season. Amrita Acharia and Roxanne McKee return as her handmaidnes Irri and Doreah, with Elyes Gabel and Steven Cole as her bloodriders Rakharo and Kovarro. Her host at Qarth is Xaro Xhoan Daxos (Nonso Anozie), while Nicholas Blane appears as her suitor the Spice King and Ian Hanmore as another suitor and warlock Pyat Pree. Lastly, Laura Pradelska stars as the enigmatic Quaithe.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
