The Bachelor is an American reality television dating game show debuting in 2002 on ABC. For all seasons, the show is hosted by veteran television personality, one-time game show host and news anchor Chris Harrison. There are two related series: "The Bachelorette" and "Bachelor Pad".
Production.
It is produced and directed by Mike Fleiss and is shot by camera operator Jesse Fleiss.
Plot.
The series revolves around a single bachelor (deemed eligible) and a pool of romantic interests (typically 25; 30 in season 15), which could include a potential wife for the bachelor. The conflicts in the series, both internal and external, stem from the elimination-style format of the show. Early in the season, the bachelor goes on large group dates with the women, with the majority of women eliminated during rose ceremonies. As the season progresses, women are also eliminated on one-on-one dates and on elimination two-on-one dates. The process culminates with hometown visits to the families of the final four women, overnight dates, should they choose to accept, at exotic locations with the final three women, and interaction with the bachelor's family with the final two women. In many cases, the bachelor proposes to his final selection.
During most seasons, the majority of the show takes place, and the contestants reside, in "Villa De La Vina," a , six-bedroom, nine-bath home in Agoura Hills, California. The custom home, built in 2005, is located on 10 acres at a confidential location. As of October 10, 2008, the home was listed for sale at a price of US$8.75 million. This mansion is used throughout of most seasons of the show, with the exceptions of New York City, where Charlie O'Connell, who had appeared in "Sliders" with his brother Jerry O'Connell, lived, where season 7 was filmed; Paris, France for season 8; Rome, Italy for season 9, where Lorenzo Borghese is half-Italian and various locations in the U.S. such as Northern California and Utah for season 16, where Ben Flajnik filmed his season in his hometown for early episodes of that season.
The show is known for its dramatic twists, both structurally and contextually. In some cases, the bachelor may or may not follow the show's standard rose ceremony guidelines. Numerous bachelors, for instance, have conferred fewer roses than allotted as per standard rose ceremony procedure; others have eliminated both women on a two-on-one date. One bachelor, Brad Womack, selected neither of his final two women. Another, Jason Mesnick, proposed to one woman, and then changed his mind during the "After the Final Rose" show to the other finalist; Mesnick is now married to her. Other twists include a woman leaving the show for work-related reasons and the dismissal of one candidate for an alleged affair with an ex-producer of the show.
The show's success has led producer Mike Fleiss to create multiple spin-offs, including "The Bachelorette", in which the format is gender-reversed. Many bachelorettes are runner-ups or eliminated contestants from "The Bachelor", including Trista Rehn, whose wedding to Ryan Sutter – the show's winner – was televised on ABC. On August 9, 2010, "Bachelor Pad" premiered, giving previous contestants of both "The Bachelor" and "The Bachelorette" the opportunity to compete in dating-themed eliminations for $250,000.
The elimination process.
According to the summary on ABC.com, each new "Bachelor" episode contains a rose ceremony during which one or more contestants is eliminated. Eliminations are based upon date performance (i.e., how the women relate to the bachelor on the dates). The bachelor must follow a process of elimination wherein his pool of bachelorettes is narrowed down week by week by presenting a rose to each of the women he wishes to keep.
At any point during the process, if a woman decides she is no longer interested in the bachelor, she may leave. A few have actually done so over the course of the show.
In the end, the bachelor may select only one woman for the final rose. Several of the bachelors have proposed, and one bachelor selected no one.
As of the end of season 16, none of the bachelors has married the woman to whom he presented the final rose. The season 13 bachelor (Jason) ended up marrying his season's runner-up in February 2010; to this point, it is the only "Bachelor" season thus far to result directly in the bachelor's marriage.
Controversies.
As of January 2012, "The Bachelor" and its popular spin-off show "The Bachelorette" have never featured a non-white contestant in the title role, in their combined 21 seasons. Furthermore, a disproportionate majority of the rest of the contestants featured on the show have been white. When asked about the lack of minority representation on the two shows executive producer, Mike Fleiss, responded, "It's just that for whatever reason, they don't come forward. I wish they would."
Questions of authenticity.
Former contestants, as well as the show's creator, Mike Fleiss, have come forth asserting that both "The Bachelor" and "The Bachelorette" are scripted. "The Bachelorette" star Jesse Csincsak argued that contestants had to follow producers' orders and that a storyline was created in the editing room.
On February 26, 2009, in an exclusive interview between "The Bachelor" Season 13 contestant Megan Parris, and Steve Carbone, Megan commented that the producers edit the footage to create a fictional storyline. "I don't think producers showed any real conversation I had with anyone... The viewers fail to realize that editing is what makes the show... You'll hear someone make one comment and then they'll show a clip of somebody's face to make it look like "that" is their facial reaction to that statement, but really, somebody made that face the day before to something else. It's just piecing things together to make a story."
On March 26, 2009, Megan Parris argued that not only was the show scripted, but that producers bullied contestants into saying things to the camera that contestants did not want to say. "'There's nothing real about it,' she said of the show's trademark "confessionals," in which contestants talk to the camera about the latest goings-on. "It is scripted," she said. "They basically will call you names, berate you, curse at you until they get you to say what they want you to say." Both ABC and Warner Bros., the studio that produces "The Bachelor," had no comment."
On March 15, 2010, creator Mike Fleiss appeared on "20/20" and said that he develops contestants into characters that will cater to his audience's tastes and that they "need fair share of villains every season." Fleiss has come under fire for admitting that "The Bachelor" has less to do with reality than it does making good television.
On February 24, 2012, during the taping of "The Women Tell All" episode of "The Bachelor," a private conversation between contestant Courtney Robertson and a show producer went public when microphones were accidentally left on in between camera takes. The conversation revealed the producer's role as an acting coach encouraging Robertson to fake certain emotions for the camera which she was not feeling.
Reality Steve.
The self-named Reality Steve (aka Steve Carbone) has been accurately leaking spoilers of "The Bachelor" since the 13th season in 2009. He publishes rumors of the show, including its spin-offs "The Bachelorette" and "Bachelor Pad" on his blog. In December 2011, the producer of The Bachelor sued Carbone for leaking information about the show. The suit claims that Carbone encouraged contestants on both "The Bachelor" and "The Bachelorette" to break their confidentiality agreements. Reality Steve has denied that the source of the spoilers and rumors are current contestants.
Video game.
A video game based on the series has been released on the Wii and Nintendo DS.
Parodies.
Ben Stiller produced a web spoof of the series entitled "Burning Love".
