Khiladi 786 is a Bollywood action comedy film directed by Ashish R Mohan, featuring Akshay Kumar in the title role alongside Asin Thottumkal playing the female lead. The film also features Mithun Chakraborty, Raj Babbar, Mukesh Rishi and Himesh Reshammiya in supporting roles. The film marks the return of Akshay Kumar to his famous "Khiladi" film series after 12 years. The film is mostly shot in Mumbai and Punjab. It released on 7 December 2012, and received positive response from critics and do well at the box office.
Synopsis.
The story follows Mansukh (Himesh Reshammiya), the son of a marriage bureau owner Champak Lal (Manoj Joshi). Since he has grown up, Mansukh tries to help his father in the business, however all the alliances he had tried to get done have resulted in separation even before the marriage took place. To prove his worth to his father, he takes up an unusual challenge of getting an underworld don Tatya Tukaram Tendulkar's (Mithun Chakraborty), spoilt brat sister Indu (Asin Thottumkal) getting married to a cop called Bahattar Singh (Akshay Kumar) aka Khiladi 786 in Punjab. He convinces Tatya to pretend to be a cop to make Bahattar agree to the marriage. But little did the over enthusiast Mansukh know that Bahattar Singh, along with his father Sattar Singh (Raj Babbar) and his uncle Ikhattar Singh (Mukesh Rishi) were not cops but a family of conmen. The story takes a shape as the two hardcore families pretend to be policemen in front of each other and the beans from each side can be spilled anytime which can be life threatening for Mansukh. And to make the situation worse, it turns out that Indu has a boyfriend, Azad (Rahul Singh), who is a criminal locked up in jail. When Bahattar finds out, he helps Azad escape from jail to make Indu happy. But no sooner does Indu realize that she truly loves Bahattar. Will she reveal this truth to Bahattar and marry him? And will the two families find out the truth about each other?
Summary.
The film starts with a wedding which is organised by Mansukh's(Himesh Reshammiya), father Champak Lal (Manoj Joshi). Champak pulled many strings in order for this marriage to happen but his son, Mansukh, was heard by the whole crowd through a dropped microphone that the wedding was done for the girl. After that the scene moves to a village where a few trucks, which have smuggled loot in them, are raided by a cop called Bahattar Singh (Akshay Kumar) aka Khiladi 786. Then we come back to Mansukh, who is now kicked out of his house by his dad, is agitated to organise his own wedding. A car driven very fast by Indu (Asin Thottumkal) with a groom who wants to marry her. Coincidentally, Mansukh is there too with his friend. An underworld don Tatya Tukaram Tendulkar's (Mithun Chakraborty) is Indu's brother and wants to get her married to a decent family. Mansukh promises that he will bring a groom within 10 days. From there Mansukh leaves for the village where Bahattar is. It is also revealed that Bahattar and his family are not cops but are acting as one. Mansukh comes with the relationship not knowing this. He lies about Tatya, that he is a cop as well. Both of them accept and pretend to be cops. Indu doesn't like Bahattar because he is a cop and she already has a boyfriend Azaad (Rahul Singh). After a few tries to scare Bhattar, Indu decides to tell him that she has a boyfriend. Bahattar now frees Azaad and brings him to Indu. Indu is now told by Bahattar that he is not a cop. Indu realises that she loves Bahattar. After that the wedding is commenced, and after a few tries to stop the wedding after the truth is out, Azaad kidnaps Indu and takes her. Bahattar comes and rescues her and starts hitting Azaad but then he is stopped by his lost brother Tehattar Singh also Akshay Kumar. The family is reunited and the wedding finishes and everyone is happy.
Production.
In March 2012, it was announced that Ashish R Mohan and Himesh Reshammiya would be creating an action-comedy film starring Akshay kumar. In April 2012, days before the release of Kumar's blockbuster "Housefull 2", it was reported that the project would be titled "Khiladi 786" and would mark Kumar's comeback to the "Khiladi" series after 12 years, the last being "Khiladi 420". The film has been given an "U" certificate from the CBFC.
Casting.
The film was announced to be releasing on 12 November 2012 on Diwali. However, the film's producer, Himesh Reshammiya reported casting issues therefore the film was delayed. In April 2012 Amitabh Bachchan was signed to play a main role in the film, however soon dropped out, and was replaced by Mithun Chakraborty. Claudia Ciesla was also roped in an special appearance to do an item-number in the film. Also, many rumors went out about the choice for the female leads. The choices included Ileana D'Cruz, Nargis Fakhri and Diana Penty. However, in June 2012, Asin was signed to play the leading lady of the film, putting all rumours to a stop.
Filming.
The filming began on 2 June 2012, for a 20 day schedule in Kamalistan Studios. During the first schedule of "Khiladi 786", Akshay performed a dangerous stunt where he jumped from a balcony of a bungalow of about 45 feet without any cables, wires or body-doubles. The only thing to soften his jump were some mattresses and card-boxes. The action sequences of the film have been provided by Jal Singh Nijjar.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack of the film is composed by Himesh Reshammiya and the music is sold to T-Series, Eros Music and HR Musik. Lyrics are penned by Sameer, Shabbir Ahmed and Himesh Reshammiya. Also, Punjab's most popular rapper, Yo Yo Honey Singh recorded the song "Lonely" for the film, and the song turned out to be widely popular specially amongst the youth. Reshammiya sang the song "Hookah Bar" for the film, which was even more popular. Other songs from the film, including "Long Drive" and "Balma" were also huge success all over India. The soundtrack received an "Superhit" verdict with 5 stars. 
Review.
The film received mixed to negative reviews from the critics. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4/5 and said "On the whole, KHILADI 786 is not for purists, but for lovers of hardcore masala films completely. If zany amusement, wacky humor and over the top entertainers is what you enjoy, this one's for you. Go, have fun!" . Madhureeta Mukherjee of Times of India gave the film 3/5 and said "In Khiladi 786 Debutant director Ashish R Mohan's masala potboiler style is unmistakably reminiscent of his guru, Rohit Shetty's films". Rummana Ahmed of Yahoo gave it 3.5 stars saying "Watch it if you are a die-hard Akshay Kumar fan and are willing to overlook the complete lack of any clever humour.". Social Movie Rating site MOZVO rated it at 4.1 putting it in hit category 
Box Office.
India.
"Khiladi 786" opened with a very good response at single screens as well as at multiplexes also. Khiladi 786 has good opening with a collection of around on its first day. It breaks the record of "Ek Tha Tiger" first day collection. It netted on its second day of release. Khiladi 786 had further growth of around 20% on Sunday,netting bringing the total nett collections to around at the end of its first weekend. The film had good collection of in its first week. It further netted around in its second weekend. Khiladi 786 collected in week two. Khiladi 786 grossed around in week three taking its total to 230.50 crore nett, making it a Blockbuster.
Overseas.
Khiladi 786 was good at overseas with around $3.6 million over the first weekend. Khiladi 786 has collected $5.9 million in ten days in overseas.
