Ayushmann Khurrana is an Indian television anchor, film actor and singer. In 2012, Khurrana made his Bollywood debut in Shoojit Sircar's romantic comedy "Vicky Donor", which touched on the topic of sperm donation. Upon release, the film was a critical and commercial success, and Khurrana received positive reviews for his performance.
Early life and education.
Ayushmann Khurrana is a native of Chandigarh. He studied at St. John’s High School and DAV College in Chandigarh. He majored in English Literature and has done Masters in Mass Communication from School of Communication Studies, Punjab University, Chandigarh. He has been active in theatre for 5 years. He was the founder member of DAV College’s Aaghaaz and Manchtantra, which are active theatre groups in Chandigarh. He has conceptualized and enacted in street plays and won prizes in national fests like Mood Indigo (IIT Bombay), Oasis (Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani) and St. Bedes Simla. He also won a Best Actor award for playing Ashwatthama in Dharamvir Bharati’s Andha Yug.
Career and Later Life.
Television.
Ayushmann Khurrana started his career when he turned out to be the winner in "MTV Roadies Season 2". After finishing studies, his first job was a Radio Jockey at BIG FM, Delhi. He hosted the show Big Chai – Maan Na Maan, Main Tera Ayushmann and also won the Young Achievers Award in 2007 for it. After radio, Khurrana moved on to become a Video Jockey on MTV with Pepsi MTV Wassup, The Voice of Youngistaan, an informative show for the youth.
He also worked in many other MTV shows as well like MTV Fully Faltoo Movies "Cheque De India" and "Jaadoo Ek Baar". He then turned as Television Anchor with a multiple-talent based reality show India's Got Talent on Colors TV which he co-anchored with Nikhil Chinapa and Stripped which gave latest updates on the Indian TV industry with comic tinge, again on MTV. At the end of the year he was also the anchor of a singing reality show "Music Ka Maha Muqqabla" on STAR Plus.
Apart from hosting the second seasons of "MTV Rock On" on MTV and "India's Got Talent" on Colors, Khurrana was also a part of the anchoring team of Extra Innings T20 for Indian Premier League Season 3 on SET Max with Gaurav Kapur, Samir Kochhar and Angad Bedi. Instead of hosting the 3rd season of India's Got Talent, Khurrana took up the offer of anchoring the dance-based reality show "Just Dance" on STAR Plus judged by Hrithik Roshan, Vaibhavi Merchant and Farah Khan.
Films.
In 2012, he made his Bollywood debut with Shoojit Sircar's "Vicky Donor" opposite Yami Gautam. The film marked actor John Abraham's debut as producer.
