Joel Thomas Zimmerman (born January 5, 1981), better known by his stage name Deadmau5 (pronounced "dead mouse"), is a Canadian electro-house music producer, DJ, and performer based in Toronto. Deadmau5 produces a variety of styles with the house genre and sometimes other forms of electronic dance music. His tracks have been included in compilation albums such as "", MixMag's "Tech-Trance-Electro-Madness" (mixed by Zimmerman), and on Armin van Buuren's "A State of Trance" radio show. His debut album, "Get Scraped", was released in 2005, followed by others in the next few years.
As well as his own solo releases, Deadmau5 has worked alongside other DJs and producers, such as Kaskade, MC Flipside, Rob Swire of Pendulum, Skrillex, Bighorse and Steve Duda (under the alias "BSOD"). He is known for performing in an iconic headdress, the "mau5head," which resembles a mouse head that he originally created while learning to use a 3D program. The "mau5head" appears in many different colors and designs, and has been shown on the cover of most of Zimmerman's albums, with the exceptions of "At Play" and "Vexillology".
Early life.
Zimmerman was born in Niagara Falls, Ontario. His mother, Nancy (née Johnson), is a visual artist, and his father, Rodney Thomas "Rod" Zimmerman, is a General Motors plant worker. He has two siblings, Jennifer (older) and Chris (younger). His ancestry includes German, Swiss, and English. He received his first keyboard for Christmas when he was a teenager. His career began in the late 1990s, with a chiptune and demoscene movements-influenced sound.
Career.
Self-released compilations.
Three self-released compilations, Project 56, deadmau5 Circa 1998-2002, and A Little Oblique, were finished in 2006, with Project 56 seeing an official release in February 2008.
"Get Scraped".
"Just Before 8bit" and "Nice Try, Kiddo" from Project 56 were expanded upon in Zimmerman's 2005 debut album "Get Scraped" and renamed "8bit" and "Try Again", respectively. It features tracks of a variety of genres, including IDM, ambient/downtempo, noise pop and trip hop. Tracks "Bored of Canada", "Intelstat" and "I Forget" reappear on this album as is, as well as "The Oshawa Connection" from "deadmau5 Circa 1998-2002".
mau5trap label and "Random Album Title".
In 2007, Zimmerman began his own record label "mau5trap", which, along with Ultra Records and Ministry of Sound, released the 2008 album Random Album Title, which saw the collaboration of deadmau5 and San-Francisco producer Kaskade with I Remember. "Random Album Title", saw a digital release in September 2008 via Ultra Records in the United States and Ministry of Sound in the United Kingdom and Europe. Physical copies of the album were released in November 2008.
In the United States, deadmau5's collaboration with Kaskade, "Move for Me", reached No. 1 on "Billboard" magazine's Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart in its September 6, 2008 issue.
Since then, deadmau5 has seen three of his tracks, all collaborations ("Move for Me" and "I Remember" with Kaskade; "Ghosts 'n' Stuff" with Rob Swire) reach number-one on Billboard's Dance/Mix Show Airplay chart, making him the only Canadian on that chart to achieve that status. He is also the fifth Canadian to top that chart, following Deborah Cox, Nelly Furtado, Dragonette, and Justin Bieber, with one apiece.
In 2009, he was the best-selling artist on Beatport with more than 30,000 digital downloads with his singles "Not Exactly", "Faxing Berlin", and "Ghosts 'n' Stuff".
"For Lack of a Better Name".
Information on his album "For Lack of a Better Name" was posted on his official MySpace page.
In the fall of 2009, deadmau5's performances were recorded and made available for sale immediately following the concert on USB wristband flash drives.
"For Lack of a Better Name" includes two of Zimmerman's most popular songs, "Ghosts 'n' Stuff" (featuring Rob Swire) and "Strobe".
MTV recognition.
MTV named deadmau5 as the house DJ for the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards and MTV PUSH artist of the week on August 16, 2010. He expressed gratitude towards Lady Gaga and David Guetta for bringing dance into the pop music scene and paving the way for him to the mainstream. At the awards, deadmau5 performed with Jason Derulo and Travie McCoy. His song "Ghosts 'n' Stuff" had been featured on the soundtrack for the MTV reality series "Jersey Shore" earlier.
"4x4=12".
His fifth studio album, titled "4×4=12", was released on December 6, 2010 in the United Kingdom and December 7, 2010 in the United States. Singles "Some Chords", "Animal Rights", "Sofi Needs a Ladder" have been released and have been featured on the album, with "Raise Your Weapon" released in 2011. "Some Chords" was featured on an episode of "" where deadmau5 made a cameo appearance, and an instrumental version of "Sofi Needs a Ladder" was featured in the film "The Hangover Part II".
"Album Title Goes Here".
On August 9, 2012, deadmau5 announced his upcoming sixth studio album, "Album Title Goes Here", which was released on September 24 of that year. Singles from this album include "Maths", "The Veldt" (featuring Chris James) and "Professional Griefers" featuring My Chemical Romance singer Gerard Way. This collaboration was announced on Facebook prior to release.
Video game appearances.
Deadmau5 is a playable avatar in "DJ Hero 2", a video game released in October 2010. The game featured several tracks by the artist, including a mix of Ghosts 'N Stuff with Lada Gaga's Just Dance.
His music has been included in more video game titles, including ', ', "FIFA 13", "Grand Theft Auto IV", ', ', "GoldenEye 007" and Sound Shapes.
Personal life.
The name "deadmau5" originated when Zimmerman claimed to have found a dead mouse in his computer while replacing his video card. He discussed this with chat room users and became known as "that dead mouse guy". The nickname "Deadmouse" was too long for the chat server, so he shortened it to deadmau5 (a form of leet spelling). He began producing under this alias in 2002.
While at his home in Toronto, Zimmerman spends much of his time broadcasting his work in his home studio (where he produces much of his music) to Ustream.
On July 30, 2010, at the in Washington, D.C., deadmau5 collapsed on stage, suffering from exhaustion and vomiting. deadmau5's set was cut short as he was rushed to a hospital, and his collapse also led to the cancellation of the nine shows following the event.
Zimmerman met Lindsey Evans, an American model and "Playboy" Playmate of the Month for October 2009, at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards in September 2010. They began dating soon after, and Evans moved to Toronto to live with him. They broke up in September 2011. In September 2012, Zimmerman began dating American tattoo artist and TV personality Kat Von D. They broke up in November 2012. On December 15, 2012, Zimmerman proposed to Von D over Twitter, and she accepted.
Live performances.
deadmau5 headlined the Dance Arena on July 10, 2009, at the Oxegen Festival in Ireland. He also headlined LovEvolution in San Francisco, California on October 3. He played at "Belsonic" in Belfast, Northern Ireland on August 28, at the Leeds, Reading, and Creamfields Festivals on August 29 and 30 in the Lock Up/Dance Tent/Mixmag stage, drawing a large crowd at each of the events. He has performed on BBC Radio 1 multiple times, which include an Essential Mix set on August 19, 2008, and a shared set with Pete Tong live at the Warehouse Project in Manchester on October 11, 2008. He played back to back shows that were broadcast via BBC Radio1 live from Ibiza on August 31 and September 1, 2009. deadmau5 was offered and accepted to play another set live on New Year's 2010 along with Justice, Eric Prydz, and Plump DJs.
deadmau5 performed at the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver, British Columbia on February 19, 2010, during the live medal presentations in men's luge doubles and biathlon (women's 15-km individual and men's 20-km individual). His track "Moar Ghosts 'n' Stuff" was aired on national TV throughout the United States when it was played over loudspeakers during Hannah Kearney's gold-medal run in women's moguls. deadmau5 also performed live at the Electric Daisy Carnival's Kinetic Fields section in Exposition Park, Los Angeles on June 25, 2010.
During Winter 2010, deadmau5 toured the United Kingdom and was supported by BBC Radio 1 DJ Zane Lowe, Magnetic Man,Dj Light, Calvin Harris, Stanton Warriors and Kim Fai. He also performed at the Scottish festival T in the Park 2011.
On November 5, 2011, deadmau5 became the first Canadian artist to headline a concert at the Rogers Centre in Toronto, which nearly 20,000 fans attended. deadmau5 closed out the last show of his record-breaking Meowington Hax Tour, recording the event for an upcoming DVD release and streamed the first 30 minutes live online. The light show spectacle featured a live appearance by Sofi for tracks "Sofi Needs A Ladder" and "One Trick Pony." The evening started off with a roster of opening acts including Crystal Castles, MSTRKRFT, Manzone & Strong, 7Wallace, Sydney Blu.
In the summer of 2012, on the 9th of June, Deadmau5 headlined in the Scottish music festival Rockness. 
DAW.
One of his songs, a remix of Reegz' "That's True", entitled, "That's Not True" is included with FL Studio. It notably differs in style from some of his more recent songs, and it features IDM elements rather than progressive house ones.
The majority of work he has produced since his rise to prominence was produced almost exclusively with Ableton Live and several electronic MIDI instruments and controllers, as well as modular instrument setups. His use of Ableton Live can be seen in many of his live screencasts.
Controversies.
Parodies.
In December 2007, Marcus Schossow, Maor Levi and Dj Eco created a project named Deadrat6 as a joke on deadmau5, claiming his tracks sound alike. A similar faux project was also created under the name of Sinterklaa5.
DirtyCircuit.
In 2008, an artist called DirtyCircuit claimed to have been threatened with legal action after using a sample called "LP_Faxing Berlin C_128bpm" that came bundled with FL Studio, and to which deadmau5 claimed copyright. The sample was a direct clip of a full bar of the song. deadmau5 provided a "Demo Track" which came bundled with FL Studio, along with several loop samples. The case caused a slight discomfort among the users of FL Studio, and some have pointed out potential inconsistencies in the EULA of the software.
Madonna.
In 2012, deadmau5 voiced his disapproval of a statement made by Madonna at the Ultra Music Festival. Her comment, "Has anyone seen Molly?" was believed by deadmau5 to be in reference to the drug MDMA. In response, Madonna said later during a live tweet session that,
Awards and nominations.
Beatport Music Awards.
On May 1, 2008, deadmau5 became the most awarded artist of the Beatport Music Awards. He was named "Best Progressive House Artist" by Beatport. (In 2009, Beatport also awarded deadmau5 the most awards that year, winning first place in both of his nominations, as well as being given the "Greatest House DJ Ever" award, two years in a row). In June 2010, Beatport announced the winners of their annual Beatport Music Awards, awarding deadmau5 Best Electro House Artist, Best Progressive House Artist, and as the "most influential, relevant and forward-thinking person in electronic music over the past 12 months".
International Dance Music Awards.
In March 2010, deadmau5 was nominated for four International Dance Music Awards, and won a further three, including Best Artist (Solo) and Best Canadian DJ (see complete list below).
Juno Awards.
deadmau5 received two nominations for the Juno Award for Dance Recording of the Year at the Juno Awards of 2008 for a track with Billy Newton-Davis and Melleefresh. He did not win an award for Melleefresh's "After Hours" song, but he won the award for Newton-Davis' "All U Ever Want".
DJ Magazine awards.
deadmau5 was also named "Producer of 2007" by "DJ Magazine"'s 2007 Top 100 winner Armin van Buuren, and by runner up Tiësto. In 2008, he placed No.11 in the "DJ Magazine" Top 100 poll, tying Infected Mushroom (2006) for the highest new entry in the poll's history, showing deadmau5's fast rise to prominence.
