""E. coli" redirects here. For the protozoan parasite, see Entamoeba coli."
Escherichia coli (; commonly abbreviated E. coli) is a Gram-negative, rod-shaped bacterium that is commonly found in the lower intestine of warm-blooded organisms (endotherms). Most "E. coli" strains are harmless, but some serotypes can cause serious food poisoning in humans, and are occasionally responsible for product recalls due to food contamination. The harmless strains are part of the normal flora of the gut, and can benefit their hosts by producing vitamin K2, and by preventing the establishment of pathogenic bacteria within the intestine.
"E. coli" and related bacteria constitute about 0.1% of gut flora, and fecal–oral transmission is the major route through which pathogenic strains of the bacterium cause disease. Cells are able to survive outside the body for a limited amount of time, which makes them ideal indicator organisms to test environmental samples for fecal contamination. There is, however, a growing body of research that has examined environmentally persistent "E. coli" which can survive for extended periods outside of the host.
The bacterium can also be grown easily and inexpensively in a laboratory setting, and has been intensively investigated for over 60 years. "E. coli" is the most widely studied prokaryotic model organism, and an important species in the fields of biotechnology and microbiology, where it has served as the host organism for the majority of work with recombinant DNA.
History.
The genera "Escherichia" and "Salmonella" diverged around 102 million years ago (credibility interval: 57–176 mya), which coincides with the divergence of their hosts: the former being found in mammals and the latter in birds and reptiles. This was followed by a split of the escherichian ancestor into five species ("E. albertii", "E. coli", "E. fergusonii", "E. hermannii" and "E. vulneris".) The last "E. coli" ancestor split between 20 and 30 million years ago.
In 1885, a German pediatrician, Theodor Escherich, first discovered this species in the feces of healthy individuals and called it "Bacterium coli commune" due to the fact it is found in the colon and early classifications of Prokaryotes placed these in a handful of genera based on their shape and motility (at that time Ernst Haeckel's classification of Bacteria in the kingdom Monera was in place).
"Bacterium coli" was the type species of the now invalid genus "Bacterium" when it was revealed that the former type species (""Bacterium triloculare"") was missing.
Following a revision of "Bacteria" it was reclassified as "Bacillus coli" by Migula in 1895 and later reclassified in the newly created genus "Escherichia", named after its original discoverer.
The genus belongs in a group of bacteria informally known as "coliforms", and is a member of the Enterobacteriaceae family ("the enterics") of the Gammaproteobacteria.
In May 2011, one "E. coli" strain, , has been the subject of a that began in Germany. Certain strains of "E. coli" are a major cause of foodborne illness. The outbreak started when several people in Germany were infected with enterohemorrhagic "E. coli" (EHEC) bacteria, leading to hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS), a medical emergency that requires urgent treatment. The outbreak did not only concern Germany, but 11 other countries, including regions in North America. On 30 June 2011 the German "Bundesinstitut für Risikobewertung (BfR)" ("Federal Institute for Risk Assessment", a federal, fully legal entity under public law of the Federal Republic of Germany, an institute within the German Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Consumer Protection) announced that seeds of fenugreek from Egypt were likely the cause of the EHEC outbreak.
Biology and biochemistry.
"E. coli" is Gram-negative, facultative anaerobic and non-sporulating. Cells are typically rod-shaped, and are about 2.0 microns (μm) long and 0.5 μm in diameter, with a cell volume of 0.6–0.7 (μm)3. It can live on a wide variety of substrates. "E. coli" uses mixed-acid fermentation in anaerobic conditions, producing lactate, succinate, ethanol, acetate and carbon dioxide. Since many pathways in mixed-acid fermentation produce hydrogen gas, these pathways require the levels of hydrogen to be low, as is the case when "E. coli" lives together with hydrogen-consuming organisms, such as methanogens or sulphate-reducing bacteria.
Optimal growth of "E. coli" occurs at 37 °C (98.6 °F) but some laboratory strains can multiply at temperatures of up to 49 °C (120.2 °F). Growth can be driven by aerobic or anaerobic respiration, using a large variety of redox pairs, including the oxidation of pyruvic acid, formic acid, hydrogen and amino acids, and the reduction of substrates such as oxygen, nitrate, fumarate, dimethyl sulfoxide and trimethylamine N-oxide.
Strains that possess flagella are motile. The flagella have a peritrichous arrangement.
"E. coli" and related bacteria possess the ability to transfer DNA via bacterial conjugation, transduction or transformation, which allows genetic material to spread horizontally through an existing population. This process led to the spread of the gene encoding shiga toxin from "Shigella" to , carried by a bacteriophage.
Diversity.
"Escherichia coli" encompasses an enormous population of bacteria that exhibit a very high degree of both genetic and phenotypic diversity. Genome sequencing of a large number of isolates of "E. coli" and related bacteria shows that a taxonomic reclassification would be desirable. However, this has not been done, largely due to its medical importance and "E. coli" remains one of the most diverse bacterial species: only 20% of the genome is common to all strains. 
In fact, from the evolutionary point of view, the members of genus "Shigella" ("S. dysenteriae", "S. flexneri", "S. boydii", "S. sonnei") should be classified as "E. coli" strains, a phenomenon termed taxa in disguise. Similarly, other strains of "E. coli" (e.g. the K-12 strain commonly used in recombinant DNA work) are sufficiently different that they would merit reclassification.
A strain is a sub-group within the species that has unique characteristics that distinguish it from other strains. These differences are often detectable only at the molecular level; however, they may result in changes to the physiology or lifecycle of the bacterium. For example, a strain may gain pathogenic capacity, the ability to use a unique carbon source, the ability to take upon a particular ecological niche or the ability to resist antimicrobial agents. Different strains of "E. coli" are often host-specific, making it possible to determine the source of fecal contamination in environmental samples. For example, knowing which "E. coli" strains are present in a water sample allows researchers to make assumptions about whether the contamination originated from a human, another mammal or a bird.
Serotypes.
A common subdivision system of "E. coli", but not based on evolutionary relatedness, is by serotype, which is based on major surface antigens (O antigen: part of lipopolysaccharide layer; H: flagellin; K antigen: capsule), e.g. O157:H7) (NB: K-12, the common laboratory strain is not a serotype.)
Genome plasticity.
Like all lifeforms, new strains of "E. coli" evolve through the natural biological processes of mutation, gene duplication and horizontal gene transfer, in particular 18% of the genome of the laboratory strain MG1655 was horizontally acquired since the divergence from "Salmonella". In microbiology, all strains of "E. coli" derive from "E. coli" K-12 or "E. coli" B strains. Some strains develop traits that can be harmful to a host animal. These virulent strains typically cause a bout of diarrhea that is unpleasant in healthy adults and is often lethal to children in the developing world. More virulent strains, such as cause serious illness or death in the elderly, the very young or the immunocompromised.
Neotype strain.
"E. coli" is the type species of the genus ("Escherichia") and in turn "Escherichia" is the type genus of the family "Enterobacteriaceae", where it should be noted that the family name does not stem from the genus "Enterobacter" + "i" (sic.) + "aceae", but from "enterobacterium" + "aceae" (enterobacterium being not a genus, but an alternative trivial name to enteric bacterium).
The original strain described by Escherich is believed to be lost, consequently a new type strain (neotype) was chosen as a representative: the neotype strain is ATCC 11775, also known as NCTC 9001, which is pathogenic to chickens and has an O1:K1:H7 serotype. However, in most studies either O157:H7 or K-12 MG1655 or K-12 W3110 are used as a representative "E.coli".
Phylogeny of "Escherichia coli" strains.
"Escherichia coli" is a species. A large number of strains belonging to this species have been isolated and characterised. In addition to serotype (vide supra), they can be classified according to their phylogeny, i.e. the inferred evolutionary history, as shown below where the species is divided into six groups.
The link between phylogenetic distance ("relatedness") and pathology is small, "e.g." the O157:H7 serotype strains, which form a clade ("an exclusive group") — group E below — are all enterohaerogic strains (EHEC), but not all EHEC strains are closely related. In fact, four different species of "Shigella" are nested among "E. coli" strains (vide supra), while "Escherichia albertii" and "Escherichia fergusonii" are outside of this group. All commonly used research strains of "E. coli" belong to group A and are derived mainly from Clifton's K-12 strain (λ⁺ F⁺; O16) and to a lesser degree from d'Herelle's "Bacillus coli" strain (B strain)(O7).
Genomics.
The first complete DNA sequence of an "E. coli" genome (laboratory strain K-12 derivative MG1655) was published in 1997. It was found to be a circular DNA molecule 4.6 million base pairs in length, containing 4288 annotated protein-coding genes (organized into 2584 operons), seven ribosomal RNA (rRNA) operons, and 86 transfer RNA (tRNA) genes. Despite having been the subject of intensive genetic analysis for approximately 40 years, a large number of these genes were previously unknown. The coding density was found to be very high, with a mean distance between genes of only 118 base pairs. The genome was observed to contain a significant number of transposable genetic elements, repeat elements, cryptic prophages, and bacteriophage remnants.
Today, over 60 complete genomic sequences of "Escherichia" and "Shigella" species are available. Comparison of these sequences shows a remarkable amount of diversity; only about 20% of each genome represents sequences present in every one of the isolates, while approximately 80% of each genome can vary among isolates. Each individual genome contains between 4,000 and 5,500 genes, but the total number of different genes among all of the sequenced E. coli strains (the pan-genome) exceeds 16,000. This very large variety of component genes has been interpreted to mean that two-thirds of the "E. coli" pangenome originated in other species and arrived through the process of horizontal gene transfer.
Proteomics.
Full sets of "E. coli" proteins and their interactions have also been isolated and studied. A 2006 study purified 4,339 proteins from cultures of strain K-12 and found interacting partnets for 2,667 proteins, many of which had unknown functions at the time. A 2009 study found 5,993 interactions between proteins of the same "E. coli" strain though this data showed little overlap with that of the 2006 publication.
Role as normal microbiota.
"E. coli" normally colonizes an infant's gastrointestinal tract within 40 hours of birth, arriving with food or water or with the individuals handling the child.
In the bowel, it adheres to the mucus of the large intestine. It is the primary facultative anaerobe of the human gastrointestinal tract. (Facultative anaerobes are organisms that can grow in either the presence or absence of oxygen.) As long as these bacteria do not acquire genetic elements encoding for virulence factors, they remain benign commensals.
Therapeutic use of nonpathogenic "E. coli".
Nonpathogenic "Escherichia coli" strain Nissle 1917 also known as Mutaflor is used as a probiotic agent in medicine, mainly for the treatment of various gastroenterological diseases, including inflammatory bowel disease.
Role in disease.
Virulent strains of "E. coli" can cause gastroenteritis, urinary tract infections, and neonatal meningitis. In rarer cases, virulent strains are also responsible for hemolytic-uremic syndrome, peritonitis, mastitis, septicemia and Gram-negative pneumonia.
UPEC (uropathogenic "E. coli") is one of the main causes of urinary tract infections. It is part of the normal flora in the gut and can be introduced many ways. In particular for females, the direction of wiping after defecation (wiping back to front) can lead to fecal contamination of the urogenital orifices. Anal sex can also introduce this bacteria into the male urethra, and in switching from anal to vaginal intercourse the male can also introduce UPEC to the female urogenital system. For more info see databases at the end of the article or UPEC pathogenicity.
Model organism in life science research.
Role in biotechnology.
Because of its long history of laboratory culture and ease of manipulation, "E. coli" also plays an important role in modern biological engineering and industrial microbiology. The work of Stanley Norman Cohen and Herbert Boyer in "E. coli", using plasmids and restriction enzymes to create recombinant DNA, became a foundation of biotechnology.
"E. coli" is a very versatile host for the production of heterologous proteins, and various protein expression systems have been developed which allow the production of recombinant proteins in "E. coli". Researchers can introduce genes into the microbes using plasmids which permit high level expression of protein, and such protein may be mass produced in industrial fermentation processes. One of the first useful applications of recombinant DNA technology was the manipulation of "E. coli" to produce human insulin. 
Many proteins previously thought difficult or impossible to be expressed in "E. coli" in folded form have also been successfully expressed in "E. coli". For example, proteins with multiple disulphide bonds may be produced in the periplasmic space or in the cytoplasm of mutants rendered sufficiently oxidizing to allow disulphide-bonds to form, while proteins requiring post-translational modification such as glycosylation for stability or function have been expressed using the N-linked glycosylation system of "Campylobacter jejuni" engineered into "E. coli".
Modified "E. coli" cells have been used in vaccine development, bioremediation, and production of immobilised enzymes.
Model organism.
"E. coli" is frequently used as a model organism in microbiology studies. Cultivated strains (e.g. "E. coli" K12) are well-adapted to the laboratory environment, and, unlike wild type strains, have lost their ability to thrive in the intestine. Many lab strains lose their ability to form biofilms. These features protect wild type strains from antibodies and other chemical attacks, but require a large expenditure of energy and material resources.
In 1946, Joshua Lederberg and Edward Tatum first described the phenomenon known as bacterial conjugation using "E. coli" as a model bacterium, and it remains the primary model to study conjugation. "E. coli" was an integral part of the first experiments to understand phage genetics, and early researchers, such as Seymour Benzer, used "E. coli" and phage T4 to understand the topography of gene structure. Prior to Benzer's research, it was not known whether the gene was a linear structure, or if it had a branching pattern.
"E. coli" was one of the first organisms to have its genome sequenced; the complete genome of "E. coli" K12 was published by "Science" in 1997.
The long-term evolution experiments using "E. coli", begun by Richard Lenski in 1988, have allowed direct observation of major evolutionary shifts in the laboratory. In this experiment, one population of "E. coli" unexpectedly evolved the ability to aerobically metabolize citrate, which is extremely rare in "E. coli". As the inability to grow aerobically is normally used as a diagnostic criterion with which to differentiate "E. coli" from other, closely related bacteria, such as "Salmonella", this innovation may mark a speciation event observed in the lab.
By evaluating the possible combination of nanotechnologies with landscape ecology, complex habitat landscapes can be generated with details at the nanoscale. On such synthetic ecosystems, evolutionary experiments with "E. coli" have been performed to study the spatial biophysics of adaptation in an island biogeography on-chip.
Studies are also being performed into programming "E. coli" to potentially solve complicated mathematics problems, such as the Hamiltonian path problem.
