Jonathan Parker Fitch (born February 24, 1978) is an American mixed martial artist currently competing as a welterweight most recently in the UFC. As of February 2013, Fitch is ranked as the #6 welterweight fighter in the world by Sherdog. 
Background.
After graduating from Carroll High School (Fort Wayne, Indiana), Fitch enrolled in at Purdue University in 1997 and graduated in 2002 with a Bachelor's in Physical Education and a minor in History. As a walk-on to the Purdue wrestling team, Fitch – a four-year letterman – wrestled under the tutelage of Tom Erikson and eventually became the team captain of his wrestling squad. Fitch secured a starting spot early on in his career, but struggled to find initial success. Compiling an 8-23 record his sophomore season, Fitch impressively turned that around to compile an 18-12 record in his final year. He finished with a 45-51 record overall for his collegiate wrestling career.
Tom Erikson– a former PRIDE fighter – would occasionally bring other mixed martial artists to the wrestling gym, and Fitch would be introduced to such fighters as Mark Coleman and Gary Goodridge. The sport, and the money that the top-tier fighters were making interested Fitch, and he started his mixed martial arts career in 2002.
Mixed martial arts career.
Jon Fitch began his career at Light Heavyweight with a record of four wins, two losses and one No Contest. Understanding that the sport required cross training in the martial arts, Fitch soon left for San Jose, California to train with the American Kickboxing Academy.
In his next seven fights, Fitch fought at Middleweight and amassed wins over fighters such as Shonie Carter, Alex Serdyukov and Jeff Joslin. After failing to make the selection process for the first season of The Ultimate Fighter – a last-minute decision by the production team that left Fitch stranded in an airport with his luggage already boarded – he earned a shot in the Ultimate Fighting Championship on October 3, 2005, where Fitch defeated Brock Larson by unanimous decision in a middleweight fight.
Drop to welterweight.
Soon after, Fitch dropped down to the welterweight division and won his next seven fights. With victories over Josh Burkman, Thiago Alves, Luigi Fioravanti, Diego Sanchez, and Chris Wilson with the latter tying the record set by Royce Gracie for most consecutive wins in the UFC, Fitch was seen as a top welterweight contender. UFC President Dana White praised Fitch's performances inside the Octagon, and indicated that Fitch would fight the winner of the Georges St-Pierre vs. Matt Serra Welterweight title fight.
Championship fight.
Fitch was defeated by Georges St. Pierre via unanimous decision with scores of 50–43, 50–44, 50–44 at UFC 87. After the fight GSP spoke to Fitch about the growth that his own loss prompted and said that Fitch's experience should be no different. Had Fitch beaten St-Pierre he would have had a nine fight winning streak in the UFC, surpassing Royce Gracie's streak of eight straight wins (a record that has since been broken by Anderson Silva, currently 16 as of October 2012). The loss also snapped Fitch's 16 fight winning streak, both in and out of the UFC.
Back to title contention.
Fitch was released from the UFC on the November 20, 2008. The dispute was over his reluctance to sign a lifetime contract to allow his name and likeness to be used in a video game the UFC released with THQ. In the end, Fitch ended up signing a licensing agreement that will allow the UFC to feature him in their UFC Undisputed video game release and returned to the UFC. Fitch's exile from the UFC lasted less than 24 hours.
Fitch dominated Pride Fighting Championships veteran Akihiro Gono en route to a unanimous decision victory with scores of 30–27, 30–27 and 30–26 at UFC 94. 
Fitch next defeated formerly unbeaten Brazilian Paulo Thiago via unanimous decision at UFC 100.
Fitch was expected to fight Ricardo Almeida on November 21, 2009, at UFC 106 but due to a knee injury sustained by Almeida, the fight was cancelled. 
Fitch was then scheduled to face Thiago Alves in a highly anticipated rematch on December 12, 2009 at UFC 107. However, Alves suffered an injury and was replaced by Mike Pierce. Fitch won via unanimous decision (29-28, 29-28, 29-28)
Fitch was expected to finally face Thiago Alves on March 27, 2010 at UFC 111, but on March 25, 2010, Alves was forced off the card due to a brain irregularity that appeared on a pre fight CAT scan. However, Ben Saunders, who was previously scheduled to fight on the same card against Jake Ellenberger, requested to fight Fitch and the fight took place on the main card. He won the fight via unanimous decision.
The Alves/Fitch rematch finally took place at UFC 117. This fight was confirmed to be the number one contendership for the welterweight championship (to fight the winner of the St-Pierre/Koscheck bout). Alves again failed to make weight, weighing in at 171.5 lbs, meaning he had to give up 20% of his fight purse. Fitch went on to defeat Alves via unanimous decision. Dana White later made remarks that the manner of Fitch's victories (primarily judges' decisions rather than finishes) and lack of connection with the UFC fans has put Fitch's number one contender status in doubt. Following Jake Shields' victory over Martin Kampmann at UFC 121, White confirmed Shields as the next in line for the Welterweight title shot, leaving Fitch's status in the division unconfirmed.
Fitch was expected to face Jake Ellenberger on February 5, 2011 at UFC 126. But after B.J. Penn defeated Matt Hughes at UFC 123, UFC president Dana White decided to match Fitch up against Penn at UFC 127 in Australia instead. At the end of the fight the scorecards of the judges were 29-28 for Fitch, 28-28 and 28-28. It was declared a majority draw. When asked by Joe Rogan if Fitch would like a rematch, Fitch replied that he wants another title shot more than anything. No confirmation of a rematch resulted from the interview of either fighter.
A rematch with Penn was expected to take place on July 2, 2011 at UFC 132., but in late March, Fitch pulled out of the bout with an injury.
After months of dealing with a shoulder injury, Jon Fitch is back in business. “I’m back! Dr. Kavitne gave me the ok to fight,” he tweeted. Fitch has made no small secret of his desire to fight on the UFC 139 fight card that takes place in his city of residence, San Jose, Calif.
Fitch fought Johny Hendricks on December 30, 2011 at UFC 141. He was knocked out 12 seconds into the fight.
Fitch was expected to face Aaron Simpson on July 11, 2012 at . However, Fitch pulled out of the bout citing a knee injury and was replaced by returning veteran Kenny Robertson.
Fitch defeated rising prospect Erick Silva via unanimous decision on October 13, 2012 at UFC 153. The back and forth bout received "Fight of the Night" honors. Before the fight he mentioned in interviews that if he shall lose the fight, he would have to stop training full-time and get a day job to help his family since he was having really huge financial problems. After winning, he said he saved his MMA career.
Fitch next faced Demian Maia on February 2, 2013 at UFC 156. Fitch lost by unanimous decision with all three judges scoring the fight 30-27 and was subsequently released from the promotion, despite being a top 10 ranked welterweight and having a 14-3-1 record with the promotion overall.. Fitch's release from the promotion caused much debate about the UFC "code of conduct" and the general "skill-demand" in UFC, as most commentators had not expected a single loss to lead to a release from the promotion. 
Personal life.
Jon and his longtime girlfriend Michele got engaged the day after UFC 100. The couple were married on September 4, 2010.
Jon Fitch appeared on the November 5, 2008 episode of "MythBusters", "Coffin Punch". The MythBusters were attempting to determine if someone could punch their way out of a coffin. For his part, Jon Fitch laid on his back and punched up into a sensor, attached to a punching bag that was a few inches above Fitch, allowing his arm only three inches of travel before contact with the sensor. The sensor read that the power behind Fitch's punch was just under 1,500 pounds of force (6672 N).
