This is a list of tables of the verified oldest people in the world in ordinal rank, such as oldest person or oldest man. In these tables, a supercentenarian is considered 'verified' if his or her claim has been validated by an international body that specifically deals in longevity research, such as the Gerontology Research Group (GRG) or Guinness World Records. 
The longest unambiguously documented human lifespan is that of Jeanne Calment of France (1875–1997), who died at age 122 years, 164 days. She met Vincent van Gogh when she was 12 or 13. This led to news media attention in 1985, after Calment turned 110. Subsequent investigation found documentation for Calment's age, beyond any reasonable question, in the records of her native city, Arles, France. More evidence of Calment's lifespan has been produced than for any other supercentenarian; her case serves as an archetype in the methodology for verifying the ages of the world's oldest people. 
The longest undisputed lifespan for male supercentenarians is that of Jiroemon Kimura. Kimura, currently living in Japan, is aged as of .
Since the death of 115-year old Dina Manfredini of the United States, on 17 December 2012, Kimura, born 19 April 1897, is the oldest living person in the world whose age can be documented. He has also been the oldest living man since the death of 114-year old Walter Breuning on 14 April 2011. Since the death of 115-year old Koto Okubo of Japan on 12 January 2013, the oldest living woman has been -year-old Misao Okawa, also from Japan, born on 5 March 1898.
Oldest people ever.
Systematic verification of longevity has only been practised in recent decades.
Oldest verified person by nation.
This article gives the recordholders for various countries to the extent that they have been established. These records are based on place of birth in current borders for simplicity. Those listed as 'verified' have been validated by an international body that specifically deals in longevity research, such as the Gerontology Research Group.
