Lost Girl is a Canadian supernatural crime drama television series, that premiered on Showcase on September 12, 2010. The series was created by Michelle Lovretta, and is produced by Prodigy Pictures, in association with Shaw Media. It follows the life of a succubus named Bo, played by Anna Silk, as she learns to control her abilities, helps those in need, and discovers the truth about her origins. Following good ratings and positive reviews, it was renewed for its second season two months after its premiere, and for its third season in December 2011.
In Australia, "Lost Girl" premiered on Sci Fi Australia on July 14, 2011. In the United Kingdom, it premiered on Syfy on September 1, 2011. In the United States, it premiered on Syfy on January 16, 2012.
Plot.
Season 1.
Bo is a succubus who grew up in an adoptive human family, unaware of her non-human nature and of the Fae world. Her succubus powers only become apparent to her when she accidentally kills her first love by draining him of his life energy, an act which forces her to flee her home. Bo exchanges her previously normal life for one without family or friends, moving from place to place whenever she kills again.
In the first episode, Bo saves a human girl named Kenzi; the two quickly become friends and Kenzi decides they should team up to create a Fae/Human detective agency. Confronted by the Fae elders with having to choose a side ("Light" or "Dark"), Bo declares herself neutral, deciding to side with humans after Kenzi risked her life to find what had happened to Bo for her own sake, where most of the Fae simply saw her as an unknown entity that should either be eliminated as a risk or exploited for their benefit. Throughout the season, Bo learns more about the Fae world and herself while she searches for information about her origins. Along the way, Bo also develops romantic relationships with both Dyson, a wolf shifter police detective; and Lauren, a human doctor.
Season 2.
With the world of Fae in chaos following Bo's explosive reunion with her mother, Bo must learn to "play the game" and navigate the inner workings of the Fae World in order to protect those who have helped to protect her. Bo finds her resolve to stay free challenged, and is forced to question her own morals and beliefs. While Bo grows stronger and learns more about who she really is, relationships will be tested and passions will ignite, but answers will not come easily.
Season 3.
For Bo, Season Three is all about discovery. The victory in the final battle of Season Two has created new alliances but also reinvigorated old enemies - enemies like The Morrigan, whom Bo crossed in an attempt to bring peace to the Faedom. This year our favourite Succubus, who until now has famously refused to pick a side, will be forced to make a deadly decision - or risk a fate worse than death. Season Three also sees Bo make a romantic choice as she attempts to commit to one relationship but finds the road to commitment riddled with obstacles. Can a Succubus ever be monogamous? Throughout the season, unexpected jeopardy stalks Bo and those she cares about. Though Bo battles many foes, her greatest enemy will prove to be the one that resides within herself. Bo will have to come to terms with her own identity, and take on an ancient, almost unwinnable challenge if she hopes to finally learn the terrifying truth about who (or what) she might be destined to become.
Development and production.
On November 16, 2008, Prodigy Pictures issued a press release that they had been commissioned by Canwest Global to produce a pilot for "Lost Girl", a drama about a young woman with supernatural powers. The pilot was to be written by Michelle Lovretta who had previously written for the Canadian television series "Mutant X".
On August 19, 2009, Canwest Global issued a press release that the Showcase television channel, a subsidiary of the main company, had picked up the rights to a one-hour supernatural drama series. The cast would include Anna Silk, previously in such series as "Billable Hours" and "Being Erica", filling the lead role of the character Bo in the series. Kris Holden-Ried, from the series "The Tudors", as another main character named Dyson, an inhuman cop involved in a love/hate relationship with Bo, and two-time Gemini Award winner Ksenia Solo as a third character named Kenzi, Bo’s street-smart and fiercely loyal human best friend. Also in the cast would be Rick Howland, from the film "Bon Cop, Bad Cop", as Trick, a friendly saloon keeper with something to hide. The release stated the series' promotional efforts would include an interactive website, graphic novel, and downloadable video game.
On April 7, 2010, Prodigy reported that the green-light had been given for a series to be produced to consist of thirteen one-hour episodes. Production on the series began in Toronto, Ontario, Canada in the spring of 2010, at sites across southern Ontario and at a small studio in western Toronto. Completion of the series' primary production occurred June 25, and the series was aimed for a September 2010 release date.
On June 22, 2010 Keyframe Digital of Niagara-On-The-Lake, Ontario reported that they had been given the contract for visual effects on the first thirteen episodes of "Lost Girl", referring to it as "fantasy/noir".
As part of the promotion of the series, an official site was opened at the beginning of August 2010 at lostgirlseries.com. It contained a short trailer for the series, and a summary of information on the series and the characters. On August 20, an interactive comic book was also released that would serve as a lead-in to the series and characters for viewers. It also was expected to have a forum for viewers to interact with the cast and crew before the series actually aired on Showcase. On the same date, a press release indicated that the series cast and crew would be making an appearance at Fan Expo Canada held in Toronto August 27–29, where they would be answering questions about the series and have promotional items available for watchers of the series as well. 
Episode 8 of the series, called "Vexed", was the first episode produced and served as the series pilot which was shown to Showcase to obtain the green light for the series.
On November 12, 2010, the Showcase Blog announced that "Lost Girl" would be renewed for a second season.
An announcement on July 7, 2011 by Showcase confirmed that the second season premiere would be on September 4, 2011 and that an additional nine episodes had been ordered to bring season two to a total of 22 episodes.
On December 9, 2011, Kirk Hooper announced on the Showcase blog that Lost Girl had been renewed for a third season. It was later confirmed by Showcase on Twitter that season 3 would premiere in early 2013.
On November 13, 2012 press releases went out confirming the air dates for Season Three: Showcase will premiere it on January 6, 2013 and Syfy will broadcast the first episode on January 14, 2013.
International distribution.
The series premiered in Australia on July 14, 2011 on Sci Fi, and season two began airing on February 23, 2012.
In the UK, the series premiered on Syfy on September 1, 2011, and returned for season two on January 12, 2012.
The series premiered on Syfy in the US the next week, January 16, 2012, and garnered almost 1.5 million viewers. It had previously been reported that the channel had acquired rights to both seasons of the show. Syfy aired both seasons back to back, with the season one finale on April 9, 2012 being immediately following on April 16, 2012 by the season two premiere.
The Romanian channel AXN started airing the first season on February 14, 2012.
In Portugal it premiered on AXN Black back in 2011
Home media.
Entertainment One released season 1 on DVD in Canada on April 24, 2012. In Region 4, Sony Pictures Australia released season 1 on DVD in Australia on November 23, 2011. Funimation Entertainment released the first season in the United States on DVD and Blu-ray on October 23, 2012, followed by the second season on November 13, 2012. Berkshire Axis Media released the second season in Canada on DVD and Blu-ray on November 13, 2012.
Reception.
Viewership of the pilot was over 400,000 for the first airing, and "another 184,000" for the second airing, making it the "highest-rated Canadian scripted series premiere of all time on Showcase."
In Canada, Rob Salem of the "Toronto Star" described the show as one that "definitely bears watching."
Vladislav Tinchev, writer for the German site "Serienjunkies" wrote that the series would benefit from "revealing more background information about the represented world," rather than spend time on "clumsy action scenes". But Tinchev pointed out that ""Lost Girl" is not lost at all, and has immediately won the audience and entertains them well. And there is nothing wrong with that, because TV series need not be world-shaking events."
Upon its U.S. premiere, "The New York Times" said "Like other fantasy-tinged shows on Syfy and USA, it offers the minor pleasures of formulaic fantasy and weekly puzzle solving, though in a cheaper-looking and less original package than usual"; ""Lost Girl" could be more than routine if we felt Bo’s magnetism the way her hapless victims do, but through the first few episodes Ms. Silk is more stolid than steamy." In his review for "Variety", Brian Lowry wrote: "At first glance, "Lost Girl" looks like another one of those Canadian imports picked up mostly for financial reasons. The pilot, however, proves unexpectedly fun—a sort of diluted version of "True Blood"... but the show has wit, style and an enticing lead in the leather-clad Anna Silk."
