Om ओ३म्or (written universally as ; in Devanagari as "oṃ" , "auṃ" , or "om" ) is a mystical Sanskrit sound of Hindu origin(India), sacred and important in various Dharmic religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism. The syllable is also referred to as omkara ( ') or aumkara ( '), literally "om syllable", and in Sanskrit it is sometimes referred to as "", literally "that which is sounded out loudly".
Om is also written ओ३म् ("ō̄m" ), where ३ is "pluta" ("three times as long"), indicating a length of three morae (that is, the time it takes to say three syllables)—an overlong nasalized close-mid back rounded vowel—though there are other enunciations adhered to in received traditions. It is placed at the beginning of most Hindu texts as a sacred incantation to be intoned at the beginning and end of a reading of the Vedas or prior to any prayer or mantra. It is used at the end of the invocation to the god being sacrificed to ("anuvakya") as an invitation to and for that God to partake of the sacrifice. The Māndukya Upanishad is entirely devoted to the explanation of the syllable. The syllable consists of three phonemes, "a" (Vaishvanara), "u" (Hiranyagarbha), and "m" (Ishvara), which symbolize the beginning, duration, and dissolution of the universe and the associated gods Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva, respectively. The name "omkara" is taken as a name of God in the Hindu revivalist Arya Samaj and can be translated as "I Am Existence".
Name, phonology and written representation.
The Sanskrit name for the syllable is "praṇava", from a root "nu" "to shout, sound", verbal ' being attested as "to make a humming or droning sound" in the Brahmanas, and taking the specific meaning of "to utter the syllable "om"" in the Chāndogya Upanishad and the Shrauta Sutras. More rarely used terms are ' (lit. symbol, character) or ' (lit. one symbol, character), and in later times ' becomes prevalent.
Phonemically, the syllable is , which is regularly monophthongized to in Sanskrit phonology. It is sometimes also written with pluti, as "" (), notably by Arya Samaj. When occurring within a Sanskrit utterance, the syllable is subject to the normal rules of sandhi in Sanskrit grammar, however with the additional peculiarity that after preceding "a" or "ā", the "au" of "aum" does not form vriddhi ("au") but guna ("o") per Pāṇini 6.1.95 (i.e. 'om').
The om symbol is a ligature of Devanagari (U+0913) + (U+0901) ("", encoded in Unicode at U+0950 , the Tibetan script variant
In Hinduism.
The syllable "om" is first described as all-encompassing mystical entity in the Upanishads. Today, in all Hindu art and all over India and Nepal, 'om' can be seen virtually everywhere, a common sign for Hinduism and its philosophy and theology. Hindus believe that as creation began, the divine, all-encompassing consciousness took the form of the first and original vibration manifesting as sound "OM". Before creation began it was "Shunyākāsha", the emptiness or the void. Shunyākāsha, meaning literally "no sky", is more than nothingness, because everything then existed in a latent state of potentiality. The vibration of "OM" symbolizes the manifestation of God in form ("sāguna brahman"). "OM" is the reflection of the absolute reality, it is said to be "Adi Anadi", without beginning or the end and embracing all that exists. The mantra "OM" is the name of God, the vibration of the Supreme. When taken letter by letter, A-U-M represents the divine energy (Shakti) united in its three elementary aspects: Bhrahma Shakti (creation), Vishnu Shakti (preservation) and Shiva Shakti (liberation, and/or destruction).
Early Vedantic literature.
The syllable is mentioned in all the Upanishads, specially elaborated upon in the Taittiriya, Chāndogya and Māndukya Upanishad set forth as the object of profound religious meditation, the highest spiritual efficacy being attributed not only to the whole word but also to the three sounds "a" ("a-kāra"), "u" ("u-kāra"), "m" ("ma-kāra"), of which it consists. "A-kara" means form or shape like earth, trees, or any other object. "U-kāra" means formless or shapeless like water, air or fire. "Ma-kāra" means neither shape nor shapeless (but still exists) like the dark energy content of the Universe. When we combine all three syllables we get AUM which is a combination of "A-kāra", "U-kāra", and "Ma-kāra".
Lord Krishna says to Arjuna – "I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable "oṃ". I am also the Ṛig, the Sāma and the Yajur Vedas."
In the following sūtra it emphasizes, "The repetition of om should be made with an understanding of its meaning".
Paramahansa Yogananda refers to Om/Aum.
The Yoga teacher and Swami, Paramahansa Yogananda mentions Om/Aum numerous times in his teachings, for example on page 277 of his "Autobiography of a Yogi": "Patanjali speaks of God as the actual Cosmic Sound of Aum that is heard in meditation. Aum is the Creative Word, the whir of the Vibratory Motor, the witness of Divine Presence. Even the beginner in yoga may soon hear the wondrous sound of Aum."
Puranic Hinduism.
In Purānic Hinduism, om is the mystic name for the Hindu Trimurti, and represents the union of the three gods, viz. "a" for Brahma, "u" for Vishnu and "m" for Mahadev which is another name of Shiva. The three sounds also symbolize the three Vedas, namely (Rigveda, Samaveda, Yajurveda).
According to Hindu philosophy (see Māndukya Upanishad), the letter A represents creation, when all existence issued forth from Brahma's golden nucleus; the letter U refers to Vishnu the God of the middle who preserves this world by balancing Brahma on a lotus above himself, and the letter M symbolizes the final part of the cycle of existence, when Bharma falls asleep and Shiva has to breathe in so that all existing things have to disintegrate and are reduced to their essence to him. More broadly, om is said to be the primordial sound that was present at the creation of the universe. It is said to be the original sound that contains all other sounds, all words, all languages and all mantras.
Advaita.
In Advaita philosophy it is frequently used to represent three subsumed into one, a triune, a common theme in Hinduism. It implies that our current existence is "mithyā" and "maya", "falsehood", that in order to know the full truth we must comprehend beyond the body and intellect the true nature of infinity. Essentially, upon moksha (mukti, samādhi) one is able not only to see or know existence for what it is, but to become it. When one gains true knowledge, there is no split between knower and known: one becomes knowledge/consciousness itself. In essence, "Om" is the signifier of the ultimate truth that all is one.
In proper names.
When "Om" is a part of a place name (for example Omkāreshwar), or is used as a man's name, it is spelled phonetically using ordinary letters of whatever Indian alphabet is used in the area. The adherents of Arya Samaj always use the ordinary letters अ(Ah), ऊ(ooh) and म(ma) to write om.
In Jainism.
Thus, () is a short form of the Navkar Mantra.
In Buddhism.
Buddhists place "om" at the beginning of their "Vidya-Sadaksari" ("om mani padme hum") as well in as most other mantras and dharanis. Moreover, as a seed syllable (a "bija mantra") "aum" is considered holy in Esoteric Buddhism.
In Buddhist texts of East Asian provenance, "om" is often written as the Chinese character (pinyin ') or (pinyin ').
A key distinction should be made here between Buddhism as it arose in Nepal, and Buddhism after the migration of the teachings to Tibet under the guidance of Padmasambhava. In its original form, Buddhism in Nepal was characterized mainly by types of mindfulness meditation and did not involve the chanting of "om" or of mantras. Tibetan Buddhism, with heavy Hindu influence and merger with Bon Shamanism, is now characterized by the AH bija, which can be roughly translated as representing pure spirit (the fifth in the Tibetan system of elements).
As to its precise graphic form, the Vedic or Indian "om" is what most Westerners are used to, and the Tibetan alphabet "om" is less widespread in popular culture. Even Tibetan handicrafts made in India tend to use the Nepali-script "om" for recognizability.
"Onkar" in Sikhism.
"Ik Onkar", in modern Punjabi spelt out as , but iconically represented as in the Guru Granth Sahib (although sometimes spelt out in full as ) is the statement of the uniqueness of God in Sikhism, and is commonly translated simply as "one God". Within the phrase, "ik" is the Punjabi word for "one", and "onkar" figuratively means "God" but literally means "creater of Om"; "-kar" (in Punjabi ) meaning "create", "work", or "action". Thus, although "Om" is referenced, Sikhism uses it only to starkly emphasize its monotheism without subscribing to its philosophy in and of itself.
Link to Auspice Maria.
An obscure and possibly Catholic/Hermetic symbol called the Auspice Maria was identified by Louis Charbonneau-Lassay and René Guénon as spelling out the letters AVM and thus being equivalent to the symbol "Aum".
