The Shield are a professional wrestling stable in WWE, consisting of Dean Ambrose, Seth Rollins and Roman Reigns. The black-clad group debuted in November 2012 at the Survivor Series pay-per-view, and later declared their intention to fight what they perceive as injustice in WWE.
History.
The group was formed on November 18, 2012, at the Survivor Series pay-per-view, when the debuting Ambrose, Reigns and Rollins interfered in the main event, a triple threat match between champion CM Punk, John Cena and Ryback for the WWE Championship. They powerbombed Ryback through the announce table, allowing Punk to pin Cena to win the match and retain his title. 
The group named themself The Shield and vowed to rally against injustice. Despite claiming that they were not working for CM Punk or Paul Heyman, over the next few weeks on both "Raw" and "SmackDown" they would routinely emerge from the crowd to attack Punk's adversaries such as Ryback, The Miz, Kane, and Daniel Bryan, who had attempted to save Kane. They also attacked Randy Orton after he defeated Brad Maddox; Maddox was the referee who helped Punk defeat Ryback during their Hell in a Cell match for the WWE Championship. This led to their debut match at the pay-per-view, where they faced Ryback and Team Hell No (Kane and Bryan) in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match and emerged victorious. 
After TLC, despite continuing to attack Punk's adversaries in Ric Flair and Maddox's in Brodus Clay and Sheamus, the Shield soon expanded their ambushes to other faces, such as Tommy Dreamer and Ricardo Rodriguez. The Shield's attacks were also used to write off wrestlers from television via injury angles, in the case of Randy Orton and Sin Cara, both of whom who were already suffering from legitimate injuries. 
During the January 2, 2013 episode of "NXT", which was taped on December 6, 2012, the Shield made their first appearance in "NXT", though Reigns and Rollins had already wrestled on "NXT" and Rollins was the inaugural NXT Champion. Rollins defended his title against Corey Graves; as Graves was about to win the match, Ambrose and Reigns attacked him to cause a disqualification, but Rollins retained his title. On the January 9 episode of "NXT" taped on the same date, Rollins faced Big E Langston in a no disqualification title match. The other NXT wrestlers neutralized the other Shield members, and Langston defeated Rollins to win the title.
On the January 7 episode of "Raw", the Shield once again aided CM Punk by attacking Ryback during their Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match for the WWE Championship, which resulted in Punk retaining his title. On the "Raw" before the Royal Rumble, the Shield attacked Punk's Rumble opponent, The Rock, resulting in Vince McMahon declaring that their interference in the aforementioned title match would result in Punk being stripped of the title. On the "SmackDown" before the Royal Rumble, Punk denied an alliance with the Shield before calling them out; the trio emerged and surrounded the ring. Punk informed them that he did not want them to interfere in his upcoming title match; the trio then left without laying a hand on Punk. During Punk's title match, a blackout occurred and the Rock was attacked in the darkness by unknown assailants, directly leading to Punk pinning Rock; the announcers blamed the Shield for the attack. The match was later restarted with Rock winning. The next day on "Raw", the Shield attacked and laid out John Cena; Sheamus and Ryback suffered the same fate when they attempted to save Cena. Later in the show, it was revealed through footage played by Vince McMahon that Punk and/or his manager Paul Heyman had been paying the Shield and Brad Maddox to work for them all along. The next week on "Raw", while calling out the Shield, Maddox revealed that he was the one who gave McMahon the footage. The Shield then attacked Maddox (as they had in the footage), but were forced to retreat due to an attack by Cena, Ryback and Sheamus. This set up a six-man tag team match at Elimination Chamber, which the Shield won. The following night on "Raw", the Shield defeated the team of Ryback, Sheamus and Chris Jericho in a tag match.
