Brave is a 2012 American computer-animated fantasy film produced by Pixar Animation Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Pictures. It was written by Mark Andrews, Steve Purcell, Brenda Chapman, and Irene Mecchi, directed by Andrews and Chapman and co-directed by Purcell. The film's voice cast features Kelly Macdonald, Julie Walters, Billy Connolly, Emma Thompson, Kevin McKidd, Craig Ferguson, and Robbie Coltrane. To make the most complex visuals possible, Pixar completely rewrote their animation system for the first time in 25 years. It is the first film to use the Dolby Atmos sound format.
In the film, set in the Scottish Highlands, a skilled archer named Merida defies an age-old custom, causing chaos in her kingdom. After consulting a witch for help, Merida accidentally curses her family and is forced to undo the spell herself before it is too late. "Brave" premiered on June 10, 2012, at the Seattle International Film Festival, and was released in North America on June 22, 2012, to both positive reviews and box office success. The film won the Academy Award for Best Animated Film, the Golden Globe Award for Best Animated Feature Film and the BAFTA Award for Best Animated Film in 2013.
Preceding the film is a short film entitled "La Luna", directed by Enrico Casarosa.
Plot.
In Scotland, King Fergus of Clan Dunbroch presents his young daughter Merida with a bow for her birthday. While practicing, Merida encounters a will-o'-the-wisp. Soon afterwards, Mor'du, a giant demon bear, attacks the family. Merida escapes along with her mother Queen Elinor while Fergus fights off the bear at the cost of his left leg. Years later, Merida has become a free-spirited 16-year-old and an older sister of identical triplets: Hamish, Harris and Hubert. Elinor informs her that she is to be betrothed to one of her father's allied clans. Reminding Merida of a legend about a prince who ruined his own kingdom, Elinor warns her that failure to marry could harm Dunbroch, but Merida is dissatisfied with the arrangement.
The clans of Macintosh, MacGuffin and Dingwall arrive with their first-born sons to compete in Highland Games for Merida's hand. Merida announces she is eligible to compete for her own hand as the first-born of Clan Dunbroch and defeats each of her suitors in an archery contest. After a falling out with Elinor, Merida runs into the forest and comes across the will-o'-the-wisps. They lead her to the hut of an elderly witch posing as a wood carver. After some bargaining, the witch agrees to give Merida a spell to change her mother in the form of a cake.
Merida returns to the castle and gives Elinor the cake, but much to the surprise of both of them, instead of changing her mind about the marriage, it transforms her into a large brown bear. Realizing she has made matters worse for herself, with the help of her brothers, Merida and Elinor return to the witch's now deserted cottage where they discover that the spell will be permanent unless undone by the second sunrise. The witch leaves Merida a riddle, mentioning that she must "mend the bond torn by pride." Merida and Elinor begin to reconcile their relationship while Merida observes that the spell is slowly becoming permanent, as Elinor often loses control and acts more like a wild bear. After encountering the wisps again, the two follow them to ancient ruins and encounter Mor'du, who they discover was once the prince in Elinor's legend who received a similar spell from the witch. Merida promises her mother that she will not become a wild animal like Mor'du. She theorizes that she can reverse the spell by repairing her family tapestry since Merida had torn a hole between herself and her mother on the tapestry and their family bond.
At the castle, the clans are on the verge of war, but the princess quells their fighting. With the encouragement of her mother who, unseen by the others, uses charades to guide Merida through a speech, the princess declares that the children should be allowed to get married in their own time to whomever they choose. Merida then sneaks into the tapestry room with Elinor, who is losing control of her human self. Fergus enters the bed chamber and is attacked by Elinor until she regains human consciousness and races out of the castle in desperation. Fergus gives chase. With the help of her brothers, who have transformed into bear cubs by eating the cake, Merida rides after her father while sewing up the tapestry. The clan members and Fergus capture Elinor, but Merida intervenes just before Mor'du attacks. Just as Mor'du is about to swallow Merida whole, Elinor saves her and a menhir crashes down on Mor'du, flattening the monster and releasing the prince's spirit.
After Merida places the tapestry over Elinor, she realizes the true meaning of the witch's riddle and reconciles with Elinor. The queen is transformed back along with the triplets, and the family is reunited. A few days later, the clans depart for their respective lands, and Merida and Elinor ride their horses together, their bond finally restored.
In a post-credits scene, the witch's crow asks a castle guard to sign for a delivery of wooden carvings that Merida bought simultaneously with the spell.
Voice cast.
Non-speaking characters include Mor'du (the evil bear), Angus (Merida's horse), and Harris, Hubert, and Hamish (Merida's triplet brothers).
Production.
Announced in April 2008 as "The Bear and the Bow", "Brave" is Pixar's first fairy tale. Brenda Chapman considers it a fairy tale in the tradition of Hans Christian Andersen and the Brothers Grimm. Chapman conceived the project and was announced as the film's director, making her Pixar's first female director, but in October 2010, she was replaced by Mark Andrews following creative disagreements. Chapman later stated that her “vision came through in the film” and that she remains “very proud of the movie, and that I ultimately stood up for myself.” 
Merida is the first female lead protagonist in a Pixar film. She was originally to be voiced by Reese Witherspoon, who declined due to scheduling issues. Instead, the character was voiced by Scottish actress Kelly Macdonald, recently acclaimed for her role as Margaret Schroeder in HBO's "Boardwalk Empire".
The end credits include a special tribute to Pixar co-founder and CEO Steve Jobs, who died in 2011.
Music.
The film score to "Brave" was composed by Patrick Doyle. To bring some of Scotland's native flavor to the music, Doyle used native Scottish instruments such as bagpipes, a solo fiddle, Celtic harps, flutes and the bodhrán, with an electronically treated dulcimer and cimbalom to give it a more contemporary feel. "I employed many classic Scottish dance rhythms such as reels, jigs, and strathspeys, which not only serve the action but keep it authentic," said Doyle.
Doyle had also written a drinking song for King Fergus and was traveling back and forth to Scotland for research. The composer has also been recording "unaccompanied Gaelic psalm singing."
In addition to Doyle's music, the film features three original songs. "Touch the Sky" (music by Alex Mandel, lyrics by Mark Andrews & Mandel) and "Into the Open Air" (music and lyrics by Alex Mandel) are both performed by Julie Fowlis, who provides Merida's off-screen singing voice. Mumford & Sons contributed the song "Learn Me Right" with Birdy to the film soundtrack.
Soundtrack.
Walt Disney Records released the soundtrack on both CD album and digital download on June 19, 2012.
Release.
The film was initially set for release on June 15, 2012, but it was later changed to June 22, 2012. On April 3, 2012, Pixar screened the film's first thirty minutes, and it received a positive reaction by its screeners. The film premiered on the last day of the Seattle International Film Festival on June 10, 2012. It had its Australian premiere on June 11, 2012, at the Sydney Film Festival, and had its domestic premiere on June 18, 2012, at Hollywood's Dolby Theatre as part of the Los Angeles Film Festival, its European premiere was at the Taormina Film Festival on Sicily on June 23, 2012, and its British premiere at the Edinburgh International Film Festival on June 30, 2012.
In the United States and Canada, "Brave" is the first feature-length film to use the Dolby Atmos sound format. Almost half of the 14 theaters set up to show the film in Atmos are in California (Burbank, Century City, Fremont, Hollywood, San Francisco, and Sherman Oaks), with the others located in seven states (Lake Buena Vista, Florida; Kansas City, Missouri; Paramus, New Jersey; Las Vegas, Nevada; Chicago; West Plano, Texas; Vancouver, Washington) and in Toronto, Ontario. It was released in other theaters with Dolby Surround 7.1. In total, it was released in 4,164 theaters, a record-high for Pixar, which was previously held by "Cars 2" (4,115 theaters). 2,790 of the theaters included 3D shows.
Home media.
"Brave" was released on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, DVD, and digital download on November 13, 2012. It is accompanied with "La Luna" and a new short film "The Legend of Mor'du". Exploring the history of antagonist Mor’du, the direct-to-video short will give fans the chance to delve deeper into the leg­end behind Mor'du, as told by the eccen­tric witch who trans­formed him.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Brave" received positive reviews from critics. The film holds a 78% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 213 reviews with an average rating of 6.9/10. The site's critical consensus reads: ""Brave" offers young audiences and fairy tale fans a rousing, funny fantasy adventure with a distaff twist and surprising depth." Another review aggregator, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics, calculated a score of 69 based on 37 reviews, or "Generally favorable." The film was also well-received among the American audience, earning an "A" CinemaScore.
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film 3 out of 4 stars. He wrote, "The good news is that the kids will probably love it, and the bad news is that parents will be disappointed if they're hoping for another Pixar groundbreaker. Unlike such brightly original films as "Toy Story", "Finding Nemo", "WALL-E", and "Up", this one finds Pixar poaching on traditional territory of Disney." He said that the film did have an uplifting message about improving communication between mothers and daughters, "although transforming your mother into a bear is a rather extreme first step." Peter Debruge of "Variety" gave a positive review of the film, remarking that the film "offers a tougher, more self-reliant heroine for an era in which princes aren't so charming, set in a sumptuously detailed Scottish environment where her spirit blazes bright as her fiery red hair." Debruge also said that "Adding a female director Chapman to its creative boys' club, the studio has fashioned a resonant tribute to mother-daughter relationships that packs a level of poignancy on par with such beloved male-bonding classics as "Finding Nemo"." Conversely, Todd McCarthy of "The Hollywood Reporter" gave it a negative review, stating that the film "diminishes into a rather wee thing as it chugs along, with climactic drama that is both too conveniently wrapped up and hinges on magical elements that are somewhat confusing to boot."
Box office.
"Brave" earned $237,283,207 in North America, and $298,100,000 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $535,383,207. It is the thirteenth highest-grossing film of 2012, the eighth highest-grossing Pixar film, and the third highest-grossing animated film that year behind ' ($875.3 million) and ' ($742.1 million).
In North America, pre-release tracking suggested the film would open between $55 million to $65 million in North America, which is slightly below average for a Pixar film. Trackers suggested that the film might not appeal to the male demographic, whereas the female protagonist was expected to draw females of all ages, and 3D was expected to boost earnings.
It opened on June 22, 2012, with $24.6 million. It finished its opening weekend with $66.3 million (the same amount as "Cars 2", Pixar's previous film) at the upper end of the numbers analysts predicted. This was the fourth largest opening weekend in June, and the fifth largest for a Pixar film. Despite pre-release tracking indications, the audience was estimated to be 43% male and 57% female. In North America, it is the eighth highest-grossing Pixar film, the highest-grossing 2012 animated film, and the eighth highest-grossing film of 2012.
Outside North America, the film earned $14 million from 10 markets on its opening weekend, finishing in third place behind "Madagascar 3: Europe's Most Wanted" and "Snow White and the Huntsman". Overall, its largest openings occurred in France and the Maghreb region ($6.5 million), Mexico ($5.53 million), and Russia and the CIS ($5.37 million). In total earnings, its highest-grossing countries were the U.K., Ireland and Malta ($34.9 million), France and the Maghreb region ($26.8 million), and Mexico ($21.6 million).
Video game.
A video game based on the film was published by Disney Interactive Studios on June 19, 2012, for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, Wii, PC, and Nintendo DS. A mobile video game "" (a "Brave" variation of "Temple Run") was released on June 14, 2012, for iOS and Android.
