 After being expelled from Canterbury, she returned to the Dwight School before dropping out a few months later as a high school junior. She later earned her GED.
Hilton began modeling as a child, initially at charity events. When she was 19, she signed with Donald Trump's modeling agency, T Management. Hilton stated that while she "wanted to model," Trump was wishing to have her at his agency, and after she signed she was "loving" the work. While working as a model, she was becoming a daily fixture in entertainment news for her heavy partying; according to "Vanity Fair", Cisco Adler, producer of "Sweetie Pie" (where Hilton acted in) stated that she was "a young party girl who gets sucked into the L.A. party scene and grew up a little too fast". In 2001, Hilton developed a reputation as a socialite, being identified as "New York's leading It Girl" whose fame was beginning to "extend beyond the New York tabloids". Around that time, she made a cameo appearance in "Zoolander" and was on several magazine covers such as UK's "Tatler", Italy's "Giola" and USA's "Vanity Fair" and "FHM". In 2002, she was one of the leads in the straight-to-video horror movie "Nine Lives". "Beyondhollywood.com" felt that "Hilton’s presence in the cast is the film’s main marketing point, which is plainly obvious by the fact that she’s front and center on the box art and is the only recognizable name in the cast" and also noted that her character was basically herself: "Hilton plays — what else? — a spoiled American socialite who shops on three continents in one day. The script is even clever enough to take a few jabs at Hilton’s real-life social standing, even mentioning that she’s been on the cover of a few sleaze rags in her day". In that year, she became engaged to fashion model Jason Shaw but they broke up in early 2003.
2003–05: "The Simple Life" and breakthrough.
Hilton's breakout role came in 2003, when she co-starred with socialite counterpart Nicole Richie in the Fox reality series "The Simple Life", which premiered on December 2, 2003, shortly after Hilton's sex tape was released. The show started airing to surprisingly well received ratings; the premiere episode drew 13,000,000 viewers, increasing Fox's Adults 18–49 rating a phenomenal 79%. "Everyone likes it because it's for all ages. People from the city will be like, 'Oh my God, I cannot believe you did that,' and people from the country think it's funny because they do it every day", Hilton said about the reason why the show was successful. At that time, she started to be recognizable for her onscreen dumb blonde persona in reality television. According to UK's "Now" magazine, in a 2009 interview she said that "For five seasons I was stuck doing this character. It was kind of hard always having to play that character when it's not who I am". In a January 2011 interview with "Movieline", she remarked: "In "The Simple Life", producers told me to play a dumb blonde and that's what I did. I didn't realize at the time that I'd have to do that for five seasons and keep up this character of me. I think people assume that that is how I am in real life but I'm actually quite a businesswoman". The year the show premiered, she started a relationship with singer Nick Carter, which lasted until 2004.
Hilton launched a lifestyle brand in 2004. She helped design a collection of purses for Japanese label Samantha Thavasa. The 10-piece line collection, a jewelry line designed by Hilton, started being on sale on Amazon.com. "I grew up surrounded by the finest fashion and jewelry designs, and I really wanted to create a line that was beautiful and very high quality, yet affordable and available to everyone," Hilton stated. "This jewelry is for the heiress in everyone." The line was described as "inspired by Hilton's personal style – feminine, flirtatious and glamorous – with heart, star and cross motifs." In the autumn of 2004, Hilton released an autobiographical book, ', co-written by Merle Ginsberg, which includes full color photographs of her and her advice on life as an heiress. She mentioned in the book she was looking for a simpler life: "I don't always want the glamorous, jet-set life," she wrote. "Someday soon, I want to have children and a big house with a lot of animals – like my parents had". The book was in the "New York Times" bestseller list, ranking at seven. The quote "Dress cute wherever you go; life is too short to blend in", which appeared in the book was added to The Oxford Dictionary of Quotations in September 2009. She was involved in the creation of a perfume line by Parlux Fragrances. Originally set to be a small release, high demand led to a wider release before December 2004. The launch was followed by a 47% increase in sales of Parlux products, predominantly due to sales of the Hilton-branded perfume. After the success of Hilton's perfume, Parlux Fragrances released several more perfumes with her name, including fragrances for men. Hilton released her second book called ' in 2005 and also in that year, she launched her second fragrance "Just Me".
After Hilton hosted "Saturday Night Live" with musical guest, band Keane in February 2005, she got her first major role in the horror thriller film "House of Wax", in which Elisha Cuthbert and Chad Michael Murray also starred. The movie, after being first screened at the Tribeca Film Festival, opened in May 2005, receiving mixed reviews. Giving a positive review for her performance, Matthew Turner for the "View London" said that Hilton "does better than you might expect". But while "MTV" felt that she was "actually pretty good", "TV Guide" called Hilton "talentless". Her role as Paige Edwards won the Teen Choice Award for "Best Scream" and earned her a nomination for "Choice Breakout Performance – Female". (It also won her the 2005 Razzie for "Worst Supporting Actress" at the 2005 Golden Raspberry Awards.) She also earned a nomination for "Best Frightened Performance" at the 2006 MTV Movie Awards. "House of Wax" grossed over $70,000,000. From May to October of that year, she was engaged to Greek shipping heir Paris Latsis.
"The Simple Life", which ran for three seasons on FOX, was cancelled after a dispute between Hilton and Richie in 2005. Hilton commented: "It's no big secret that Nicole and I are no longer friends. Nicole knows what she did, and that's all I'm ever going to say about it." Neither Richie nor Hilton spoke publicly about the cause of the split, though it was speculated that the pair fell out due to Richie showing one of Hilton's homemade sex tapes to a group of their friends. They renewed their friendship in October 2006.
2006–07: "Paris", films and arrests.
After "The Simple Life" was cancelled by FOX in 2005, other networks, such as NBC, The WB, VH1 and MTV were all reported to be interested in obtaining the rights to air new seasons of the show. On November 28, 2005, E! announced that they had picked up "The Simple Life" and had ordered production go ahead on the fourth season, along with the rights to re-air the first three seasons. Shooting for the new season began February 27, 2006. The premiere of the fourth season brought high ratings for the network with 1.3 viewers. She released her self-titled debut album, "Paris", under the label on August 22, 2006. The album reached number six on the "Billboard" 200 for a week and sold over 600,000 copies worldwide The first single "Stars Are Blind" was a massive success in the United States as it was played at more than 125 pop stations across the country. The song also was a hit worldwide; it was a top ten in 17 countries. Although "The Guardian" felt that Hilton sound "both distracted and bored stiff", "Allmusic" commented that the album was "more fun than anything released by Britney Spears or Jessica Simpson". As a whole, critical reception was mixed.
In September 2006, Hilton was arrested and charged with driving under the influence of alcohol with a blood alcohol content of 0.08%, the level at which it is illegal to drive in California. The arrest complicated the shooting of the fifth season of series. Hilton's driving license was subsequently suspended in November 2006, and in January 2007 she pleaded no contest to a reckless driving charge. Her punishment was 36 months' probation and fines of about $1,500. The straight-to-DVD motion picture "Bottoms Up" was released in late 2006. The film came out with negative reviews; Australia's "Urban Cinefile" remarked that Hilton, as the lead role, "spends most of her screen time flicking her hair as she delivers lines like 'books are those things you read'". In December 2006, "Pledge This!", film in which Hilton appeared and produced, premiered in a limited release before going directly to video. She missed the premiere of the movie at the Cannes Film Festival in protest to the addition of some nude scenes that were going to be included in the film. Hilton said, "I was so angry I snubbed my own premiere." In August 2008, Worldwide Entertainment Group Inc. sued Hilton in the Miami District Court, alleging she did not honor her contractual agreement to provide "reasonable promotion and publicity" for the film. It was reported she was paid $1,000,000 for her work.
On January 10, 2007, Hilton released the DreamCatchers line of hair extensions in partnership with Hair Tech International. On January 22, 2007, Hilton's private life was thrust into the media spotlight with the launch of ParisExposed.com, a website that features images of personal documents, video, and other material allegedly obtained when the contents of a storage locker rented by Hilton was auctioned off due to lack of a $208 payment. The website began charging online access to this material and received 1.2 million visitors in just over 40 hours. Among the contents were medications, diaries, photographs, contracts and love letters, as well as a video of her shot by Joe Francis of Girls Gone Wild. Hilton later obtained a temporary injunction against ParisExposed.com, closing down the website. Also in that month, Hilton was pulled over for driving with a suspended license and signed a document acknowledging that she was not permitted to drive. The following month, Hilton was caught driving 70 mph in a 35 mph zone, again with a suspended license. She also did not have her headlights on even though it was after dark. Prosecutors in the office of the Los Angeles City Attorney charged that those actions, along with the failure to enroll in a court-ordered alcohol education program, constituted a violation of the terms of her probation. On May 4, Hilton was sentenced by Judge Michael T. Sauer to 45 days in jail for violating her probation. Initially, Hilton planned to appeal the sentence, and supported an online petition asking California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger for a pardon. The petition was created and organized on May 5, 2007, by Joshua Morales. In response, various opponents started a counter-petition to maintain the sentence. Both petitions attracted tens of thousands of signatures. Hilton later switched lawyers and dropped her plans to appeal.
Hilton was required to begin her jail term on June 5, and checked herself into the Century Regional Detention Facility, an all-female jail in Lynwood, California after attending the 2007 MTV Movie Awards on June 3. However Los Angeles County Sheriff Lee Baca signed orders on June 7, reassigning Hilton to 40 days of home confinement with an electronic monitoring device due to an unspecified medical condition. Baca commented on the release saying, "My message to those who don't like celebrities is that punishing celebrities more than the average American is not justice," contesting that under normal circumstances, Hilton would not have served any time in jail, and he added that "The special treatment, in a sense, appears to be because of her celebrity status ... She got more time in jail". On the same day that Hilton was released from jail, Judge Michael Sauer summoned her to reappear in court the following morning (June 8) as the sentencing statement had explicitly said she would serve time in jail with "No work furlough. No work release. No electronic monitoring." At the hearing he declined to be briefed by Hilton's attorney in private chambers on the nature of her condition and sent her back to jail to serve out her original 45-day sentence. Upon hearing the sentence, Hilton shouted, "It's not right!" and started screaming, requesting to hug her mother who was present in the courtroom. Concern about Hilton's condition led to her being moved to the medical wing of the Twin Towers Correctional Facility in Los Angeles, and she was moved back to the Century Regional Detention Facility in Lynwood on June 13.
While in jail, Hilton was influenced by the clergyman minister Marty Angelo: Hilton referred to starting a "new beginning" during her interview with talk show host Larry King on June 28, 2007, two days after being released from jail, and quoted from Angelo's autobiography, entitled "Once Life Matters: A New Beginning". On June 9, 2007, Marty Angelo petitioned Sauer, asking to serve out the remainder of Hilton's jail sentence if the judge would release her to an alternative treatment program, but the petition was turned down. On the same show, she revealed taking Adderall for ADHD since childhood. After Hilton faced time in jail, "The Simple Life" finished its run at the end of the fifth season in July 2007. In early August 2007, Hilton signed a licensing agreement with Antebi for a signature footwear line, "Paris Hilton Footwear", featuring stilettos, platforms, flats, wedges, and a sports collection, expected to reach stores in 2008. In mid August 2007, Hilton launched a line of tops, dresses, coats, and jeans at the Kitson Boutique in Los Angeles. She felt the event was "a dream come true" and described the clothing line as " fun, bright and flashy". In December 2007, Hilton posed nude, covered in gold paint, to promote "Rich Prosecco", a canned version of an Italian sparkling wine. She also traveled to Germany to promote the drink, appearing in various print ads for the product. 
Around that time, Hilton's grandfather, Barron Hilton, pledged 97% of his estate (the Hilton family fortune) to a charitable organization founded by their great-grandfather, Conrad N. Hilton, the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation. As a result, the inheritance of his grandchildren is sharply diminished. An immediate pledge of $1.2 billion was made (the proceeds of the sale of Hilton Hotels Corporation), with a further $1.1 billion due after his death. He cited the actions of his father, Conrad N. Hilton, as the motivation for his pledge. Conrad, Barron's father, had left 97% of his estate to the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation and Barron subsequently contested his father's will to win back a sizeable amount of the Hilton family fortune in a settlement. By leaving his estate to the Foundation, Barron is donating not only the fortune he has amassed on his own, but he is also returning the Hilton family fortune amassed by his father, Conrad, to the Conrad N. Hilton Foundation, where it would have gone over 30 years ago had Barron not contested his father's will. Barron stated he is proud to follow his father's example. Also in 2007, Hilton modeled for 2 be free and her fourth perfume came out, called "Can Can".
2008–09: Focus on acting and "My New BFF" shows.
Hilton's love for dogs led her to create an apparel line for dogs called Little Lily by Paris Hilton, with some of the proceeds going to benefit animal rescue. "I have 17 dogs and I like to dress them, so I started designing this clothing line and it's really cute, like dresses and jeans – everything you can imagine for humans, but for dogs," she said in an interview during Super Bowl XLII festivities. In April 2008, she guest starred on the "My Name is Earl" episode "I Won't Die with a Little Help from My Friends". On August 6, 2008, Hilton appeared in a video online, "Paris Hilton Responds to McCain Ad", directed by Adam McKay and posted on the Funny or Die website. The video featured Hilton in a parody advertisement, and was made in response to a television campaign advert "Celeb", by the 2008 John McCain presidential campaign. In "Celeb", McCain briefly compared his rival Barack Obama to that of celebrities such as Hilton and Britney Spears, going on to question his readiness to lead and criticize his energy policy. In what "The Washington Post" opined "might just be her best acting role yet," Hilton appears in the video wearing a leopard print swimsuit. The video received seven million views in two days garnering worldwide press coverage, and drew both written and verbal media response from both campaigns. In October Hilton featured in a second parody video posted on "Funny or Die", "Paris Hilton Gets Presidential with Martin Sheen", alongside Hollywood actor Martin Sheen, with his son, actor Charlie Sheen, appearing in a cameo role. Hilton, heavily made up and in a green evening dress, interviews Martin Sheen in a kitchen, discussing various political issues, seeking his advice from his days playing a fictional President on "The West Wing".
A the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival, it was screened a documentary about Hilton called "Paris, Not France". "I think there's a lot of misconceptions in the media. This movie is very personal. It's kind of like a diary", she said about the motion picture. Hilton admitted that when she talked with the movie director Adria Petty, she "broke it down to her and talked about things that have never been spoken about before, and people will learn a lot from that". It is shown in the documentary how she felt about the way the media had portrayed her: "I'm basically being judged, and they're creating this false person, and I can't do anything about it". Petty, during the premiere at the festival remarked that Hilton has "created a mystery about herself that a film like this maybe wouldn't have been a great thing for her in the past. But now, she's been so saturated in the media. We're so used to her. To see a new side of her is so exciting". Later, in 2009, the film was aired in July for MTV.
Hilton starred in an MTV reality series titled "Paris Hilton's My New BFF", about her search for a new best friend. The series premiered on September 30, 2008. That day, Hilton released her song "My BFF" on KIIS-FM with host Ryan Seacrest. It was the theme song for the "BFF" show . The series proved to be a hit; it was watched in its premiere episode by 1,200,000 viewers and averaged a 1.6 rating among spectators 12–34 in its Tuesday 10 p.m slot, topping all other cable shows in the hour. Hilton's next project was the goth/rock musical with a cult film following, "Repo! The Genetic Opera", where she played the character of Amber Sweet, the surgery- and painkiller-addicted daughter of a biotech magnate. "Horror.com" said: " Not only is this by far Hilton's best role, she's actually got a grain of gravitas in the end". However, "Jam! Movies" called her a "hopeless twit as an actress". She remarked that "Just getting a role like this offered to me was new to me because I always get offered a certain role just basically playing myself". She was nominated for the Razzie Award for Worst Supporting Actress in 2009 for her role. The film, first screened at the 2008 San Diego Comic-Con International, received a limited release in the United States and Canada on November 7, 2008. Around that time, Hilton released her fifth fragrance for women called, "Fairy Dust" and broke up with Good Charlotte guitarist Benji Madden, who she was in a relationship with since early that year. 
As a result of the American version success, on January 29, 2009, "Paris Hilton's British Best Friend", a spin-off, began airing on ITV2 in England. She began to film the show in October 2008. She said that she would not leave London until she could "find that amazing girl or guy who can meet the challenges of being" her "British bestie". She also felt that her friend had to be "hot", "can keep up" with her – it had to be somebody who "is real and won't be a backstabber". The show did quite well; it was watched by 428,000 viewers in its first episode and brought 605,000 viewers for its finale. The second season of "Paris Hilton's My New BFF" premiered on June 2, 2009. In that same month, Hilton shot "Paris Hilton's Dubai BFF" (which, after some complication, it was aired in 2011). Runner-up of the British series Kat McKenzie died on July 3, 2009, of a suspected overdose. Hilton guest-starred in the fifth episode of "Supernaturals fifth season. "Paris Hilton is playing a demonic creature that takes the form of ... Paris Hilton," creator and executive producer Eric Kripke said in a statement. "It'll be a fun, irreverent episode and we here at "Supernatural" are thrilled that Paris agreed to do it." In July 2009, her sixth fragrance for women "Siren" was launched. She won the Female Celebrity Fragrance of the Year Award at the 2009 Fifi Awards. She got involved in the creation of a sunglasses line by Gripping Eyewear. She first launched the line on October 7, 2009 and the collection became available in stores in March 2010. The next month, she launched a Hair and Beauty Products line, which includes a range of shampoos, conditioners, and hair vitamins
Also in 2009, she began dating "The Hills" star Doug Reinhardt; Hilton referred to her intention to marry Reinhardt, saying "He's gonna be my husband." The couple broke up in June 2009, only to get back together again in August of the same year. However, on April 13, 2010, Hilton reportedly split from Reinhardt because she was worried he was just using her to further his career.
2010–11: Legal issues and reality television comeback.
In February 2010, Hilton participated in an advertising campaign for the launch of the Brazilian beer Devassa Bem Loura, whose slogan in English roughly translates to "very blonde bitch". As part of the campaign, Hilton joined the brewery's float in the carnival of Rio de Janeiro. On July 2, Hilton was accused of smoking marijuana at the 2010 FIFA World Cup game between Brazil and the Netherlands. She was escorted from the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium by local police, however the case was later dismissed for unknown reasons. Hilton's publicist, Dawn Miller, stated "I can confirm that the incident was a complete misunderstanding and it was actually another person in the group who did it". Two weeks later, Hilton was detained and released after being caught in possession of cannabis at Figari airport, Corsica.
On August 10, Hilton released her 10th fragrance, "Tease" inspired by Marilyn Monroe. On August 19, she launched a footwear line in Las Vegas. The collection costs between $60 and $160 and Hilton, during an interview, said that she "chose the styling, design, materials and colours for the line and also wanted to make sure it was super comfortable". That same month, she was arrested on suspicion of cocaine possession in Las Vegas while her boyfriend, Cy Waits, was booked on charges of driving under the influence. Initially her defence claimed that the handbag containing 0.8g of cocaine was not hers as "This purse in question was a high street brand – and by no means up to her high fashion standards.". Later she claimed some of the personal items (like cash and credit cards) from the bag acknowledging it was hers. In order to avoid being convicted on felony, Hilton pleaded guilty to two misdemeanors on September 17, 2010. Under the terms of the plea bargain, she was sentenced to one year probation, 200 hours community service, $2,000 fine and ordered to complete a drug abuse program. Clark County District Attorney David Roger said that: "If she is arrested for anything besides a minor traffic violation she will spend a year in jail. There will be no discussion. The court will have no discretion." On September 21, 2010, while travelling to a press conference in Tokyo to promote fashion and fragrance lines, Hilton and her sister Nicky were stopped by immigration officers at Narita Airport, Japan because of Hilton's conviction for drug possession a day earlier. Under Japan's strict anti-drug laws, all people sentenced for any drug crime are in general denied entry. Narita officials questioned Hilton "for hours" and Hilton and her sister were forced to sleep over at the airport-hotel. On September 22, Japanese authorities decided not to grant Hilton entry into the country and she was put on a plane back to the U.S. the same day. Other stops on their Asian promotion tour were cancelled, as countries like Indonesia and Malaysia have even tougher anti-drug laws. The documentary "Teenage Paparazzo", in which Hilton appeared, aired on HBO on September 27. The motion picture was met with critical acclaim.
She provided her voice for the character of Bella in the ABC made-for-television film "The Dog Who Saved Christmas Vacation" (it is her first voice-over role). She said of the film: "I just think it's a really cute film" and that "I love animal movies, I love Christmas movies, and also, my grandmother, who passed away a couple of years ago from breast cancer, actually had a standard poodle and her name was Paris. So when I'm watching this, it's kind of like watching grandma's dog. It's kind of like a sign to me." The film aired on November 28, 2010 and attracted good ratings with 2.611 million viewers. In December 2010 Hilton launched her own motorcycle team. In November 2011, her Spanish driver Maverick Vinales won the final race and come up third overall in the 125cc world championship. She modeled for the second time (the first time was early 2010) at the Brazil Fashion Week in 2011. In February, it was released a new collection of fragrances called the Passport collection. The perfumes are inspired by popular cities such as Paris, France; South Beach, Florida; and Tokyo, Japan, The following month, she launched a footwear collection in Mexico. Around that time, she launched her mobile application, which became available for iPhone and iTouch. On May 12, she opened her third store in Philippines. The store is located at Abreeza Mall in Davao City and it displays bags, earrings, wallets, belts, caps and perfumes.
On June 1, 2011, Oxygen's show "The World According to Paris", which marked Hilton's comeback to reality television, premiered. The show followed her in her daily life, and attracted 409,000 viewers. Although being the highest Wednesday premiere for a show, it was considered a bomb, which led to the suspicion Hilton's popularity had faded. "The New York Times" wrote that Hilton "is an attractive woman with proven talent for marketing and self-promotion, though as a reality heroine she seems a little passé — a Sony Walkman in an iPod era, a Friendster in the age of Facebook or, to put it in context, a single-process blonde in a triple-process world", and also remarked that she "appears to have plenty of boyfriends, present and ex. Paparazzi still snap her picture. But it’s hard to see how she can recapture the kind of audience she enjoyed in her heyday – even by streaming her premiere live on Facebook". She appeared on the show alongside her boyfriend Cy Waits (a entrepreneur and co-owner of Tryst Nightclub and XS Nightclub in Las Vegas), who she broke up with in June. Hilton was named "Billion Dollar Entrepreneur" by "Variety" magazine and was featured on the cover. She opened up her fourth store in the Philippines on August 18, 2011. In September, she launched a footwear line in Istanbul, Turkey and a Paris Hilton brand store was opened in India with plans to open 8 more stores. She also modeled during Ukraine Fashion Week for designer Andre Tan in October 2011.
2012–present: Music, acting work and upcoming projects.
In September 2011, at the Sun City music festival, Afrojack (who, from December 2011 to May 2012, was rumoured to be Hilton's boyfriend) previewed "Good Time", an unfinished demo with Hilton's vocals. In the same month, DJ Antoine revealed that he had met with Hilton twice to discuss collaborating on her upcoming album. In October, Manufactured Superstars revealed that their next single would be "Drunk Text", which stars Hilton in the music video. The video was leaked on February 23, 2012 and receiving a mixed reaction from the public, the song was pulled back from YouTube. However it was later stated that the song was not part of her upcoming album.
In January 2012, at the 69th Golden Globe Awards After Party, she stated she was going to appear in Darren Lynn Bousman's horror film "Devil's Carnival", remarking that the film was a musical. In an interview with the director, he admitted that although considering Hilton for a role in the film, he felt that "there just wasn't anything in there that was perfect for her". He told, however, he will work with Hilton in the future. In March 2012, it was reported that she will appear as herself in Sofia Coppola's "The Bling Ring", a film about a group of teenagers who robbed the houses of celebrities such as Hilton, Lindsay Lohan and Orlando Bloom between 2008 and 2009, is scheduled to be released in 2013. In February 2012, she launched a new line of sunglasses in Shanghai. The launch was a "huge success", she said.
During an interview with MTV News, she revealed Afrojack was producing her entire album and that she made a song with LMFAO. She also stated that she was working with Snoop Dogg and Flo Rida. It was announced in early May that the first single, which was called "After Midnight", was going to premiere on June 5. However, in her DJ debut at the Pop Music Festival in Brazil, she premiered her single called "Last Night". Having attracted extremely negative reviews after some videos were posted on Youtube.com and being dissed by the DJs Deadmau5, Samantha Ronson, and even Afrojack, she gained positive reviews from DJ Poet, fans and the crowd at the festival. As a whole, her set received mixed reviews. Hilton's footwear line was nominated for Best Celebrity Licensee of the Year at the 2012 International Licensing Excellence Awards. Around that time, she released her fifteen perfume, "Dazzle".
Hilton appeared in a music video for Korean singer, Kim Jang Hoon. The filming took place at the American resort of Malibu Beach, California from August 24 to 25, 2012. An agent for the Korean singer stated that they had considered several Hollywood stars for the lead actress role in Kim's music video, including Jessica Alba and Scarlett Johansson, as well as Hilton. However, she was finally chosen to play the role following a survey conducted by the Korean public who recognised Paris more than the other contenders. It is alleged that Hilton was paid $1 million for her appearance in the video shoot, with a 3D premiere that took place in October 2012.
On September 20, 2012, an audio recording of her making derogatory comments about gay people appeared on the Internet. On the same day, after the backlash caused over the comments, Hilton issued an apology throughout GLAAD where she wrote she is a "huge supporter of the gay community" and labels gay people as "the strongest and most inspiring people I know". As a result of the remarks, gay-focused channel Logo pulled a documentary about her called "Paris Hilton Inc.", which was scheduled to air. Since that month, she has been in a relationship with Spanish model River Viiperi.
Hilton will have a part in a Turkish film called "Yarmani". Being a comedy, the movie is going to be about "an ingenious Anatolian boy who becomes a famous fashion guru". Filming will take place in Los Angeles, Instanbul and Cappodocia. The director of the film is Baris Denge and Hilton's co-star is actor Erkan Kose.
After a falling out between Afrojack and Hilton caused over her DJ set, her single "Last Night" was handed to Pitbull for his album "Global Warming". On November 20, 2012, the song that Hilton recorded was leaked online and it features a collaboration with rapper Lil Wayne. Hilton opened her fifth store in the city of Mecca, Saudi Arabia in early November 2012. As Mecca is considered the "holiest city in the Muslim world" and Saudi Arabia is a conservative country, a controversy regarding her personal life was ganerated on Twitter. In early December, she modeled for designers Shane and Falguni Peacock at India Fashion Week. She also made a performance as a DJ there. Like her debut, the set was met negatively after a video was posted on Youtube but received acclaim from the audience.
She said she will be opening a beach club: "The first one is opening in the Philippines soon. It's going to have nightclubs, restaurants, bars, gyms. Everything really". It has been reported that her fragrances have grossed over $1.4 billion in revenue since 2005. As of November 2012, there are 42 Paris Hilton Stores worldwide, and her signature brand includes 17 different products lines such as t-shirts, footwear, fragrances, handbags and watches. She earns over $10 million a year from her products sales and she is estimated to have a net worth of $100 million as of 2012.
Celebrity status.
Although being already a fixture in entertainment news for her heavy-party lifestyle, she gained significant notoriety for her participation in "1 Night in Paris", a sex tape that was leaked before the premiere episode of her reality show "The Simple Life", which aired to high ratings. Some entertainment writers felt the overnight success of Hilton was spawned by the whole tape controversy. "Entertainment Weekly" commented: "I dare say the Paris Hilton-Rick Salomon tape received more print and television coverage in a week than the run-up to "The Simple Life" received in the months since its premiere was announced. We in the media have become Paris-ites". "People" magazine wrote that the show "no doubt was helped by the very public saga of a pirated three-year-old video tape, which recently made the rounds on the Internet showing Hilton engaged in various sex acts with ex-boyfriend Rick Salomon". As a result, Hilton's profile was raised significantly, paparazzi began following her and her relationships, lavish lifestyle and legal issues became frecuent targets of gossip sites and tabloid media worldwide—for which critics suggest that Hilton epitomizes the title of famous for being famous and she is an example of the modern phenomenon of the "celebutante", the celebrity who rises to fame not because of their talent or work but because of their inherited wealth and controversial lifestyle.
Hilton appeared for the third time in FHM's 100 Sexiest Women poll in 2006, ranking at number thirty four. She was twenty three in 2005 and fifty nine in 2004. In a poll conducted by the Associated Press and AOL, Hilton was voted the second "Worst Celebrity Role Model of 2006", behind Britney Spears. She denied proclaiming herself as the "iconic blonde of the decade" such as Diana, Princess of Wales, and Marilyn Monroe in the May 2007 issue of "Harper's Bazaar". She appeared in the 2007 "Guinness World Records" as the world's "Most Overrated Celebrity". "New York Daily News" gossip columnist Lloyd Grove banned her from his page and the Associated Press conducted what they called an experiment in February 2007, trying not to report on Hilton for a whole week.
During 2009, a quiet free relationship between Hilton and tabloid headlines led entertainment writers surmise Hilton's popularity had plummeted. In an article from "CNN" called "Why has Paris Hilton disappeared?", editor Samantha Yanks (of "Gotham" and "Hamptons" magazines) was quoted saying: "Phase one was the ascension, seemingly out of nowhere. That came with a media frenzy, the antics, the partying, the music, the babe-like status and of course, the fashion label. Phase two, she disappears" The absence of Hilton in the news and tabloids seemed to be a response to a new generation of tabloid consumers' lack of interest in her. The suspicion of her star power fading came back in June 2011, when her reality show, "The World According to Paris" failed to get high ratings. As a result, Hilton walked out during an interview with "Good Morning America", after she was asked if she worried about her moment having passed. Remaining a frequent target for paparazzi, Hilton has been keeping clear from news headlines in recent years.
In 2011, she was named one of the "100 Hottest Women of All-Time" by "Men's Health". According to a 2011 poll conducted by Ipsos, Hilton is the most unpopular celebrity among Americans, with 60% of the responders having an unfavorable opinion on her. In 2012, she ranked at number five in the "Most Over-exposed" list by "Forbes".
External links.
 <!--Do not remove. Look at sources in article-->
