Emraan Hashmi (born 24 March 1979) is an Indian film actor who appears in Hindi language films. Before starting his career as an actor, Hashmi worked with Vishesh Films as an assistant director on Vikram Bhatt's "Raaz" (2002). In 2003, he made his acting debut with Bhatt's "Footpath" and followed it with the commercially successful romantic thriller "Murder" (2004).
Hashmi subsequently appeared in several commercially successful films, mostly under the production of Vishesh Films. The critics, however, labelled him as a "one note actor" and criticized his repetitive roles. These characters also earned him the "serial kisser" title. Hashmi eventually garnered wide critical acclaim for his performances in "Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai" (2010), "The Dirty Picture" (2011) and "Shanghai" (2012). He has established himself has a leading contemporary actor of Hindi cinema.
Hashmi has received three Filmfare Awards nominations in his career. He is considered as one of the most popular celebrities in India. He married his long-time girlfriend Parveen Shahani in 2008 and became father to a son, Ayaan Hashmi, in 2010.
Early life and background.
Emraan Hashmi was born on 24 March 1979 in Mumbai, Maharashtra, to Anwar Hashmi and Maherahh Hashmi. He is the nephew of director and producer Mahesh Bhatt and Mukesh Bhatt. He is the cousin of director Mohit Suri actress and director Pooja Bhatt, actor Rahul Bhatt, and actress Alia Bhatt. Hashmi studied at Sydenham College, Mumbai and University of Mumbai. But his grandfather was Pakistani before and his grand mother was Indian
Career.
2003–2007: Debut and breakthrough.
Hashmi made his acting debut in 2003, with Vikram Bhatt's thriller "Footpath". Co-starring alongside Aftab Shivdasani and Bipasha Basu, he portrayed the role of Raghu Shrivastav, a gangster. His performance in the film was appreciated by critics; Gaurav Malani described him as the "scene-stealer" and praised his mannerisms. The following year he featured in Anurag Basu's romantic thriller "Murder" with Mallika Sherawat and Ashmit Patel. Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama said about his performance, "Emraan Hashmi is fantastic in a role that seems tailormade for him. Enacting the role of an obsessive lover with flourish, there's no denying that the narrative gets a major impetus thanks to Emraan's performance." "Murder" emerged as a commercial success, with a domestic total of , becoming the ninth-highest grossing film of the year in India. 
Hashmi next starred in Anurag Basu's romance "Tumsa Nahin Dekha – A Love Story" opposite Dia Mirza. While shooting the film Basu was diagnosed with blood cancer, hence producer-director Mahesh Bhatt completed it. Although the film did not succeed at the box office, his portrayal of Daksh Mittal (a young millionaire who falls in love with a bargirl) was generally well received. A review of his performance in BBC Online noted that he was "becoming fabulous with every film."
In 2005, Hashmi appeared in Mohit Suri's romantic thriller "Zeher", co-starring Shamita Shetty and Udita Goswami. His portrayal of Siddharth Mehra (a chief of police who is jealous of his wife's professional success) met with negative reviews from critics. Patchy N of Rediff.com wrote, "Emraan Hashmi has done a passable job, except for the scenes where his character gets angry. The young man yells so loudly that he could well compete with a Sunny Deol!". The film emerged as a moderate commercial success, earning over in India. He then starred in Aditya Datt's romance "Aashiq Banaya Aapne" and Vivek Agnihotri's crime thriller "Chocolate", all of which performed poorly at the box office.
Hashmi then took a supporting role in Mohit Suri's thriller "Kalyug", alongside Kunal Khemu, Smilie Suri, Amrita Singh, Ashutosh Rana and Deepal Shaw. Based on the sex industry, the film depicted the devastating effect that non-consensual pornographic films have on the subjects. Hashmi featured as Ali Bhai, a man who runs a sex shop. His performance garnered positive reviews from critics, with Taran Adarsh writing, "Emraan Hashmi makes a brief appearance and the actor is, like always, highly competent." "Kalyug" was a moderate commercial success in India.
Hashmi's first film in 2006 was Anant Mahadevan's thriller "Aksar" with Udita Goswani and Dino Morea. The film was a moderate commercial success at the box office, but met with negative reviews from critics. He next appeared in Anurag Basu's romantic thriller "Gangster", co-starring Kangna Ranaut and Shiney Ahuja. The film, which emerged as a commercial success, grossing over in India, generated positive reviews for his portrayal of an undercover detective called Aakash. Rediff.com's Raja Sen wrote, "His character is an understated one, and Hashmi manages to keep it that way. There is no unnecessary bluster or melodrama, and he does a pretty believable job. There is something lazy about his acting, by which I mean he makes the job look easy." Hashmi eventually received his first Filmfare Awards nomination in the Best Performance in a Negative Role category. He then acted in the crime thriller "The Killer" (adapted from the 2004 film "Collateral") and the romance "Dil Diya Hai". Both these films were critically and commercially unsuccessful.
In 2007, Hashmi appeared in three films. He first starred in the comedy "Good Boy Bad Boy" alongside Tusshar Kapoor, Isha Sharvani and Tanushree Dutta. The film was a critical and commercial failure. He then featured opposite Mrinalini Sharma and Shriya Saran in Mohit Suri's romantic thriller "Awarapan". Hashmi was cast as the protagonist Shivam, a gangster with a tragic past. The film opened to mixed reviews but his performance was praised by critics. Writing for "The Hindustan Times", critic Khalid Mohamed described it as "intense and believable". Subhash K Jha wrote, "... Emraan Hashmi an actor who conceals more than he reveals on screen. There is an inherent pain in his personality that this film taps better than anything he has done earlier. This film marks the emergence of a major talent." His final release of the year was the critically and commercially unsuccessful thriller "The Train".
2008–present: Commercial success.
Hashmi's only film in 2008 was Kunal Deshmukh's "Jannat", a love story set against the backdrop of match fixing. Co-starring alongside Sonal Chauhan, Javed Sheikh and Sameer Kochhar, Hashmi was cast as Arjun Dixit, a bookmaker. His performance was appreciated by critics; Taran Adarash stated, "The actor displays the gamut of emotions with aplomb, he changes expressions like a chameleon changes colors. "Jannat" is yet another turning point in his career." The film emerged as a commercial success in India, with revenues of over .
In 2009, Hashmi appeared in Mohit Suri's supernatural horror "Raaz – The Mystery Continues", alongside Kangna Ranaut and Adhyayan Suman. The film was commercial success, earning over in India. Hashmi's portrayal of a painter was critically well received; "The Times of India"'s Nikhat Kazmi wrote, "Emraan Hashmi is fast emerging as the Colin Farrell of Indian cinema: completely mercurial, eclectic and unpredictable. As the brooding, prescient painter, who paints death on his canvas and falls in love with one of subjects, he is suitably aggrieved, desperate and afraid." He then co-starred opposite Soha Ali Khan in Kunal Deshmukh's "Tum Mile", a love story set against the backdrop of the 2005 Maharashtra floods. The film was a critical and commercial failure in India.
The following year, Hashmi featured in Milan Luthria's period mob film "Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai" with an ensemble cast including Ajay Devgan, Randeep Hooda, Kangna Ranaut and Prachi Desai. The film, which depicts the rise of organised crime in Mumbai, saw Hashmi play Shoaib Khan, a character inspired by the real-life gangster Dawood Ibrahim. "Once Upon A Time In Mumbaai" was a critical and commercial success, with a domestic revenue of over . Hashmi's performance garnered positive reviews from critics and earned him a Best Supporting Actor nomination at the 56th Filmfare Awards. Blessy Chettiar of "Daily News and Analysis" described him as "top class". Komal Nahta remarked, "This is easily Emraan’s best performance so far. If he is cute in the romantic scenes, he is believably tough in the action and dramatic scenes." His next release was Mohit Suri's thriller "Crook", based on the violence against Indians in Australia controversy. The film was a critical and commercial failure in India.
In 2011, Hashmi starred in Madhur Bhandarkar's romantic comedy "Dil Toh Baccha Hai Ji", alongside Ajay Devgan, Omi Vaidya, Shazahn Padamsee, Tisca Chopra and Shruti Hassan. The film was a "below average" grosser at the box office and received mixed to negative reviews from critics, as did Hashmi's performance. His next appearance was in Mohit Suri's slasher thriller "Murder 2", alongside Jacqueline Fernandez, Prashant Narayanan and Sulagna Panigrahi. Upon release, the film and his performance garnered mixed reviews from critics Shubhra Gupta of "The Indian Express" wrote, "Hashmi gets to do what he does best, glowering at the men, bedding the ladies, and towards the end, going head to head with the bad guy [...] he goes through the film with his usual smart one-liners containing equal amounts of bluster and fluster." "Murder 2" was eventually declared a blockbuster, earning worldwide.
Hashmi's final film in 2011 was Milan Luthria's biopic "The Dirty Picture", featuring Vidya Balan as the controversial Indian actress Silk Smitha, alongside Naseeruddin Shah and Tusshar Kapoor. He was cast as Abraham, the narrator, who proclaims himself to be the protagonist's biggest enemy. The film opened to critical acclaim and Hashmi's performance was appreciated; CNN-IBN's Rajeev Masand wrote, Emraan Hashmi is appropriately restrained as Abraham, a director who believes in film as art, and who abhors the idea of inserting steamy numbers in his movie to lure in the crowds." However, several critics were skeptical about his role in the film; Soumyadipta Banerjee from "Daily News and Analysis" considered it "out of place". "The Dirty Picture" emerged as a commercial success with a worldwide revenue of .
In 2012, Hashmi appeared in Kunal Deshmukh's crime thriller "Jannat 2" with Randeep Hooda and Esha Gupta. It was initially titled as "Informer" but was later changed to the current title, making it a follow-up film to "Jannat" (2008). The film generated mixed reviews from critics and was a commercial success at the box office. He then starred alongside Abhay Deol, Prosenjit Chatterjee and Kalki Koechlin in Dibakar Banerjee's "Shanghai", an adaptation of writer Vassilis Vassilikos's novel "Z" and the 1969 French film of the same name. Set in a fictional town called Bharat Nagar, the political thriller traces corruption in India. The film was a critical success, and Hashmi received unanimous praise for his portrayal of Joginder Parmar, a videographer who sometimes shoots porn. Madhureeta Mukherjee of "The Times of India" wrote that Hashmi "looks the part and pulls off an act he should be proud of." Raja Sen described it as one of his best performances and wrote, "Emraan Hashmi, delivers a knockout punch as he masters a complicated role." He received a second Best Supporting Actor nomination at the 58th Filmfare Awards for his performance in the film.
Hashmi's next appearance was in Vikram Bhatt's supernatural horror "Raaz 3D", alongside Bipasha Basu and Esha Gupta. A commercial success, the film and his performance received negative reviews; critic Kunal Guha commented, "takes his role as seriously as he could but his efforts couldn't exorcise the devilishly terrible plot from spelling doom for this film." Lisa Tsering of "The Hollywood Reporter" wrote, "The swarthy Hashmi [... does a forgettable job. His final film in 2012 was Shamin Desai's thriller "Rush". The film was a critical and commercial failure.
As of February 2013, Hashmi is due to appear in Ekta Kapoor and Vishal Bhardwaj's Supernatural thriller "Ek Thi Daayan", alongside Konkona Sen Sharma, Huma Qureshi and Kalki Koechlin. He will then feature in Raj Kumar Gupta's black comedy "Ghanchakkar" opposite Vidya Balan, Karan Johar's "Ungli" and Academy Award winning director Danis Tanovic's next film. Hashmi will also feature alongside Kareena Kapoor in Ekta Kapoor and Karan Johar's untitled romantic drama.
Personal life.
Hashmi is married to a Hindu girl Parveen Sahani in December 2008 after four and a half years courtship and the couple has a son Ayaan Hashmi who was born in 2010.
