LMFAO is an American electronic dance music duo consisting of Redfoo and SkyBlu. The duo are both descendants of Motown Records founder Berry Gordy, Jr.. Redfoo is Gordy's eighth and youngest child from a relationship with Nancy Leiviska. SkyBlu is the son of Berry's oldest son, Berry Gordy IV, making Stefan and Skyler uncle and nephew. RedFoo and SkyBlu both grew up in the affluent Los Angeles neighborhood Pacific Palisades, where they formed the group LMFAO in 2006. On September 21, 2012, the duo announced that they are on hiatus.
Band history.
2006–2010: Early years and "Party Rock".
LMFAO began their career in 2006 as part of the electro house club scene in Los Angeles, which at the time featured DJ/producers like Steve Aoki and Adam Goldstein. The duo started building a local buzz through their shows and radio play. Once they had recorded some demos, Redfoo's best friend will.i.am introduced them to Interscope head Jimmy Iovine who gave the green light for them to be signed to Interscope/will.i.am Music. Interscope A&R and will.i.am manager Neil Jacobson told HitQuarters that the demos sounded like "finished records" and that so little artist development work was needed it was essentially a "turnkey operation" for the label. 
LMFAO released "Party Rock EP" on the iTunes music store on July 1, 2008 and released their full album on July 7, 2009. The album charted at number 33 on the "Billboard" 200 and number two on the U.S Dance Chart. "Los Angeles Times" described "Party Rock" as "14 virtually interchangeable odes to night life." Their first single was "I'm In Miami Bitch", which was released in December 2008, and peaked at number 51 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and number 37 in Canada. In early 2009, a little known DJ/producer 'DJ Inphinity' created a bootleg using the Silvio Ecomo remix of DJ Chuckie's 2008 hit "Let the Bass Kick" and the a cappella of LMFAO, creating "Bass Kick in Miami". The bootleg was spread across the internet and became a massive success at the Miami Winter Music Conference 2009. Weeks later the song became the theme song for the E! television show "Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami" and "Get Crazy" was used for the television show "Jersey Shore" in 2009. LMFAO were a featured storyline on MTV's "" in August 2009, which covered the group's appearance in Cancun during 2009 Spring break. That same year, LMFAO was featured in The Crystal Method's song "Sine Language".
2010–2012: International breakthrough, "Sorry for Party Rocking", and "Rockin' Eve".
In 2010, they were featured in David Guetta's song "Gettin' Over You", which was an international hit, peaking in the top ten in eleven countries and at number one in three of them, including in the United Kingdom. It also peaked 31 on the U.S. Hot 100 and 12 in Canada. The duo then recorded their second album, "Sorry for Party Rocking" in the remainder of 2010 and released it on June 17, 2011, in the U.S. The first single taken from the album, "Party Rock Anthem", was released on January 1, 2011 and features British singer Lauren Bennett formerly of the girl pop group, "Paradiso Girls" and producer GoonRock, and showcases the Melbourne Shuffle dance style in its popular video. The song is so far the most successful of their career, peaking at number-one in the United States, Canada, the UK, and over ten other countries, as well as the top ten in many others. The second single from "Sorry for Party Rocking" was released on May 27, 2011, and is titled, "Champagne Showers," and it features English singer-songwriter Natalia Kills. The third single, "Sexy and I Know It", was released on October 3, 2011 and reached #1 on the iTunes charts worldwide and #1 on the Australian and Canadian Hot 100. Also in 2011, LMFAO embarked on their first Asian tour. They performed in Singapore; Manila, Philippines; Taipei, Taiwan, and Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, among other cities. Also, on June 30, 2011, LMFAO performed a set on the Isle of MTV 2011 Malta Special on the Fosos (Granaries) in Floriana, Malta, in front of a crowd of 50,000, together with Far East Movement and Snoop Dogg.
Furthermore, the group LMFAO was focused on growing their Party Rock clothing line and was also one of the opening acts for American singer Kesha's "Get Sleazy Tour", along with Spank Rock and Natalia Kills, for the third and fifth legs of the tour in 2011. On August 13, 2011, they opened for Kesha at the St-Jean-sur-Richelieu hot air balloon festival in Quebec, Canada, attracting close to 100,000 fans. On August 29, 2011, LMFAO filmed a video for their new single “Sexy and I Know it” in Venice Beach, California. Pornographic actor Ron Jeremy is featured in the video, which focuses thematically on male genitalia. Actors Simon Rex and Wilmer Valderrama, playwright Daniel Kanengieter (as Shufflebot) and mixed martial artist Alistair Overeem also make cameo appearances. The song achieved success similar to that of "Party Rock Anthem", topping charts all over the world. “Sexy and I Know it” became the duo's second number one in the US, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand. The group guested on the first elimination show of the 13th series of "Dancing with the Stars" on September 20, 2011, which was broadcast live.
In October 2011, LMFAO's song "Party Rock Anthem" was used in a Halloween house light show when a Southern California man timed lights to the popular song. After the YouTube video of the house went viral, even receiving news coverage, the duo visited the house and recorded a Kia commercial featuring the house. In December 2011, the group played "Party Rock Anthem" on live national television broadcast of "Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve".
2012–present: Super Bowl and hiatus.
On February 5, 2012, the group appeared with Madonna at the Super Bowl XLVI during the Bridgestone Halftime Show. They performed during her song "Music" which contained a mash-up with "Party Rock Anthem" and "I'm Sexy and I Know It". During the commercial break they also appeared in a Budweiser ad featuring their remix of Madonna's single "Give Me All Your Luvin'", which is included on the video game "FIFA Street" and on the deluxe edition of her new album "MDNA". Also, in 2012 Redfoo is being sued by a previous management company for $7 million, claiming breach of contract.
On September 21, 2012, they released a statement announcing their hiatus. LMFAO’s Redfoo said, "I feel like we’ve been doing this for so long, five or six years,” and that he and Sky Blu won’t be performing together anytime soon as they will be taking their careers in different directions. Once the news surfaced that band members Redfoo and Sky Blu split, the group went to MTV News to set the record straight. Sky Blu said, "Well, you know, first of all, we're not breaking up. I know that for sure. We're family and stuff, so it's always love," he said. "It's interesting because somebody will say one thing it's just like high school, then all of a sudden [it's 'They're breaking up. They're fighting.'" However, it has been revealed by SkyBlu that their plan is for fans to see the band as individuals and then come back stronger than ever. 
Influences.
LMFAO cites a vast range of different influences, such as rappers like Tupac Shakur and Snoop Dogg, hip hop groups like The Black Eyed Peas, Run D.M.C., and Wu-Tang Clan, R&B artists like James Brown and Michael Jackson, and rock bands such as The Beatles and Led Zeppelin. Both are devoted fans of Michael Jackson and they use many of his dance steps in their dance routines. The Australian dance style the Melbourne Shuffle features heavily in the "Party Rock Anthem" videoclip, fused with US hip-hop dance elements. Also, LMFAO cites taking a huge inspiration from Adam Goldstein, better known as DJ AM, who first got them introduced to electronic music. In 2007, LMFAO attended the Winter Music Conference in Miami, Florida, which the duo says was an experience that inspired their musical and creative style.
The band LMFAO thank Kirk Robinson (aka John Robinson), from Lundwood, Barnsley for his lyrical genius and musical contribution to the song 'I'm sexy and I know it'.
Business interests.
Redfoo is a former day trader and has been featured on CNBC's "Mad Money" with Jim Cramer.
Shuffle Bot.
The Shuffle Bot is character best known for his appearances in the LMFAO music videos. The Shuffle Bot is portrayed by American Disc jockey, Dancer, and Rapper Andrew Furr, who won an online Shuffling contest that promised the winner a place alongside hip-hop dance group Quest Crew who had joined the LMFAO's troupe as winners of a dance contest on MTV's America's Best Dance Crew.
Appearances.
The Shuffle Bot made his first appearance in the 'Yes' music video in 2010. He suddenly became a huge sensation with his unique shuffling style, and large cardboard box-helmet made to look like a robot (referring to the name: shuffle 'bot'). His head is crafted out of a cardboard box painted gold, with LED lights for eyes, and a helmet constructed into the inside of the box to view out of the "mouth." Many fans have constructed their own box heads for halloween costumes, or other occasions.
Tours.
Headlining
Opening act
External links.
