Jake Bugg (born Jacob Edwin Kennedy; 1994) is an English singer songwriter. His work is influenced by Donovan, Johnny Cash, Jimi Hendrix, Oasis, Arctic Monkeys and The Beatles.
Early life.
Bugg was born in Nottingham, to musical parents who separated when he was young. His father, whose name was Bugg, was a nurse and his mother worked in sales, both having previously made recordings. He grew up in the Clifton council estate of Nottingham and started playing guitar aged 12 after being introduced to the it by his uncle Mark, he also states that his formative musical moment was hearing Don McLean’s "Starry Starry Night" on an episode of The Simpsons. He originally played bass guitar in his cousin's band while enrolled in a music technology course, but by the age of 16 he had dropped out and was writing and performing his own songs influenced by the Beatles, Johnny Cash, Donovan, the Everly Brothers and Jimi Hendrix. 
Bugg was chosen by the BBC to appear on their "Introducing" stage at the 2011 Glastonbury Festival aged 17, and because of this was given a contract by Mercury Records. His songs were then placed on various BBC Radio play lists and one of them, "Country Song", was selected for use in a national TV beer commercial for Greene King IPA.
Career.
2012-present: Debut Album.
In an interview for The Telegraph, when dubbed 'an East Midlands Bob Dylan’, Bugg said "Bob Dylan’s cool, you know, he’s great, but he's not a major influence."
On 22 May 2012, Bugg appeared on the BBC music programme "Later... with Jools Holland".
In August 2012 Bugg was a supporting act for Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds at Belsonic Music Festival, Belfast. 
On 1 October 2012, he performed live on the BBC Radio 6 Music programme "Live at Maida Vale". Bugg's debut album was released on 15 October 2012. Talking about Bugg and his debut Clash hailed the "precocious talent fusing retro folk with blistering contemporary rock riffs". On 21 October 2012 the song "Two Fingers" charted at 28 in the UK while his self-titled album reached number one in the UK charts. On 1 January 2013 Bugg appeared on Jools' Annual Hootenanny on BBC2, and on 5 January 2013 he appeared on The Jonathan Ross Show on ITV1.
At the London 2012 Olympic games, Bugg's song "Lightning Bolt" was played during the build up to the 100m mens final. [http://jakebugg.com/mobile/news/jake-buggs-lightning-bolt-featured-on-the-oly]
On 17 January Bugg performed "Two Fingers" on the US TV talkshow "Conan". On 26 January, he performed the same song as well as giving a short interview on the talkshow Lindmo on Norwegian television NRK.
