The Bugatti Veyron EB 16.4 is a mid-engined grand touring car, designed and developed by the Volkswagen Group and manufactured in Molsheim, France by Bugatti Automobiles S.A.S.
The Super Sport version of the Veyron is the fastest street-legal production car in the world, with a top speed of . The original version has a top speed of . It was named "Car of the Decade" (2000–2009) by the BBC television programme "Top Gear". The standard Veyron won "Top Gear"'s Best Car Driven All Year award in 2005.
The Veyron's chief designer was Hartmut Warkuss, and the exterior was designed by Jozef Kabaň of Volkswagen, with much of the engineering work being conducted under the guidance of engineering chief Wolfgang Schreiber.
A number of special variants have been produced. In December 2010, Bugatti began offering prospective buyers the ability to customize exterior and interiors colours by using the "Veyron 16.4 Configurator" application on the marque's official website.
Origin of the car.
In 1998, the Volkswagen Group purchased the trademark rights on the former car manufacturer Bugatti in order to revive the brand. Starting with the Bugatti EB118, they presented at various international auto shows a total of four 18-cylinder concept cars. At the 1999 Tokyo Motor Show, the first study of the Veyron was presented. At the time the name of the concept car was "Bugatti Veyron EB 18.4" and it was equipped with a 3-bank W 18-cylinder engine instead of the 2-bank W 16-cylinder engine of the production version. While the three previous prototypes had been styled by Giugiaro, the Veyron was designed by the Volkswagen stylists.
The decision to start production of the car was taken by the Volkswagen Group in 2001. The first roadworthy prototype was completed in August 2003. It is identical except for a few details to the later series variant. In the development to series production, however, considerable technical problems had to be addressed, so that the start of production was delayed repeatedly, until September 2005.
Name origin.
The Veyron EB 16.4 is named in honour of Pierre Veyron, a Bugatti development engineer, test driver and company race driver who, with co-driver Jean-Pierre Wimille, won the 1939 24 hours of Le Mans while driving a Bugatti. The "EB" refers to Bugatti founder Ettore Bugatti and the "16.4" refers to the engine's 16 cylinders and four turbochargers.
Versions and modifications.
Bugatti Veyron (2005–2011).
Specifications and performance.
The Veyron features an 8.0-litre, quad-turbocharged, W16 cylinder engine, equivalent to two narrow-angle V8 engines. Each cylinder has four valves for a total of 64, but the narrow staggered V8 configuration allows two overhead camshafts to drive two banks of cylinders so only four camshafts are needed. The engine is fed by four turbochargers and displaces , with a square bore and stroke.
The transmission is a dual-clutch direct-shift gearbox computer-controlled automatic with seven gear ratios, with magnesium paddles behind the steering wheel and a shift time of less than 150 milliseconds, built by Ricardo of England rather than Borg-Warner, who designed the six speed DSG used in the mainstream Volkswagen Group marques. The Veyron can be driven in either semi-automatic or fully automatic mode. A replacement transmission for the Veyron costs just over . It also has permanent all-wheel drive using the Haldex Traction system. It uses special Michelin PAX run-flat tyres, designed specifically to accommodate the Veyron's top speed, and cost per set. The tyres can be mounted on the rims only in France, a service which costs . Kerb weight is . This gives the car a power-to-weight ratio, according to Volkswagen Group's figures, of per ton.
It has a drag coefficient of 0.41 (normal condition) and 0.36 (after lowering to the ground), and a frontal area of . This gives it a drag area – the combination of drag coefficient and frontal area, represented as CdA – of .
Engine output.
According to Volkswagen Group and certified by TÜV Süddeutschland, the final production Veyron engine produces of motive power, and generates of torque. The nominal figure has been stated by Bugatti officials to be conservative, with the real total being or more.
Top speed.
German inspection officials recorded an average top speed of the original version of during test sessions on the Ehra-Lessien test track on 19 April 2005.
This top speed was verified by James May on "Top Gear" in November 2006, again at Volkswagen Group's private Ehra-Lessien test track. May noted that at top speed the engine consumes of air per minute (as much as a human breathes in four days). The Veyron at the time had the highest top speed of any street legal production car. Back in the "Top Gear" studio, co-presenter Jeremy Clarkson commented that most supercars felt like they were shaking apart at their top speed, and asked May if that was the case with the Veyron at . May responded that no, the Veyron was very controlled, and only wobbled a tiny bit when the air brake deployed. May further commented, “Absolutely yeah, it’s totally undramatic. But I would give you a bit of a warning: It’s a bit disorientating doing that sort of speed, because after I came off the banking, I was slowing down to stop, and you know how you get a bit impatient and think ‘I’ll just open the door’; fortunately I looked back at the speedo, and I was still doing seventy.”
The car's everyday top speed is listed at . When the car reaches , hydraulics lower the car until it has a ground clearance of about . At the same time, the wing and spoiler deploy. In this "handling mode" the wing provides of downforce, holding the car to the road.
For "top speed mode" the driver must, while stationary, toggle a special top speed key to the left of the driver's seat. A checklist then establishes whether the car and its driver are ready to attempt to reach . If so, the rear spoiler retracts, the front air diffusers shut, and normal ground clearance drops to .
Braking.
The Veyron's brakes use cross drilled, radially vented carbon fibre reinforced silicon carbide (C/SiC) composite discs, manufactured by SGL Carbon, which have a much greater resistance to brake fade when compared with conventional cast iron discs. The lightweight aluminium alloy monobloc brake calipers are made by AP Racing; the fronts have eight titanium pistons and the rear calipers have six pistons. Bugatti claims maximum deceleration of 1.3 g's on road tyres. As an added safety feature, in the event of brake failure, an anti-lock braking system (ABS) has also been installed on the handbrake.
Prototypes have been subjected to repeated 1.0 g braking from to without fade. With the car's acceleration from to , that test can be performed every 22 seconds. At speeds above , the rear wing also acts as an airbrake, snapping to a 55° angle in 0.4 seconds once brakes are applied, providing an additional 0.68 g (6.66 m/s2) of deceleration (equivalent to the stopping power of an ordinary hatchback). Bugatti claims the Veyron will brake from to a standstill in less than 10 seconds, though distance covered in this time will be half a kilometer (third of a mile).
Special versions.
Pur Sang (2007).
Launched on 11 September 2007 at the Frankfurt Motor Show the "Pur Sang" (literally "Pure Blood", but more accurately translated as "Thoroughbred") is a limited run of five cars. They have high-gloss bronze roadwheels with a diamond-cut glass-like finish and a clear body finish revealing the Veyron's silver oxide finish carbon fibre body, but are otherwise standard.
Pegaso (2007).
This special edition Veyron was made for a rich Ukrainian living in Dubai. Some reports say that the Pegaso had its power increased from to , making it as powerful as a Super Sport. The Pegaso name comes from a Spanish coachbuilder that used to build luxury cars, such as the Pegaso Z-102.
Fbg Par Hermès (2008).
A Hermès-themed model: Hermès monogram on the front grille, roadwheels with a single H in the centre, and fuel filler door engraved with "Bugatti Veyron Fbg Par Hermès". The interior is done in Hermès leather with internal door handles reminiscent of handles used on Hermès trunks – and a Hermès wallet and Hermès suitcase is included.
Sang Noir (2008).
A limited run of 15 cars with an all-black exterior colour palette and a bright orange interior. In 2012 Gemballa Racing unveiled their Sang Noir wrapped in Gemballa blue with glow-in-the-dark lightning flashes to be used as a promotional vehicle for Gemballa Racing.
Bleu Centenaire (2009).
A celebratory model unveiled at the 2009 Geneva Motor Show for the 100th anniversary of the Bugatti brand. The entire body is painted in a combination of matte and gloss "Bugatti Blue", the midsection between the two wings on the hood is expanded, and a chrome strip up the middle added.
L'Edition Centenaire (2009).
The Bugatti Centenaire Villa d’Este Limited Edition is an homage to the golden age of motorsport in the first half of the last century. As such, it is reminiscent of the historic Bugatti Type 35 thoroughbred racing car. Each of the four finishes available symbolises one of the great European racing nations of the 1920s. Only 4 cars were made and the four cars have different colors.
Sang d’Argent (2010).
First shown at the 2009 Dubai Motor Show, this one-off is finished in matte silver and polished aluminium. It was inspired by the two tone finish of the Centenary Villa d’Este cars and the previous Pur Sang edition. The car was sold for .
Nocturne (2010).
Also at the 2009 Dubai Motor Show, the car was unique because of its galvanised side windows. This Veyron is distinguished by its polished aluminum line that starts at the front of the vehicle and finishes with the wide rear arches. The rest of the vehicle is coated in uniblack. Inside, it has a dark magnesium dashboard and a galvanized Platinum center console. Just five were produced, exclusively for the Middle East, for an even higher price of . As the standard Veyron 16.4 sold out in 2011, this was the last special edition for the "normal" Veyrons.
Bugatti Veyron Grand Sport (2009–).
A targa top version unveiled at Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance on 15 August 2008, with production beginning in the second quarter of 2009. The model has extensive reinforcements to compensate for the lack of standard roof, and small changes to the windshield and running lights. There are two removable tops, the second a temporary roof fashioned after an umbrella. The top speed with the hardtop in place is the same as the standard coupé version, but with the roof down is limited to —and to with the temporary soft roof. The first (chassis 001) was sold at auction, raising approximately for charity.
Special versions.
Sang Bleu (2010).
Blue carbon-fibre with polished aluminium, wheels inspired by the Grand Sport Roadster, highlighted in a Midnight Blue and Diamond Cut two-tone finish.
Soleil de Nuit (2010).
Exclusively for the Middle East, the Soleil de Nuit was unveiled at the 2009 Dubai Motor Show. It combines polished aluminium accents with metallic blue/black paint. It also features a burnt orange interior. It was sold for .
Grey Carbon (2010).
The Grey Carbon was first shown to the public at the 2010 Geneva Motor Show. The exterior features exposed carbon-fibre with metallic dark grey aluminum body panels, and lower portion in polished aluminium. Only one Grand Sport Grey Carbon edition was made.
Royal Dark Blue (2010).
Like the Grey Carbon, the Royal Dark Blue was a show car at Geneva 2010. It features a carbonfibre monocoque and the bonnet and rear section finished in Royal Dark Blue, hence the name. The rest of the car is painted Arctic White. It sold for .
Sang Blanc (2010).
This car was designed at the request of a client from the UK. It is finished in a matte pearlescent white with black front grille, exhaust and engine cover, as well as a black interior. In 2011, Derbyshire-based exotic car dealer Tom Hartley sold the Sang Blanc, with 448 miles on the odometer, for . On 25 August 2012, the Sang Blanc was involved in a crash near to Mandelieu-la-Napoule, France. The front right fender and the right headlight sustained some damage.
Bijan Pakzad Edition (2011).
Just before unexpectedly passing away due to a stroke, the Iranian born fashion designer Bijan Pakzad collaborated with Bugatti to design this one-off Veyron. The car features a unique yellow and black colour scheme. It also features a lot of decals, like the handwritten-look ‘Bijan’ logo on the underside of the rear wing. It is currently parked outside of the "House of Bijan" boutique on Rodeo Drive.
Matte White (2011).
First shown at the 2011 Shanghai Auto Show, the Matte White, as its name suggests, features a matte white paint finish, with the lower section of the car finished in blue carbon fibre. The interior is also blue. It was sold soon after it was put on display.
L'Or Blanc (2011).
Teaming up with Königliche Porzellan-Manufaktur, Bugatti created the one-off Veyron "L'Or Blanc". Its name means "white gold", and the special Grand Sport uses porcelain to distinguish its body and interior with a blue and white pattern.
Red Edition (2011).
Shown at the 2011 Frankfurt Motor Show, this special edition features the whole car (body and interior) painted red. Even the wheels were painted red. It is thought Bugatti brought this car to Frankfurt to speed up purchases of the Grand Sport, as the sales figure was disappointing low.
Middle East Editions (2011).
Three different ‘Middle East Edition’ cars were unveiled at the 2011 Dubai Motor Show. The first car combines a bright yellow exterior and interior with black carbon fibre inserts and black wheels. The second has a blue carbon framed exterior with polished aluminium and an orange interior. The final edition features a green carbon finish, once again framed with polished aluminium. The yellow model sold for , while the other two were sold for .
Vitesse (2012).
The Vitesse is a version of the Grand Sport with a Super Sport engine. The vehicle was unveiled at the 2012 Geneva Motor Show. It produces a maximum output of @ 6.400 rpm and a maximum torque of @ 3,000-5,000 rpm. These figures allow the car to reach from standing in 2.6 seconds, all the way up to its top speed of . This makes it the fastest production roadster ever. The maximum speed can only be reached on closed tracks. On normal roads, the Vitesse is electronically limited to . It costs .
The Vitesse SE was first shown at Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance in Monterey, California. It features a bespoke Bianco and New Light Blue colour scheme as a reminder of the 1928 Bugatti Type 37A.
Wei Long (2012).
First shown at the 2012 Beijing Auto Show, the Wei Long was built by Bugatti to commemorate the Chinese year of the Dragon. It was developed alongside Königliche Porzellan-Manufaktur, the same firm responsible for the Veyron L'Or Blanc, who fitted several high-quality porcelain motifs. Most of the pieces depict a dragon and are featured on the body and in the cabin, endowing the car with deep Chinese cultural heritage. Some locations include on the surface of the oil and fuel filler cap. Other details include a pearl white exterior with contrasting carmine red interior, headrests embroidered with the Chinese “Dragon” character, and hand-crafted pure silk floor mats embossed with more dragon logos. It was sold for .
Bernar Venet (2012).
In 2012, Bugatti invited Bernar Venet to create a one-off artwork to be applied to a Veyron Grand Sport. The finished work, described as "the fastest artwork ever", features an interpretation of Venet's trademark mathematical equations and was revealed at the Rubell Family Collection in Miami during Art Basel Miami Beach.
Bugatti Veyron Super Sport (2010–).
The Veyron Super Sport features an engine power increase from the standard to and torque of and a revised aerodynamic package. It has a top speed, making it the fastest road car in production, although it is electronically limited to to protect the tyres from disintegrating. It was shown publicly for the first time at the Pebble Beach Concours d'Elegance in August 2010. The first five of an unannounced production run made its debut in a matte black and orange colour combination, all of which have been spoken for. It is valued at and Bugatti have stated that only 30 will be produced.
On 4 July 2010 James May, a television presenter on BBC 2's television show "Top Gear", drove the Veyron Super Sport at . Later that day, Bugatti's official test driver Pierre Henri Raphanel drove the Super Sport version of the Veyron on Volkswagen's Ehra-Lessien (near Wolfsburg, Germany) high-speed test track to establish the car's top speed. With representatives of the Guinness Book of Records and German Technical Inspection Agency (TÜV) on hand, Raphanel made passes around the big oval in both directions achieving an average maximum speed of , thus taking back the title from the SSC Ultimate Aero TT as the fastest production vehicle of all time. The 431.072 km/h mark was reached by averaging the Super Sport's two test runs, the first reaching and the second . Once produced for sale, the first five Super Sports will sport the same black and orange finish as the first production car which was used to set the speed record.
The car then went round the Top Gear Test Track and topped the lap leader board with a 1:16.8 time, beating the 1:17.1 record set previously by the Gumpert Apollo Sport.
The Super Sport unofficially holds the 0- world record at 13.7 seconds, beating the official world record holder the "Koenigsegg Agera R" by almost 4 seconds. The run was done by the French Magazine "Le Nouvel Obervateur" in 2010.
Special versions.
Sang Noir (2011).
Introduced for customers who did not like the look of the ‘World Record Edition’, the Sang Noir was a show car at the 2011 Geneva Motor Show. The car is finished entirely in black, except for the interior, which is bright tangerine orange. The car costs a very high , more than a standard Super Sport.
Black Carbon (2011).
First shown at the 2011 Shanghai Auto Show, the Black Carbon was built for a customer in China. This car is finished in a black clear-coat, revealing the carbon fibre body. The black exterior is combined with "Snow Beige" and "Beluga Black."
Edition Merveilleux (2011).
Unveiled in December 2011, the Edition Merveilleux was presented by Bugatti to a car collector from China known only as "Simon". In a video released by Bugatti, featuring a number of Bugatti’s top execs including CEO Wolfgang Dürheimer, they wish Simon a happy 40th birthday. The Edition Merveilleux features an un-painted carbon fibre exterior with matching blacked-out alloy wheels and a bright blue interior. It is the first Super Sport in the Chinese market.
Le Saphir Bleu (2012).
In early September 2012, a Super Sport with the same exterior design as the L'or Blanc was seen driving around Molsheim. It is believed to be called "Le Saphir Bleu" (The Blue Sapphire).
Bugatti SuperVeyron (2013).
In October 2012, Bugatti announced plans for a new variant of the Veyron due to debut at the Frankfurt Motor Show in September 2013. Based on the Super Sport, the SuperVeyron is planned to be lighter, mostly through utilizing more carbon fibre and further increasing aerodynamics. The Super Sport's 8.0 L W16 engine will be increased to 9.6 L to produce , decreasing the time to 1.8 seconds and increasing top speed to a planned .
Concepts.
16C Galibier.
The Bugatti 16C Galibier concept is a prototype of a luxury sedan which was presented officially in September by Bugatti prior to the IAA 2009. A derivative of the concept vehicle is expected to reach the market in 2015. The car is a 4-door luxury sedan which shares the W16 8.0L engine of the Veyron, but with two superchargers instead of four turbochargers for improved torque.
Commentary.
Top Gear.
All three presenters of the popular BBC motoring show "Top Gear" have given the Veyron considerable praise. While initially skeptical that the Veyron would ever be produced, Jeremy Clarkson later declared the Veyron "the greatest car ever made and the greatest car we will ever see in our lifetime." James May described the Veyron as "our Concorde moment." Clarkson test drove the Veyron from Alba, northern Italy to London in a race against James May and Richard Hammond who made the journey in a Cessna 182 aeroplane.
A few episodes later, James May drove the Veyron at the VW test track and took it to its top speed of . During the second episode of the 13th series, Richard Hammond raced the Veyron on two occasions. In the first contest, the Veyron lost a two-mile sprint against the Eurofighter Typhoon. The second contest was a race against a McLaren F1 driven by The Stig in a one mile (1.6 km) drag race in Abu Dhabi. The commentary focused on Bugatti's "amazing technical achievement" versus the "non-gizmo" racing purity of the F1. While the F1 was quicker off the line and remained ahead until both cars were travelling at approximately 200 km/h, the Bugatti overtook its competitor from 200 to 300 km/h and emerged the victor. Hammond has stated that he did not use the Veyron's launch control in order to make the race more interesting.
The Veyron also won the award for "Car of the Decade" in "Top Gear"'s end of 2010 award show. Clarkson commented "It was a car that just rewrote the rule book really, an amazing piece of engineering, a genuine Concorde moment". When the standard version was tested, it did not reach the top of the lap time leader board, with a time of 1:18.3, which was speculated as being due to the car's considerable weight disadvantage against the other cars towards the top; however in 2009 "Alain Prost" took his own Veyron round the track in a time of 1:11.2. This was never mentioned by "Top Gear" as it was felt that it would have made "The Stig" look bad. The Super Sport version - piloted by "The Stig" - achieved the fastest ever time of 1:16.8 (later beaten by the Ariel Atom V8, the McLaren MP4-12C, the Lamborghini Aventador, and the Pagani Huayra), as well as being taken to a (verified) average top speed of by Raphanel on the programme, thenceforth retaking its position as the fastest production car in the world.
Martin Roach.
In 2011, Martin Roach's book "Bugatti Veyron: A Quest for Perfection – The Story of the Greatest Car in the World" took the stance that the car had now become so famous that it is effectively a bona fide 'celebrity'. The book follows its author as he attempts to track down and drive the car, along the way interviewing chief designers, test drivers, and the president of Bugatti.
Gordon Murray.
Murray later brought up and criticized Volkswagen for "scamming" car buyers in the 1990s for buying the cheapest parts possible for the production of Jettas and Golfs, allowing Volkswagen to make a larger profit off their car sales, funding the construction of the Bugatti Veyron. However, Murray was impressed with the Veyron's engine and transmission after he test drove one for "Road and Track" magazine.
