In mathematics, a quadratic equation is a univariate polynomial equation of the second degree. A general quadratic equation can be written in the form
where "x" represents a variable or an unknown, and "a", "b", and "c" are constants with "a" ≠ 0. (If "a" = 0, the equation is a linear equation.)
The constants "a", "b", and "c" are called respectively, the quadratic coefficient, the linear coefficient and the constant term or free term. The term "quadratic" comes from "quadratus", which is the Latin word for "square". Quadratic equations can be solved by factoring, completing the square, graphing, Newton's method, and using the quadratic formula (given below).
Quadratic formula.
A quadratic equation with real or complex coefficients has two solutions, called "roots". These two solutions may or may not be distinct, and they may or may not be real.
Having
the roots are given by the quadratic formula
where the symbol "±" indicates that both
are solutions of the quadratic equation.
Discriminant.
Thus the roots are distinct if and only if the discriminant is non-zero, and the roots are real if and only if the discriminant is non-negative.
Monic form.
Dividing the quadratic equation by the quadratic coefficient "a" gives the simplified monic form of
where "p" = "b"/"a" and "q" = "c"/"a". This in turn simplifies the root and discriminant equations somewhat to
and
History.
There is evidence pushing this back as far as the Ur III dynasty.
In the Sulba Sutras in ancient India circa 8th century BC quadratic equations of the form "ax"2 = "c" and "ax"2 + "bx" = "c" were explored using geometric methods. Babylonian mathematicians from circa 400 BC and Chinese mathematicians from circa 200 BC used the method of completing the square to solve quadratic equations with positive roots, but did not have a general formula.
Euclid, the Greek mathematician, produced a more abstract geometrical method around 300 BC. Pythagoras and Euclid used a strictly geometric approach, and found a general procedure to solve the quadratic equation. In his work "Arithmetica", the Greek mathematician Diophantus solved the quadratic equation, but giving only one root, even when both roots were positive.
In 628 AD, Brahmagupta, an Indian mathematician, gave the first explicit (although still not completely general) solution of the quadratic equation
The "Bakhshali Manuscript" written in India in the 7th century AD contained an algebraic formula for solving quadratic equations, as well as quadratic indeterminate equations (originally of type "ax"/"c" = "y").
Muhammad ibn Musa al-Khwarizmi (Persia, 9th century), inspired by Brahmagupta, developed a set of formulas that worked for positive solutions. Al-Khwarizmi goes further in providing a full solution to the general quadratic equation, accepting one or two numerical answers for every quadratic equation, while providing geometric proofs in the process. He also described the method of completing the square and recognized that the discriminant must be positive, which was proven by his contemporary 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk (Central Asia, 9th century) who gave geometric figures to prove that if the discriminant is negative, a quadratic equation has no solution. While al-Khwarizmi himself did not accept negative solutions, later Islamic mathematicians that succeeded him accepted negative solutions, as well as irrational numbers as solutions. Abū Kāmil Shujā ibn Aslam (Egypt, 10th century) in particular was the first to accept irrational numbers (often in the form of a square root, cube root or fourth root) as solutions to quadratic equations or as coefficients in an equation.
The Indian mathematician Sridhara, who flourished in the 9th and 10th
centuries AC provided the modern solution of the quadratic equation.
The Jewish mathematician Abraham bar Hiyya Ha-Nasi (12th century, Spain) authored the first European book to include the full solution to the general quadratic equation. His solution was largely based on Al-Khwarizmi's work. The writing of the Chinese mathematician Yang Hui (1238-1298 AD) represents the first in which quadratic equations with negative coefficients of 'x' appear, although he attributes this to the earlier Liu Yi.
By 1545 Gerolamo Cardano compiled the works related to the quadratic equations. The quadratic formula covering all cases was first obtained by Simon Stevin in 1594. In 1637 René Descartes published "La Géométrie" containing the quadratic formula in the form we know today. The first appearance of the general solution in the modern mathematical literature appeared in a 1896 paper by Henry Heaton.
Examples of use.
Geometry.
The solutions of the quadratic equation
since they are the values of "x" for which
If "a", "b", and "c" are real numbers and the domain of "f" is the set of real numbers, then the roots of "f" are exactly the "x"-coordinates of the points where the graph touches the "x"-axis.
It follows from the above that, if the discriminant is positive, the graph touches the "x"-axis at two points, if zero, the graph touches at one point, and if negative, the graph does not touch the "x"-axis.
Quadratic factorization.
The term
is a factor of the polynomial
if and only if "r" is a root of the quadratic equation
It follows from the quadratic formula that
In the special case (formula_27) where the quadratic has only one distinct root (i.e. the discriminant is zero), the quadratic polynomial can be factored as
Application to higher-degree equations.
where
Thus
and
Derivations of the quadratic formula.
By completing the square.
The quadratic formula can be derived by the method of completing the square,
Dividing the quadratic equation
or
which produces
The right side can be written as a single fraction, with common denominator 4"a"2. This gives
Taking the square root of both sides yields
Isolating "x", gives
By shifting "ax"2.
The quadratic formula can be derived by starting with equation
which describes the parabola as "ax"2 with the vertex shifted from the origin to ("xV", "yV").
Solving this equation for "x" is straightforward and results in
Using Vieta's formulas for the vertex coordinates
the values of x can be written as
Note. The formulas for "xV" and "yV" can be derived by comparing the coefficients in
and
Rewriting the latter equation as
and comparing with the former results in
from which Vieta's expressions for "xV" and "yV" can be derived.
By Lagrange resolvents.
An alternative way of deriving the quadratic formula is via the method of Lagrange resolvents, which is an early part of Galois theory.
This method can be generalized to give the roots of cubic polynomials and quartic polynomials, and leads to Galois theory, which allows one to understand the solution of algebraic equations of any degree in terms of the symmetry group of their roots, the Galois group.
This approach focuses on the "roots" more than on rearranging the original equation.
Given a monic quadratic polynomial
assume that it factors as
Expanding yields
where
and
Since the order of multiplication does not matter, one can switch "α" and "β" and the values of "p" and "q" will not change: one says that "p" and "q" are symmetric polynomials in "α" and "β". In fact, they are the elementary symmetric polynomials – any symmetric polynomial in "α" and "β" can be expressed in terms of "α" + "β" and "αβ." The Galois theory approach to analyzing and solving polynomials is: given the coefficients of a polynomial, which are symmetric functions in the roots, can one "break the symmetry" and recover the roots? Thus solving a polynomial of degree "n" is related to the ways of rearranging ("permuting") "n" terms, which is called the symmetric group on "n" letters, and denoted formula_63 For the quadratic polynomial, the only way to rearrange two terms is to swap them ("transpose" them), and thus solving a quadratic polynomial is simple.
These are called the Lagrange resolvents of the polynomial;
notice that one of these depends on the order of the roots, which is the key point.
Thus, solving for the resolvents gives the original roots.
Formally, the resolvents are called the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) of order 2, and the transform can be expressed by the matrix formula_66 with inverse matrix formula_67 The transform matrix is also called the DFT matrix or Vandermonde matrix.
Now formula_68 is a symmetric function in "α" and "β," so it can be expressed in terms of "p" and "q," and in fact formula_69 as noted above. But formula_70 is not symmetric, since switching "α" and "β" yields formula_71 (formally, this is termed a group action of the symmetric group of the roots). Since formula_72 is not symmetric, it cannot be expressed in terms of the polynomials "p" and "q", as these are symmetric in the roots and thus so is any polynomial expression involving them. However, changing the order of the roots only changes formula_72 by a factor of formula_74 and thus the square formula_75 "is" symmetric in the roots, and thus expressible in terms of "p" and "q." Using the equation
yields
and thus
and thus
Thus the roots are
which is the quadratic formula. Substituting formula_82 yields the usual form for when a quadratic is not monic. The resolvents can be recognized as formula_83 being the vertex, and formula_84 is the discriminant (of a monic polynomial).
A similar but more complicated method works for cubic equations, where one has three resolvents and a quadratic equation (the "resolving polynomial") relating formula_72 and formula_86 which one can solve by the quadratic equation, and similarly for a quartic (degree 4) equation, whose resolving polynomial is a cubic, which can in turn be solved. However, the same method for a quintic equation yields a polynomial of degree 24, which does not simplify the problem, and in fact solutions to quintic equations in general cannot be expressed using only roots.
Other methods of root calculation.
Alternative parameters.
Some sources, particularly older ones, use the alternative parameterization
which results in a value of "b" one half of the more common one. This produces a simpler formula
where the discriminant formula_89 is one quarter of the common value. It is otherwise equivalent.
Alternative quadratic formula.
In some situations it is preferable to express the roots in an alternative form.
This alternative requires "c" to be nonzero; for, if "c" is zero, the formula correctly gives zero as one root, but fails to give any second, non-zero root. Instead, one of the two choices for ∓ produces the indeterminate form 0/0, which is undefined. However, the alternative form works when "a" is zero (giving the unique solution as one root and division by zero again for the other), which the normal form does not (instead producing division by zero both times).
The alternative formula can reduce loss of precision in the numerical evaluation of the roots, which may be a problem if one of the roots is much smaller than the other in absolute magnitude. In this case, "b" is very close to formula_92, and the subtraction in the numerator causes loss of significance.
Here sgn denotes the sign function.
Floating-point implementation.
Here sgn("b") is the sign function, where sgn("b") is 1 if "b" is positive and −1 if "b" is negative; its use ensures that the quantities added are of the same sign, avoiding "catastrophic cancellation". The computation of "x"2 uses the fact that the product of the roots is "c"/"a".
Note that while the above formulation avoids catastrophic cancellation between "b" and formula_97, there remains a form of cancellation between the terms "b"2 and −4"ac" of the discriminant, which can still lead to loss of up to half of correct significant figures. The discriminant "b"2−4"ac" needs to be computed in arithmetic of twice the precision of the result to avoid this (e.g. quad precision if the final result is to be accurate to full double precision). This can be in the form of a fused multiply-add operation.
Vieta's formulas.
and
The y-coordinate can be obtained by substituting the above result into the given quadratic equation, giving
These formulas are much easier to evaluate than the quadratic formula under the condition of one large and one small root, because the quadratic formula evaluates the small root as the difference of two very nearly equal numbers (the case of large "b"), which causes round-off error in a numerical evaluation. The figure shows the difference between (i) a direct evaluation using the quadratic formula (accurate when the roots are near each other in value) and (ii) an evaluation based upon the above approximation of Vieta's formulas (accurate when the roots are widely spaced). As the linear coefficient "b" increases, initially the quadratic formula is accurate, and the approximate formula improves in accuracy, leading to a smaller difference between the methods as "b" increases. However, at some point the quadratic formula begins to lose accuracy because of round off error, while the approximate method continues to improve. Consequently the difference between the methods begins to increase as the quadratic formula becomes worse and worse.
This situation arises commonly in amplifier design, where widely separated roots are desired to ensure a stable operation (see step response).
Trigonometric solution for complex roots.
In the case of complex roots the roots can also be found trigonometrically.
Geometric solution.
The quadratic equation may be solved geometrically in a number of ways. One way is via Lill's method. The three coefficients "a", "b", "c" are drawn with right angles between them as in SA, AB, and BC in the accompanying diagram. A circle is drawn with the start and end point SC as a diameter. If this cuts the middle line AB of the three then the equation has a solution, and the solutions are given by negative of the distance along this line from A divided by the first coefficient "a" or SA. If "a" is 1 the coefficients may be read off directly. Thus the solutions in the diagram are −AX1/SA and −AX2/SA.
Generalization of quadratic equation.
The formula and its derivation remain correct if the coefficients "a", "b" and "c" are complex numbers, or more generally members of any field whose characteristic is not 2. (In a field of characteristic 2, the element 2"a" is zero and it is impossible to divide by it.)
The symbol
in the formula should be understood as "either of the two elements whose square is "b"2 − 4"ac", if such elements exist". In some fields, some elements have no square roots and some have two; only zero has just one square root, except in fields of characteristic 2. Note that even if a field does not contain a square root of some number, there is always a quadratic extension field which does, so the quadratic formula will always make sense as a formula in that extension field.
Characteristic 2.
In a field of characteristic 2, the quadratic formula, which relies on 2 being a unit, does not hold. Consider the monic quadratic polynomial
over a field of characteristic 2. If "b" = 0, then the solution reduces to extracting a square root, so the solution is
and note that there is only one root since
In summary,
See quadratic residue for more information about extracting square roots in finite fields.
In the case that "b" ≠ 0, there are two distinct roots, but if the polynomial is irreducible, they cannot be expressed in terms of square roots of numbers in the coefficient field. Instead, define the 2-root "R"("c") of "c" to be a root of the polynomial "x"2 + "x" + "c", an element of the splitting field of that polynomial. One verifies that "R"("c") + 1 is also a root. In terms of the 2-root operation, the two roots of the (non-monic) quadratic "ax"2 + "bx" + "c" are
and
For example, let "a" denote a multiplicative generator of the group of units of F4, the Galois field of order four (thus "a" and "a" + 1 are roots of "x"2 + "x" + 1 over F4). Because ("a" + 1)2 = "a", "a" + 1 is the unique solution of the quadratic equation "x"2 + "a" = 0. On the other hand, the polynomial "x"2 + "ax" + 1 is irreducible over F4, but it splits over F16, where it has the two roots "ab" and "ab" + "a", where "b" is a root of "x"2 + "x" + "a" in F16.
This is a special case of Artin-Schreier theory.
