Parineeti Chopra (; born 22 October 1988) in Ambala, Haryana is an Indian film actress who appears in Hindi films. Chopra had always wanted to become an investment banker, After obtaining a triple honours degree in Business, Finance and Economics from Manchester Business School, United Kingdom, She returned to India during the 2009 economic recession and joined Yash Raj Films as a Public relations consultant. Later, she was signed by Aditya Chopra for a three-film deal with Yash Raj Films. Chopra made her screen debut with a supporting role in the 2011 romantic comedy, "Ladies vs Ricky Bahl", which was moderately successful at the box office. Her portrayal of a Delhi based "rich brat" Dimple Chadda drew critical appreciation from reviewers. She went on to win the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut at the 57th Filmfare Awards and was nominated for Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress. The following year, Chopra featured in the lead role in the romantic drama "Ishaqzaade"; a critical and commercial success. She portrayed the character of Zoya, a feisty tomboy. Her performance in the film won her critical acclaim and she achieved several nominations in "Best Actress" category, including Filmfare Award for Best Actress at the 58th Filmfare Awards.
Early life and work.
Parineeti Chopra was born on 22 October 1988, in Ambala, Haryana into a punjabi family. Her father, Pawan Chopra is a business man and supplier to the Indian Army at Ambala Cantonment, her mother is Reena Chopra. she has two brothers, Shivang and Saraj and the actress Priyanka Chopra is her cousin. Chopra did her schooling at the Convent of Jesus and Mary, in the Ambala Cantonment. Chopra had always wanted to become an investment banker. She said "I’ve always been a really good student and wanted to become an investment banker in London,". She obtained a triple honours degree in Business, Finance and Economics from Manchester Business School, United Kingdom. In 2009, she returned to India due to the 2009 economic recession and moved to Mumbai and stayed with her cousin. During a visit to Yash Raj Films studio, to meet her cousin, who was filming for "Pyaar Impossible!", Chopra (Priyanka) introduced her to the head of the PR team of Yash Raj Films, where she managed to get an internship in the marketing department, joining the production company as a Public relations consultant. According to Chopra, that seemed like the perfect job to her because she could use what she had learnt and still work in films. Chopra used to hate actors and dislike acting. The whole profession of acting seemed her like an excuse to wear excessive make up. While working there and observing actors, her perception towards acting changed. She reflected "I realised I never understood acting and my respect for the profession increased,".
Acting career.
Debut and breakthrough (2011–present).
While working on the promotions of "Band Baaja Baaraat", Chopra realised that she wanted to become an actor. She decided to resign and quit her executive job with the company for joining an acting school. Maneesh Sharma suggested to consider signing Chopra as an actress to Aditya Chopra, Vice-President of Yash Raj Films. Appalled at the idea of recruiting someone from his marketing team as an actress, Chopra (Adiya Chopra) refused. When Chopra told Sharma about leaving her job to join acting school, he adviced Chopra to meet the casting director. The casting director asked her to do a "dummy audition for fun". Chopra remarked that she was "fooling around with a camera" and performed some of the dialogues of character Geet from the film "Jab We Met", never expecting the producer (Aditya Chopra) to see the tape. However, Aditya Chopra saw the video tape and was impressed by her acting, with Sharma expressing Chopra was "phenomenal" in the video test, Chopra was ultimately signed for a three-film deal with the production company. Her colleagues later told her that she was a "misfit in an office situation".
In 2011, Chopra made her screen debut in the romantic comedy "Ladies VS Ricky Bahl" playing a supporting role alongside Ranveer Singh and Anushka Sharma. The film depicts the story of three girls, who are conned by a conman and how they seek the revenge from him by plotting the same plan to him. She played the role of a delhi based "rich and spoilt brat" Dimple Chadda, who is betrayed in love and conned by the film's central character. The film received mixed reviews from critics and was moderate success at the box office. However, Chopra's performance was widely appreciated by film critics. Taran Adarsh from Bollywood Hungama writes "Parineeti Chopra springs a pleasant surprise. She has wonderful screen presence and acts freely. In fact, the viewers would take to her character instantly". Komal Nahta claims that, "Of the three other girls, Parineeti Chopra is undoubtedly the best. She has the best role, the best lines and hers is the best performance among the three. In fact, she provides a lot of light moments in the first half and, more importantly, in the second half too". The film fetched her every "Debut" awards that year including the Filmfare Award for Best Female Debut. She also received several nominations in "Supporting" category including Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress and won few including the Apsara Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role.
Chopra's second release, which saw her playing her first lead role, was Habib Faisal's romantic drama "Ishaqzaade" opposite Arjun Kapoor. The film revolves around two political families whose rivalry and mutual hatred for one another goes back generations. She portrayed the character of boisterous and feisty tomboy Zoya, a muslim girl who eventually fall in love with a hindu boy and marries him, giving birth to the new rivalry in both the families. The film received positive reviews from critics and Chopra received wide critical acclaim for her performance. Taran Adarsh mentions that "Parineeti Chopra is simply fantastic in this high-voltage drama. Playing the part of a spirited gun-toting girl, she is not the regular timid, decorous, withdrawn Hindi film heroine. She portrays the violent behavior coupled with the audacious and brash attitude with aplomb". Mrigank Dhaniwala from Koimoi noted "Parineeti Chopra, whom we loved in Ladies Vs Ricky Bahl, shines again in a complex and intense role. She looks very good and acts like a song. Arjun and Parineeti’s on-screen chemistry and excellent performances are the highlights of the film." CNN-IBN critic Rajeev Masand labelled her as the "biggest strength of this film". The film grossed over at the Domestic box office and was credited "super hit". She received her first nomination for Filmfare Award for Best Actress along with several others.
Chopra is currently filming for Maneesh Sharma's next, opposite Sushant Singh Rajput. She has also signed Anurag Kashyap-Karan Johar's joint production, "Hasee Toh Phasee", opposite Siddharth Malhotra, which will be her first venture outside the Yash Raj Films. The actress also signed Shaad Ali's "Kill Dil" alongside Ranveer Singh and Ali Zafar; she described it as the first "glamorous" role of her career.
Off-screen work and Media image.
Apart from acting in films, Chopra is active in various charity work and supports various causes. She walked the ramp at the Wills Lifestyle India Fashion Week to support Shabana Azmi's NGO "Mijwan Welfare Society", founded to empower the girl child. Chopra said "I don't want it to be just about ramp walk, but I seriously and genuinely feel for what Mijwan and what Manish and Shabanaji are doing. For such an initiative, I just could not say no. I had to be a part of it." She also appeared on NDTV's "Greenathon", an initiative to support eco-friendliness and investigate poor electricity supplies in rural villages, to lend her support. Chopra represents several brands and has a number of brand endorsements like Nivea, Kurkure, Maaza and Spinz.
NDTV noted ... is as far removed from the standard Bollywood bombshell as it is possible for a lead actress to be. She's more girl next door than glamour doll, with no obvious oomph in evidence, and freely confesses to a battle with the weighing scale. "The Indian Express" lebelled her the "most brightest and talented" newcomer of this generation noting "her infectious amount of energy". In a 2013 Interview with "Hindustan Times", She said "I don’t want to do a film that will get me money and has a huge star cast and a big director. I want to do films where I have a lot to do." Chopra featured on "Verve" list of most powerful women in 2011. In 2012, She featured on Rediff's annual listing of "Bollywood's Best Actresses".
