Mirchi () is a 2013 Telugu film written and directed by debutante Koratala Siva. The film stars Prabhas, Anushka Shetty and Richa Gangopadhyay in the lead roles and Sathyaraj, Adithya and Nadhiya in pivotal roles. The film started its regular shooting on 1 December 2011 in Hyderabad. The film was tentatively titled Vaaradhi, but was later renamed to Mirchi. Mirchi was released on 8 February 2013 and was declared a Heavy Success at the Box Office.
Plot.
Jai (Prabhas) is an architect based in Milan. He comes across Manasa (Richa Gangopadhyay). Manasa becomes friends with Jai. Jai comes to know about the violent family background of Manasa. He decides to reform this family, based in Macherla district of Palnadu area, and heads to India. Manasa’s family is headed by Nagineedu, Bannerjee, Sampath Raj and Subbaraju. With the help of Veera Pratap (Brahmanandam), a bank manager, Jai slowly starts reforming the family and he wins the appreciation of all, except Sampath Raj. As the story unfolds, it is revealed that Jai has a connection with the Palnadu area and with Deva (Sathyaraj). Deva is the arch enemy of Manasa’s family and Jai is his son. Manasa also realises that Jai is in love with another girl, Vennela (Anushka Shetty). He reforms the two families and proposes to Vennela.
Production.
Casting.
In September 2011, the makers of the movie finalized the casting of the film with two heroines Anushka and Richa Gangopadhyay. The father and mother characters in the film are being played by Tamil actors Sathyaraj and Nadhiya. It was reported that Richa Gangopadhyay would play the role of a NRI girl named Manasa.
Filming.
The film started its regular shooting on 1 December 2011 at Police Academy establishment in Hyderabad. Filming resumed on 16 January 2012 at a house set at Kokapet in the outskirts of Hyderabad. The set was built and previously used for S. S. Rajamouli's "Maryada Ramanna". The filming continued till end of January with action Sequences for climax episodes were canned. After one month, filming resumed at Saradhi Studios in Hyderabad. Director canned few scenes involving Supreet, Kota Srinivasa Rao and Prabhas.
In March 2012, filming was done at Ramoji Film City with lead actors. Filming resumed from 17 May in RFC where action sequences were canned in a railway station set. A new schedule began from 17 June in Hyderabad where important scenes on lead actors were shot. After the schedule, filming resumed in Pollachi where scenes on Prabhas, Anushka and Richa were canned. It was reported that the unit will move to Italy to shoot few songs on the lead actors. The film completed its Europe schedule on 14 October, where couple of songs were shot. Filming is scheduled to resume in Hyderabad. The unit members of the film shifting to Tenkasi for shooting Action Scenes from 24 October. The next schedule of the film is progressing at Ramoji Film City picturising a song 'Suno Senorita' on Prabhas and Richa Gangopadhyay. Mirchi interval block will have a high voltage fight sequence that will be raw and violent. The Small Schedule of the movie is canning at Kutralam in Tamil Nadu on Prabhas, Anushka Shetty and few lead Cast members.Ramajogayya Sastry recently visited the shooting spot of Mirchi at annapurna studios where a song is been canning on Prabhas and Anushka Shetty with Dance Master PremRakshit.Richa Gangopadhyay finishing up her final scenes of mirchi in Bangkok with prabhas.The visual Effects of the movie is done by Light line Entertainments in which a foreign location was created visually.
Release.
Mirchi was awarded a 'A' Certificate from the Censor Board. The movie would release worldwide on 8 February 2013 admist High Expectations as it is the biggest outing of Prabhas. Great India Films is releasing Mirchi in 76 centers from 7 February in USA alone, which is by far one of the best and humongous release. The movie has beaten the record of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu (SVSC) and Naayak, which had released in 69 and 54 screens, respectively, in the country. Mirchi is coming up with all digital screening in USA to ensure that it will have superb quality screens across USA.
Pre-Release Revenues.
Mirchi overseas rights sold to a leading distribution company Great India Films, USA. Some information is that Mirchi overseas rights sold for 2 crores to Great India Films.
Marketing.
On 21 October 2012 the First Look posters and photos was released to the market in the view of the Prabhas Birthday on 23 October. The first look of the movie got impressive response from audience Mirchi movie teaser is going to be launch on 18 November 2012. The first teaser of Mirchi movie was released in YouTube on 18 November 2012.The teaser got viral response across web and it has raised the expectations among the fans and movie buffs. The makers of the film are planning to release the audio on 5 January 2013 at Hyderabad.
Young rebel star Prabhas family-mass entertainer film 'Mirchi' is all set for grand release on 8 February 2013. Fans of Prabhas especially all the Telugu girls and ladies are preparing themselves for a big treat. 
Critical Reception.
Jalapathy Gudelli of telugucinemas.com gave Rating-3.25/5 and commenting as "Mirchi showcases Prabhas in different avatar. Neat package of masala moments and Prabhas are the strengths. Mirchi is a decent entertainer and time pass flick".Jeevi review od Idlebrain.com gave Rating-3.25/5 and commenting as "First half of Mirchi is decent. Flashback episode which occupies 80% of second half is good. Climax could have been better. The plus points of the film are Prabhas, music and all-round orientation. On a whole, Mirchi has all the ingredients of a commercial potboiler".Mahesh S Koneru od 123telugu.com gave Rating of 3.25/5 and commenting as "At the Box Office, the film will turn in a good commercial performance".Super good movies gave a Rating of 3/5 and commenting as "Go and Watch Mirchi, It entertains both Class and Mass. It is a worth watch".Way2movies gave a Rating 3.25/5 and commenting as "Prabhas rocks the show in this decent yet formulaic commercial entertainer".
NDTV Movies gave a Rating of 2.5/5 and the bottom line is "But apart from good direction and strong performances by lead actors, Mirchi lacks narrative power and is loosely based on an amalgamation of some old films, which makes the film quite predictable".The Times of India gave 2.5 stars for 5 and mentioned "Watch it for Prabhas".Sify movies gave a rating of 3.25/5 and mentioned as "Mirchi showcases Prabhas in a different avatar. Neat package of masala moments and Prabhas are the strengths. Mirchi is a decent entertainer".
Box Office.
The first day collection of mirchi set a new record in nizam area with 2.30 crore share.Mirchi collected 3 Crore in USA in first weekend of the movie release.
Soundtrack.
Devi Sri Prasad composed the Music for this film. The audio launch was held on 5 January 2013 at Ramanaidu Studios in Nanakramguda at Hyderabad. Krishnam Raju attended the audio launch function as chief guest, released the audio CD and handed over the first piece to Rajamouli. Dil Raju, Shyam Prasad Reddy released the trailers on this occasion.
Reception.
The audio got Positive Response. Mahesh S Koneru of 123telugu.com gave a review stating "DSP has started off his 2013 innings on a pretty good note with the audio album of ‘Mirchi’. He has composed some hummable numbers for this film and though he has not experimented too much, the tunes are all easy to appreciate. In other words, they are safe and simple. Prabhas has a good album on his side and that should help the film at the Box Office." TeluguNow.com gave a review stating "Not extraordinary but good from Devi." CineCorn.com gave a review stating "DSP begins 2013 with a bang, it’s a blockbuster beginning. The album has fantastic repeatability and likeability. This is the second best album in the combination of Prabhas and Devi Sree Prasad on par with Pournami. We Love Prabhas Forever." cinema65 gave a review stating "Finally Prabhas and DSP Given a Kick Start Album in the year 2013. No Doubt Audio Gonna be a biggest hit of this year." APHerald gave a review stating "Devi Sri Prasad started this year giving chart-buster songs to music lovers, this alblum surely stands as one of the best audio in Prabhas films."telugumuzicreviews wrote "DSP welcomes 2013 in a style".
