The following is a list of characters in the "Twilight" novel series by Stephenie Meyer, comprising the books; "Twilight", "New Moon", "Eclipse" and "Breaking Dawn", as well as "The Twilight Saga" film series adaptations.
Major characters.
Bella Swan.
Isabella Marie "Bella" Swan (later Bella Cullen) is the fictional protagonist of the "Twilight" series, written by Stephenie Meyer. The "Twilight" series, consisting of the novels "Twilight", "New Moon", "Eclipse", and "Breaking Dawn", is primarily narrated from Bella's point-of-view.
In "Twilight", Bella moves to her father's home in Forks, Washington, meets the mysterious Cullen family, and falls in love with Edward Cullen. However, she soon discovers that the family is a coven of vampires. Bella expresses a desire to become a vampire herself, against Edward's wishes. In the second novel, "New Moon", Edward and the other Cullens leave Forks in an effort to keep Bella safe from the vampire world. Jacob Black, a member of the Quileute tribe who is also a shape shifter taking a wolf form, comforts the distraught and severely depressed Bella. She comes to care deeply for Jacob, though less than she loves Edward. In "Eclipse", Bella becomes engaged to Edward, and they marry in "Breaking Dawn". Edward then transforms Bella into a vampire after she nearly dies giving birth to their daughter, Renesmee. Bella has the ability to shield her mind (from mind reading, attacks, etc.), an ability she's had from the beginning. But once she is transformed into a vampire, her ability is enhanced to where she can also expand her shield to protect others from mind control.
Kristen Stewart plays Bella in the "Twilight" film series.
Edward Cullen.
Edward Cullen (born Edward Anthony Masen) is a major character, implicated in all of the "Twilight Saga" films and books. As stated in the first and second novels, he was born on June 20, 1901, in Chicago, Illinois, and was frozen in his 17-year-old body while dying of the Spanish influenza, when he was changed into a vampire by Dr. Carlisle Cullen. As shown in Twilight, he only did so because Edward's dying mother, Elizabeth, begged him to save Edward. A member of the Olympic Coven, Edward only drinks animal blood and has the special ability to read minds. He falls in love with Bella soon after she arrives in Forks. Edward knows that he could kill Bella easily, a fact that torments him so much that, in the book "New Moon", he decided to leave Forks with his family so they wouldn't be able to hurt her. He returned because he realized he cannot live without her. Edward marries Bella in "Breaking Dawn" and they have a daughter, Renesmee. 
Robert Pattinson plays Edward in the "Twilight" film series.
Jacob Black.
Jacob Black is Bella's best friend. He is a Quileute Native American and a werewolf. In "Twilight", Jacob plays the minor role of a forgotten childhood friend of Bella's, and he develops a crush on her. In an attempt to learn more about Cullens, Bella flirts with Jacob, and he tells her tribe legends about "the cold ones", or vampires. After Edward leaves Bella in "New Moon", she spends much of her time with Jacob. Though she only considers him a friend, Jacob falls in love with Bella. Although he spends most of his time in "Eclipse" trying to win Bella, in "Breaking Dawn" he "imprints"— an involuntary process in which a werewolf finds their soul mate— on Bella and Edward's daughter, Renesmee.
Taylor Lautner plays Jacob in the "Twilight" film series.
Carlisle Cullen.
Carlisle Cullen (also known as Stregone Benefico) is Esme Cullen's husband and the adoptive father of Edward, Emmett and Alice Cullen, as well as Rosalie and Jasper Hale. His first appearance was in "Twilight" and his physical age is 23. Carlisle is described to look like a model; he has blond hair, and is slender but muscular. Carlisle theorizes that when a human is turned into a vampire, they will have an enhanced ability from their previous life. He believes he brought compassion from his human life. Carlisle has had centuries to perfect his medicinal talents, therefore making him an excellent doctor. Unlike most vampires, he is not at all tempted by the scent of human blood, due to the over 300 years he has spent holding back his temptations. Carlisle Cullen was the son of an Anglican priest, born in 1640s London, England, during a time of religious upheaval. His father and other pastors hunted creatures such as witches, werewolves, and vampires, often mistaking humans for them. As his father grew older, Carlisle assumed his role. One night, he was attacked by a vampire and left to die on the streets. Knowing he would be rejected by society, he hid himself and silently endured the painful transformation, emerging as a vampire. Horrified by what he had become, he tried killing himself many different ways, but all failed due to his power. One night, unable to endure hunger any longer, he fed on some passing deer. Subsequently realizing he could avoid feeding on humans, he committed himself to resisting his blood lust and to becoming a doctor.
For a short time, Carlisle lived with the Volturi, though he eventually left and traveled to the New World. While treating patients with the Spanish Influenza, he met an ill woman who begged him to save her dying son, Edward. Out of loneliness, Carlisle transformed Edward into a vampire, and Edward became his companion. Soon after, in 1921, Carlisle moved to Ashland, Wisconsin where he treated Esme after her failed suicide attempt brought on by her infant son's death. Carlisle felt compelled to save her and transformed her into a vampire, subsequently falling in love with her, and later marrying her. Carlisle then found Rosalie Hale, a young woman nearly killed by her drunken fiancé and his friends in Rochester, New York, and left in the street to die after smelling all the blood and transforms her. Later, while hunting, Rosalie found a young man named Emmett who had been mauled by a bear, and carried him over 100 miles to Carlisle. Carlisle then transformed Emmett, since Rosalie was unwilling to do it herself, fearing her blood lust would overwhelm her. After Carlisle changed Emmett, Carlisle and his family moved to Hoquiam, Washington where the Quileute Native American tribe offered the Cullens a treaty: the Quileutes would leave them alone if the Cullen family never attacked any humans or trespassed on Quileute land. The Cullens agreed and lived in relative peace until they had to move on. Between the Cullens' first and second stay in Washington, Alice and Jasper joined his coven as well, having found Carlisle on their own. Throughout the "Twilight" saga, Carlisle works as a doctor, acting as the coven leader and offering medical advice and help when Bella is pregnant in "Breaking Dawn".
"Forbes" magazine claimed in its 2009 Fictional 15 list of the wealthiest fictional characters that Carlisle is the richest of them all, using 370 years of compound interest and timely investments to amass an estimated fortune of $34.5 billion.
Peter Facinelli plays Carlisle in the "Twilight" film series.
Esme Cullen.
Esme Cullen (born Esme Platt and later Esme Evenson) is Carlisle Cullen's wife and the adoptive mother of Edward, Emmett and Alice Cullen, as well as Rosalie and Jasper Hale. She enjoys restoring old houses and her physical age is 26. She has no special power, but has a strong ability to love passionately. Esme is described as having caramel-colored hair; she also has a heart-shaped face with dimples, and her figure is slender, but rounded and soft. Esme was born in 1895 in Columbus, Ohio, where she was treated at the age of 16 by Carlisle after breaking her leg when climbing a tree. She married Charles Evenson, but he abused her. After finding out she was pregnant, she ran away and gave birth to a son, who subsequently died a few days later. Grief-stricken by his death, Esme attempted to kill herself by jumping off a cliff. Presumed dead, she was brought to a morgue. Carlisle, who remembered treating her years before, was able to hear her faint heartbeat and transformed her into a vampire. Esme fell in love with and married Carlisle soon after. She loves her adoptive children, including Bella, as if they were her own and has the most affection for Edward, but she still grieves that she is unable to bear children.
Esme is present throughout the entire "Twilight" series, revealing her past to Bella during the Cullens' baseball game in "Twilight". Esme treats Bella as her own daughter, comforting her after several traumatic events. In the film adaptation of "Eclipse", Esme participated in a battle against the newborn vampires but in the book series, it is stated by Sam in "Breaking Dawn" that she is not a fighter. In "Breaking Dawn", it is revealed that Esme owns a South American island named "Isle Esme" that Carlisle purchased for her, and where Edward and Bella spend their honeymoon.
Elizabeth Reaser plays Esme in the "Twilight" film series.
Alice Cullen.
Alice Cullen (born Mary Alice Brandon) is the adopted daughter of Carlisle and Esme Cullen, adoptive sister of Edward and Emmett Cullen, as well as Rosalie Hale and the wife of Jasper Hale. Alice is petite and pixie-like, with a graceful gait and hair that is short, spiky, and black. Her special ability is to see the future, an enhanced version of her ability to have premonitions as a human. Her ability is limited; she is only able to see the outcome of a decision once it is made. Due to this, decisions made in the spur of the moment can not be foreseen. Alice can see futures involving humans and vampires, but is unable to see those involving half-breeds, such as Renesmee and the werewolves. In "Breaking Dawn", Alice theorizes that she can see vampires very clearly because she is one, can see humans somewhat less clearly because she was one, and cannot see werewolves or half-breeds because she never was one. Alice is bubbly and optimistic, and she loves and cares for Bella like a sister. She is also close to her brother Edward, and enjoys shopping, make-overs, and throwing parties. Alice's early history is vague, as she remembers nothing about her human life and woke up alone as a vampire. It is eventually revealed that she was born around 1901 in Biloxi, Mississippi, and was committed to an asylum because she had premonitions. Alice was transformed by an old vampire who worked at the asylum to protect her from James, a tracker vampire who was hunting her. After some research, Alice found her grave and discovered that the date on her tombstone matches the date of her admission to the asylum. Through her research she additionally discovered that she had a younger sister named Cynthia, and that Cynthia's daughter, Alice's niece, is still alive in Biloxi.
Throughout "Twilight", Alice uses her ability to see the future and help Bella when she is in danger. The two soon become friends, loving each other like sisters. In "New Moon", Alice foresees Bella jumping off a cliff and assumes she is trying to commit suicide, though Bella actually was cliff diving. After discovering the truth, Bella accompanies Alice to Italy to prevent Edward from killing himself. They are successful, but are taken to see the Volturi, who police the vampire world. Through Alice's premonitions, Aro is able to see that Bella will eventually become a vampire and invites her, Alice, and Edward to stay with them; it is later mentioned that Aro especially covets Alice's gift. In "Eclipse", Alice, who proves to be an adept fighter, joins the fight to destroy a group of rampaging newborn vampires, created by Victoria in an effort to take revenge on Edward. Alice acts as Bella's maid of honor at her wedding in "Breaking Dawn" and helps care for Renesmee until leaving to search out a crossbreed after the Volturi plan to destroy Renesmee, believing her to be an immortal child. Alice is successful and the Volturi, convinced there is no threat, leave.
Ashley Greene plays Alice in the "Twilight" film series.
Emmett Cullen.
Emmett Cullen (born Emmett Dale McCarty) is Rosalie Hale's husband, Carlisle and Esme Cullen's adopted son, and Edward and Alice Cullen, as well as Jasper Hale's adoptive brother. Emmett is tall, burly, extremely muscular, and, to most humans, the most intimidating of his adoptive siblings. He has curly dark hair and dimpled cheeks, and despite his physical attributes, he is actually the joker among the Cullens. He is always eager to engage in fights, and is often described as Edward's favorite brother. 
Emmett was 20 and living in Gatlinburg, Tennessee, in 1935 when he was mauled by a bear. The injuries from the attack were severe and he was found by Rosalie, who had been hunting in the area at the time. Rosalie, who was reminded of her friend Vera's baby by his dark curls, dimples, and innocent appearance, carried him over a hundred miles to Appalachia where Carlisle was, asking him to spare Emmett's life by turning him into a vampire. Emmett joined Carlisle's coven but initially had trouble adjusting to the family's diet of animal blood. In "Twilight", Emmett is at first wary of Bella but soon warms up to her, treating her as his younger sister. He often teases her for her clumsiness, criticizes her old truck and constant blushing, and votes in favor of her becoming a vampire in "New Moon". In "Breaking Dawn" Emmett jokingly makes innuendos about Bella's sex life until he is silenced when she defeats him several times in arm wrestling matches; he later helps train Bella to fight in the oncoming battle with the Volturi.
Kellan Lutz plays Emmett in the "Twilight" film series.
Rosalie Hale.
Rosalie Hale is the adopted daughter of Carlisle and Esme Cullen, adoptive sister of Jasper Hale as well as Edward and Alice Cullen, and the wife of Emmett Cullen. She and Jasper are the only ones who don't take the surname of Cullen as they pass off as being biological siblings. Her physical age is 18, and she was born in 1915 in Rochester, New York. Rosalie is described as exceptionally beautiful, even for a vampire; she is tall, statuesque, and has long, wavy blonde hair. While she was human, she was said to be a woman with elegance, class, and eyes the color of violets. In "Eclipse", she describes her human self as vain, self-centered, and shallow, pleased with her physical beauty and forever desiring attention. A wealthy young man named Royce King II took an interest in her and soon the two became engaged, with Rosalie eager to have a fancy wedding, live in a big, expensive house, and have children of her own. While visiting her friend Vera, she one day noticed that she did not share the same loving relationship with Royce as her friend Vera did with her husband. Dismissing it, Rosalie later walked home and met an intoxicated Royce and his friends, leading to her being beaten, gang-raped, and left to die in the streets. She is found by Carlisle, who had smelled the blood, and he pitied her and changed her into a vampire with the secret hope that she would become Edward's mate, though the two of them are never more than brother and sister. After her transformation, she tortured and killed those who had attacked her, including Royce, but did not drink their blood, a fact that she is proud of. She found Emmett two years after becoming a vampire, and begged Carlisle to change him since she was afraid of doing it herself. They have been together ever since. Apart from Carlisle and Edward, she has the most self-control and appreciation for human life, and has never tasted human blood. Rosalie is bitter that her life as a vampire prevents her from having children and experiencing the normal changes of life, and her desire to be human is so strong that she would give up her immortality and beauty for it.
When Rosalie first appears in "Twilight" she is hostile toward Bella and jealous of her humanity; she is also irritated that Edward could be attracted to Bella, a mere human, when he had never shown the slightest interest in Rosalie, who has always been desired by men. In "New Moon", she mistakenly reports to Edward that Bella is dead after supposedly committing suicide. She is guilty and apologetic upon Bella and Edward's return from Italy, and is the only one next to Edward who opposes Bella becoming a vampire. In "Eclipse", Rosalie reveals her past to Bella with the hope that Bella will choose to stay human and she later joins in the fight against Victoria's army of newborn vampires. In "Breaking Dawn", Bella contacts Rosalie after finding out she is pregnant, knowing that Rosalie has always wanted children. She stays by Bella's side throughout the pregnancy, defending Bella's choice to keep the baby; this ultimately brings the two of them closer together, and by the end of the novel they have become friends. Rosalie later helps care for the child, Renesmee, while Bella is undergoing transformation into a vampire.
Nikki Reed plays Rosalie in the "Twilight" film series.
Jasper Hale.
Jasper Hale (born Jasper Whitlock) is the adopted son of Carlisle and Esme Cullen, adoptive brother of Rosalie Hale, as well as Edward and Emmett Cullen, and husband of Alice Cullen. He takes the name Hale to pass as Rosalie's sibling. He was born in Texas and joined the Confederate States Army in 1861 to serve in the American Civil War. Due to his extremely charismatic personality, he ascended through the ranks quickly. Jasper was turned into a vampire in 1863 by a vampire named Maria when he was 19 years old. After transformation, he gained the ability to sense and manipulate the emotions of those around him. Recognizing his high rank in the army, Maria decided to change him into a vampire to help her claim territory in Monterrey. Jasper's responsibility was to train young vampires and then kill them when they were no longer useful. After about a century of this, he grew weary of the lifestyle and joined an old friend, Peter, and his mate Charlotte. Jasper left the two eventually, not wanting to feed on humans because he could feel his prey's emotions as they died. Alice, foreseeing that they would be together, met him in a half-empty diner in Philadelphia, and together they sought out the Cullen family. Due to his past, where he was able to feed on humans whenever he chose, Jasper lacks strong self-control. In "Eclipse" it is suggested that the "vegetarian" lifestyle is not Jasper's first choice and that this also affects his self-control. It is also suggested that he remains with the Cullens mainly for Alice's sake and that while he is fond of them all, he is not as attached to them as she is. He is described as tall with honey blond hair, and is muscular but lean. His face and body are covered with crescent-shaped scars, after his years of fighting and training newborn vampires.
In "Twilight", upon meeting Bella, Jasper has a hard time controlling himself from attacking Bella due to her scent. He accompanies Alice and Bella when they are hiding from James, using his ability to calm Bella when she is stressed or afraid. In "New Moon", he loses control and tries to attack Bella after smelling her blood when she gets a paper cut, prompting Edward to leave Forks in order to protect her. When the Cullens return, Jasper votes for Bella to become a vampire, stating that it would be a nice change from him wanting to attack her. In "Eclipse", Jasper teaches the werewolves and vampires fighting techniques to defend themselves against newborn vampires. In "Breaking Dawn", he leaves with Alice to find a vampire-human hybrid, and returns with her to defend Renesmee and the rest of the family against the Volturi. 
Jackson Rathbone plays Jasper in the "Twilight" film series.
Renesmee Cullen.
Renesmee Carlie "Nessie" Cullen (pronounced RUH-nez-MAY ) is the dhampir daughter of Edward Cullen and Bella Swan, born on September 10, three days before Bella's nineteenth birthday in "Breaking Dawn". Her name is derived from the amalgamation of the names of Bella's mother, Renée, and Edward's adoptive mother, Esme. Her middle name, Carlie, is a portmanteau of the names Carlisle, Edward's adoptive father, and Charlie, Bella's father. She has the same facial features and hair color as Edward, but has curly hair inherited from her grandfather, Charlie Swan, and brown eyes like Bella. Her heart pumps blood, giving her a blush, and her pale skin slightly glows in sunlight. Her skin is warm and soft to the touch, but it is as strong as a vampire's. Only minutes after she is born, she is imprinted upon by Jacob Black, who becomes her soul mate and acts as an older brother figure to her. Renesmee can survive on either blood or human food, though she prefers blood, and she does not produce venom. Her special abilities are transmitting thoughts to others by touching their skin and penetrating mental shields, the opposite abilities of each of her parents. She rapidly grows both mentally and physically, is able to speak only seven days after her birth, and by the end of the novel can read, run, hunt, and perform other tasks at advanced levels for her young age. Her intelligence stuns everyone, and she is able to understand what is happening around her when the Volturi arrive. Jacob nicknames her "Nessie" because he considers her full name to be a mouthful, though Bella strongly dislikes her child being nicknamed "after the Loch Ness Monster." By the book's end, however, all of the characters have adopted this shortened version. She will reach physical maturity after about seven years, when her appearance will be around 17, and then stop aging.
Weeks after Renesmee is born, Irina, a vampire from the Denali coven, sees Renesmee and believes she is an "immortal child", a young human child who had been changed into a vampire. She informs the Volturi, as immortal children are not permitted to exist due to their unpredictable nature. Intent on killing Renesmee and the other Cullens, the Volturi travel to Forks. The Cullens gather witnesses from around the world to testify that they have seen her mature and grow, and so she is therefore not an immortal child. Alice brings another half-breed, 150-year-old Nahuel, who explains that half-breeds pose no danger to the vampires. Convinced that Renesmee is not a threat, the Volturi leave, and Renesmee and her family are left in peace.
Mackenzie Foy plays Renesmee in the film adaptation of "Breaking Dawn".
Renesmee and Jacob.
Stephenie Meyer, when asked about whether or not Jacob could father children with Renesmee, responded: "That is a question I'm reserving the right not to answer, because there is a chance I'll go back to their story."
Vampires.
In "Twilight", vampires deviate from traditional myth in many ways, a fact often alluded to in the series, usually for humor. Meyer has said she did not research vampire mythology before writing the series. For example, they are unharmed by garlic, holy items, or wooden stakes; they have reflections and shadows, and are able to be out during daylight. Vampires are also capable of eating human food, though their bodies are unable to digest it and they must cough it up later. They do not have to breathe, but typically find it uncomfortable to be without a sense of smell.
All vampires possess refined and perfected physical features (including their voice and scent), allowing them to lure in prey. Their skin is flawless, has the texture and feel of marble due to being stronger than granite, and sparkles in direct sunlight because of the crystalline properties of their cells. Newborn vampires have bright red eyes; for vampires who choose to drink human blood, the most revitalizing kind of blood for a vampire, eye color fades to a deep crimson over the course of a year. If they feed on animal blood, like the Cullens, their eyes fade to a deep gold color. Regardless of meal preference, all vampires' eyes grow darker with thirst, eventually fading to black; vampires tire only from lack of blood. All vampires possess superhuman physical and mental attributes. Their superhuman strength gives them the ability to subdue their prey, uproot trees, throw cars, and crush metal. Newborn vampires are known to be exceptionally strong during their first year because of the excessive amount of human blood still in their systems. Vampires have very keen senses and are able to see and hear clearly for miles in total darkness and move with such speed that they become a blur to human eyes. They are immortal and difficult to destroy, only permanently killed when dismembered and then burned, as their body parts continue to move even after being detached. Vampires also do not have to sleep; they do not feel physical fatigue, and mental fatigue passes very quickly. After transformation, a vampire's certain ability becomes enhanced, sometimes resulting in a specialized, supernatural skill. While not definite, the theory behind these special abilities is that the power is reminiscent of the individual's original personality. Some vampires have no special abilities, and instead have a prominent personality or physical trait from their human life magnified.
Transformation process.
In the series, humans can be changed into vampires, and vampire venom is nothing more than a deadly poison to animals.
Transformation from human to vampire is described as being "the sharpest memory they have of their human life." Once a human is bitten, the venom from glands inside the vampire's mouth is injected into the bloodstream.
Depending upon "how much venom is in the bloodstream, and how close the venom is until it enters the heart", the transformation could last anywhere from 2-5 days. During this time, the human will endure indescribable pain. Once the venom is injected, the sensation is described as very similar to being burned alive. The venom will then make its way throughout the body. Next through the heart, and it will pump again and again in the heart until it starts meeting itself in the veins. Then it will burn all the veins until the heart stops beating. It moves slower than blood because it is thicker, which makes the transformation long-lasting. Each beat of the heart can only push it so far. The changing/burning process is slow. The venom has to saturate every cell in the body before the process can be completed.
There is no medicine that is strong enough to numb the pain; the best one could do is to immobilize the body.
Venom.
When a vampire catches his prey, he bites into its neck and injects his venom into its bloodstream while feeding. This serves as a useful way to immobilize his prey while also initiating the conversion from human to vampire, allowing the predator to feed on his prey without it trying to resist, even though it would not have done any good. While the venom is transformative to humans, it is deadly to animals and shape-shifters.
Newborn vampires.
―Jasper Hale
"Newborn" or "newborn vampire" is the term for a vampire that has been transformed for less than one year. On average, a newborn's physical strength, senses and speed greatly surpass that of an older vampire because they still have their own blood lingering in their tissues. As time passes, however, the venom in them will consume that blood, and the newborn's physical capabilities and thirst will slowly diminish until it reaches that of a normal vampire, by the end of its first year. A newborn's thirst for blood is overwhelmingly and relentlessly painful, described by Bree Tanner as being a "fire in the throat", and they will feed as much as possible to curb it.
Personality.
Newborns are often bloodthirsty, violent and uncontrollable. Their enhanced emotions are hard to control and they anger easily. They are also likely to kill one another to compete for blood. When they catch the scent of blood, their hunting instincts will take over and cloud their ability to focus, even the thought of the word "blood" is enough to make their thirst unbearable. The thirst is so maddening in the first year that most newborns are more animalistic and wild than their older counterparts. However, as time passes, their thirst will slowly diminish and become easier to manage. Their secondary human emotions and desires will mostly be dormant for a while, and resurface slowly over time.
Bella Swan is an exception to this rule, as she had time to think about her decision and therefore did not have the first brutal year that most vampires encounter. Carlisle Cullen showed an amazing control of his thirst for human blood as a newborn, which kept him from feeding on humans and redirect his thirst to animal blood instead. Rosalie Hale had never drunk human blood in her vampire life, though she had killed her murderers and their bodyguards by torturing them to death.
It is impossible to predict how long a newborn or an average vampire will remain vicious and bloodthirsty before their secondary desires and personality resurfaces, since every person is different. Certain vampires may have to wait for at least a few years after their first year ended.
Some indications which show a newborn are their bright crimson eyes (due to the blood left in their body at the time of changing), uncontrollable thirst that makes them more ferocious than most vampires, and superior in physical abilities. In the Olympic Coven, Emmett Cullen was the hardest to contain when he was a newborn because of his superior physical strength, though he did become a vegetarian successfully.
Physical description.
Newborns appear much like normal vampires with the exception of their eyes. A newborn's eyes are an incredibly bright crimson, indicating that their own blood is still in their system, though their heart is no longer beating. In a year that a vampire feeds on animal blood, their eyes will change from red to amber and then to gold. If he reverts to feeding on human blood, the eyes will darken to be almost a burgundy color.
Newborns are also incredibly powerful in the physical sense, being much stronger and faster than a regular vampire, which allows them to easily crush an older vampire. As they become older their strength begins to wane, and after the first year, their strength will be reduced to that of an average vampire. In "Breaking Dawn", Bella arm-wrestles with Emmett and wins easily because of her newborn strength.
Immortal children.
Introduced in the novel "Breaking Dawn", immortal children are human infants and toddlers turned into vampires. They are said to be so beautiful it takes just one look to be under their control. In addition, it is said that an immortal child's tantrum can kill people, since they cannot easily control themselves. Carlisle described them as adorable little children with smiles and dimples that would destroy a village in one of their tantrums.
It is presumed that while their mental age is stuck at the age they were transformed, they still have the vampiric gifts of enhanced strength and speed as well the supernatural gifts of certain vampires.
Because they are too young to be controlled, the Volturi killed all those who could be found. Creating one has become the worst crime in the vampire world, under penalty of death for both creator and newborn vampire. Under this law, anyone who knows about or stands by the child is also punishable under this law.
Even after the law was established, the Volturi captured two children to experiment on. However, no matter how many centuries they'd spent to teach them, they still could not be controlled or taught. Carlisle Cullen stumbled across these children during his stay in Volterra and learned of this law. After they determined that immortal children could not be tamed, they had the children destroyed.
In Book 3 of "Breaking Dawn", Irina sees Bella, Jacob and Renesmee hunting and mistook Renesmee for one, prompting her to report the child to the Volturi. Her mother Sasha had created an immortal child called Vasilii, and she had to witness her mother's and brother's executions.
Libishomen.
Libishomen is the word that the people in South America (tribes like the Mapuche or the Ticunas), call vampires. Libishomen are blood drinking demons who prey exclusively on beautiful women. In the Twilight Saga, the vampire Joham, who believes that he is creating a new race by impregnating women with half-mortal, half-vampire babies (like Renesmee), would be called Libishomen. Joham has created half-mortals which include Nahuel and his half-sisters.
Enemies.
Vampires are said to have two natural enemies: werewolves and shape-shifters, to each of the creatures the other smells disgusting. These smells are too enhanced for a human sense of smell. Vampires are said to be stronger than shape-shifters, and can usually overpower them easily. In Quileute history, one lone vampire was able to kill two wolves at one time, and the same vampire managed to kill three of the four wolves that hunted him another time, while the fourth managed to rip him apart.
Vampires often fight among each other. There have been many cases throughout history where vampires created armies of newborns to challenge one another and gain territory.
If a vampire's mate is attacked or killed, then he or she will likely seek revenge, hunting down and killing the attacker.
In Eclipse and Breaking Dawn, the Cullens and La Push shape-shifters become allies, partially because Jacob imprints on Renesmee.
The Volturi.
The vampire coven known as the Volturi live in Volterra, Tuscany (Italy). They are regarded as "royalty" by other vampires because they have lived for well over 3000 years and act as police, enforcing the rule that vampires' existence remain a secret from humans. They often send emissaries or enforcers from Volterra to prevent overzealous covens and renegade vampires from exposing their kind. They are guarded by several powerful vampires who have been recruited for their powers and skills. Carlisle once stayed with the coven as a guest, but left due to his desire to avoid harming humans and established his own coven in the United States. At the end of "New Moon", the Volturi discover that Bella, a human, has learned that vampires exist and demand that she become a vampire or else be killed. In "Eclipse", they arrive in Forks under the pretense of eliminating Victoria and her newborn army for violating Volturi law; their true intentions, however, were to allow Victoria's army to destroy the Cullen clan, whom Aro envies for its large size and for its members' supernatural talents. In "Breaking Dawn", the vampire Irina goes to the Volturi and informs them that the Cullens have created an immortal child after seeing Edward and Bella's daughter, Renesmee, hunting close to the Cullens' house. The Volturi coven travel to Forks to destroy Renesmee and the Cullens, but leave when they are outnumbered by the group gathered there. It is noted at the end of the novel that the Volturi may again one day attempt to destroy the Cullen family.
The Volturi leaders include Aro, who can read every thought a person has ever had once he has made physical contact, Marcus, who senses the strength and nature of relationships, and Caius, who has no known power. Aro's wife Sulpicia, Caius' wife Athenodora, and formerly Marcus' wife Didyme, who had the power to make others happy, also act as leaders. The Volturi guard consists of 32 members, including Jane, who creates illusions of pain; her twin brother Alec, who is able to block others' senses; Demetri, who can track anyone once he has the tenor of their mind; Felix, who possesses exceptional physical strength and speed; Chelsea, who can change emotional bondings and causes members of the Volturi to be loyal to the coven; and Renata, who can make anyone feel distracted and wandering when they are near her (classified as a "shield"). The majority of the Volturi guard remain nameless throughout the series. There is also a human secretary named Gianna, who appears in "New Moon" and is killed by the Volturi by the events of "Breaking Dawn", despite her hope that they would turn her into a vampire. Aro, coveting their talents, invites Carlisle, Edward, Alice, Kate, Benjamin, Zafrina, and Bella to join the Volturi, but all of them refuse.
In ', the cast of the Volturi includes Michael Sheen as Aro; Jamie Campbell Bower as Caius; Christopher Heyerdahl as Marcus; Dakota Fanning as Jane; Cameron Bright as Alec; Charlie Bewley as Demetri; Daniel Cudmore as Felix; and Noot Seear as Heidi. Fanning, Bright, Bewley, and Cudmore all reprised their roles in '. They are all set to return for "".
James's Coven.
James.
The major antagonist of "Twilight", James is a merciless, sadistic "tracker" vampire who hunts human beings or, in some cases, animals, for sport. Fellow coven member Laurent says that James is unusually gifted at what he does and always gets what he wants, though it is later revealed that then-human Alice Cullen escaped him years ago by being turned into a vampire before James could attack her. Unlike the Cullen family, he drinks human blood. Towards the end of "Twilight", James is destroyed by Cullen brothers Emmett and Jasper after he lures Bella to an empty ballet studio and nearly kills her. The shimmery scar left by his venomous bite still remains on Bella's hand as a symbol of his unsuccessful attempt on her life. James is described as having light brown hair and being quite average-looking.
James is portrayed by Cam Gigandet in the "Twilight" film. In the film, he is given the surname "Witherdale".
Victoria.
A red-haired, cat-like vampire, Victoria is originally a member of James' coven. She plays a small role in the first book assisting James, her lover and coven leader, in hunting Bella Swan. After James is killed, she decides to exact revenge on Edward Cullen by plotting to kill the woman he loves, Bella. Bella is sufficiently protected from her wrath by the Quileute shape-shifting wolves. Months later in "Eclipse", Victoria creates an army of bloodthirsty newborn vampires in Seattle to rise up against the combined forces of the werewolves and Cullen family. During this battle, both she and her new fighting partner, Riley, are destroyed by Edward and the young wolf Seth Clearwater. Her supernatural talent is self-preservation, and her voice is said to sound high and girlish.
Victoria is portrayed by Rachelle Lefevre in the films "Twilight" and "The Twilight Saga: New Moon". Bryce Dallas Howard replaces Lefevre in the role for the third film, "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse". In the films, she is given the surname "Sutherland".
Laurent.
A dark-haired, olive-toned vampire, Laurent is a member of James' coven in "Twilight". When James and Victoria choose to track and murder Bella, Laurent leaves them and travels to Denali, Alaska, hoping to find solace among a coven of "vegetarian" vampires. He never adopts their strict diet of drinking animal blood, and "cheats" by occasionally feeding on humans. During this stay he takes a special liking to a vampire named Irina, though the infatuation is not strong enough to keep him there, as he later returns to Forks in "New Moon" as a favor to Victoria. During this visit, he stumbles across Bella and tries to kill her, before being ambushed by the Quileute wolves and subsequently destroyed.
Laurent is portrayed by Edi Gathegi in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and in a flashback seen In "". In the films, he is given the surname "Da Revin".
Newborn Army.
Riley Biers.
As a vampire, Riley Biers is tall and muscular with bright red eyes and blond hair. Victoria bites and changes Riley when he is approximately Bella's age in "Eclipse". Once Riley ages and gains some control, he helps to lead Victoria's army of newborn vampires. He performs his work faithfully because of his love for Victoria, which she pretends to return. In a battle between the army of newborns and the Cullens at the end of "Eclipse", Edward voices Riley's concern that Victoria has been lying to him. Edward tries to convince Riley to stop fighting by explaining Victoria's true motives, but in the end Victoria bolsters Riley's faith in her and he is destroyed by Edward and Seth Clearwater.
In the film "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse", Riley is described as a "good-looking college student" and is portrayed by Australian actor Xavier Samuel.
Bree Tanner.
Bree Tanner was a young vampire created by Victoria as a part of the newborn army that attacks the Cullens in "Eclipse". While she was human, Riley found her and brought her to Victoria, who bit and changed her. Her age is said to be 15 or 16, and she is described as petite with chin-length black hair. Because of her youth and her willingness to surrender, the Cullens spare her life during the newborn attack, and Carlisle even offers to make her part of the family. When the Volturi arrive, however, Jane orders her destroyed by Felix despite her innocence.
Stephenie Meyer's novella "The Short Second Life of Bree Tanner", which is written from Bree's perspective, tells of Bree's life as a newborn vampire and her interactions with Riley, the Cullens, and other members of the newborn army.
In the film "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse", she is portrayed by Canadian actress, Jodelle Ferland.
Amazonian coven.
Zafrina, Senna, and Kachiri are female vampires who comprise the Amazonian coven in "Breaking Dawn". They are described as tall and intimidating, with dark skin, long hair, and clothes made of animal fur. Zafrina's special ability is to create illusions; her illusions do not affect Bella or anyone who is under her protective shield, and she assists Bella in improving her shield. Zafrina develops a friendship with Renesmee, who is said to like Zafrina and her "pretty pictures", and at the end of the novel she has Bella promise to bring Renesmee to visit her in the future.
In the film "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - part 2", Judi Shekoni will portray Zafrina and Tracey Heggins will portray Senna, as Kachiri never appears.
American nomads.
Peter, his mate Charlotte, Mary, and Randall are American nomads. Peter is Jasper's good friend, and helped Jasper escape his previous life as a general of newborn vampires. Though he feeds on human blood, he does not agree with the execution of newborns after they have outlived their usefulness. In the past, Jasper lived with Peter and Charlotte, but chose to leave because of his ability to sense his human prey's emotions. All four of these nomads join the Cullens as witnesses in "Breaking Dawn."
In "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II", Peter is set to be portrayed by Erik Odom, Charlotte by Valorie Curry, Mary by Toni Trucks and Randall by Bill Tangradi.
Denali coven.
Eleazar and his mate Carmen, Tanya, Irina (deceased), Kate, and later Kate's mate Garrett are members of the Denali coven. Like the Cullens, the Denali coven practices a diet of drinking animal instead of human blood. They are considered to be cousins of the Cullen family, though the relationship is put under strain in "Eclipse" when they refuse to fight Victoria and her army because of Irina's vendetta against the werewolves. Tanya, their leader, has strawberry blonde hair and once expressed an interest in Edward Cullen, though he turned her down. Carmen speaks fluent Spanish and was the first to listen to and not fear Renesmee for being a half-breed. Eleazar, a former member of the Volturi guard, speaks fluent Spanish as well and has the ability to vaguely identify the gifts of other vampires. Garrett, a tall, rangy vampire with ruby eyes and long sandy hair, is an adventurer, and alludes to being an American Patriot. He joins the Denali coven in "Breaking Dawn" and becomes Kate's mate. Kate's special ability is the production of an electric current over her skin that can shock and incapacitate attackers. She assists Bella in learning to use her new ability to mentally shield those around her.
Sasha, Vasilii, and Irina were former members of the Denali coven. Sasha, who created Tanya, Kate, Irina, and Vasilii, was executed by the Volturi for creating an immortal child, Vasilii. Volturi law prohibits creating an immortal child, as they are unpredictable and have no self-control. For this reason, both Sasha and Vasilii were destroyed, and since then the Denalis have maintained respect for Volturi law. Laurent was Irina's mate, and she holds a grudge against the Quileute wolves for destroying him. She arrives to make peace with the Cullens in "Breaking Dawn", but before speaking with them, she sees Renesmee, mistakenly assumes she is an immortal child, and notifies the Volturi. After determining that Renesmee is not an immortal child, the Volturi destroy Irina in order to provoke her sisters into attacking them, thus giving them an excuse to destroy them along with the Cullens and their allies.
In both parts of "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn", the Denalis are portrayed by MyAnna Buring as Tanya, Christian Camargo as Eleazar, Maggie Grace as Irina, Mía Maestro as Carmen, Casey LaBow as Kate, and Lee Pace as Garrett. Sasha is portrayed by Andrea Powell.
Egyptian coven.
Tia, Amun, Benjamin, and Kebi are members of the Egyptian coven. Amun, the mate of Kebi, is shown to be very unhappy to stand witness for the Cullens in "Breaking Dawn", and he and Kebi later flee in fear of the Volturi. Benjamin, the mate of Tia, has a high awareness of what is right and wrong, and his special ability is to control the elements of nature, air, earth, fire, and water. Benjamin's ability is unique in that it involves physical manipulation, as opposed to illusions of the mind.
In "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II", the members of the Egyptian coven is portrayed by Rami Malek as Benjamin, Omar Metwally as Amun, Angela Sarafyan as Tia, and Andrea Gabriel as Kebi.
European nomads.
Alistair, Charles, and Makenna are European nomads. Alistair considers Carlisle to be his oldest friend, though he does not visit him often and is highly standoffish. His special ability is tracking. When he is called to be a witness for the Cullens in "Breaking Dawn", he leaves out of fear of the Volturi. Charles is the mate of Makenna, and his special ability is to sense if a statement is true.
Alistair is portrayed by British actor, Joe Anderson.
Irish coven.
Siobhan, Liam, and Maggie are members of the Irish coven. Liam is Siobhan's mate. Siobhan's suspected special ability is to alter the course of a situation through willpower. Maggie, a redhead, has the ability to sense if someone is lying. They were called upon to witness for the Cullen clan in face of the Volturi in "Breaking Dawn".
In "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II", the members of the Irish coven are portrayed by Marlane Barnes (as Maggie), Lisa Howard (as Siobhan), and Patrick Brennan (as Liam).
Romanian coven.
Vladimir and Stefan used to rule along with other Romanian vampires about 1500 years ago. The Volturi overthrew them, and destroyed their castle. After the rebellion, it became apparent that Vladimir and Stefan were the only survivors of their coven. They hold a grudge against the Volturi and are willing to do anything for revenge, and so they eagerly serve as witnesses in "Breaking Dawn", hoping to watch the Volturi fall.
In "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II", the Romanian coven are portrayed by Noel Fisher (as Vladimir) and Guri Weinberg (as Stefan).
Nahuel.
Nahuel is a vampire/human hybrid conceived by human Pire and vampire Joham. His mother died giving birth to him, and when he was born, he bit his aunt, Huilen, who hated him for causing her sister's death, causing her transformation into a vampire. He refused to join his father's family, and stayed with Huilen. Knowing that he was the one who killed his mother, Nahuel blamed himself for this. He was found by Kachiri, Alice Cullen and Jasper Hale in Chile to seek his aid in protecting their family. By finding the other hybrid, Renesmee Cullen, and meeting her family, he begins to realize that he himself may not be as evil as he had always thought and learned to forgive himself for his mother's death.
Nahuel is set to be portrayed by J.D. Pardo in "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II".
Huilen.
"Huilen" is a South American vampire and the older sister of Pire. She was turned by her nephew Nahuel who is a half-human, half-vampire. Huilen and Nahuel came to Forks with Alice Cullen and Jasper Hale to witness against the Volturi that Renesmee, another half-human, half-vampire hybrid, wasn't a threat to the vampires' secret world. After the Volturi left, she stayed behind with her nephew during celebration and was one of the last to leave. Bella assumed that she and Nahuel would have gone with the Amazon Coven, but they departed earlier. 
In the film "The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part II", Huilen is portrayed by actress Marisa Quinn.
Werewolves.
According to the "Twilight" series, the Quileute tribe legends holds that chiefs could leave their bodies and wander as spirits, communicate with nature, command nature (weather, trees, insects, animals) and hear each other's thoughts, however, besides the latter many of these techniques appear to have been forgotten. In "Twilight", members of this tribe can still phase in and out of their shape-shifting forms, transforming independently of the lunar cycles. Members are able to regenerate, talk to one another telepathically, and possess superhuman strength, speed and endurance with the ability to cover 1.67 miles in just 1 minute, outrunning vampires. Werewolves skins are durable and their regenerative abilities allow them to heal within seconds. They are also immune to vampirism, though the venom does act as a mild irritant and retards their healing abilities to some degree. As long as they phase, they do not age. Their body temperature is around "108°" Fahrenheit which Bella as a vampire in "Breaking Dawn", describes like "touching an open fire". Jacob is Alpha male thus possesses the unique ability to command the clan telepathically and forcibly, regardless of individual resistance. They possess immunity to vampire bites and some vampire special abilities - such as Alice's premonitions. In human form shape-shifters can use the style of free running to get to hard to reach places. 
In the "Twilight universe", werewolves claws and teeth can tear through the "marble hard skin" of a vampire at ease. Each werewolf has a different look and different specific quality, whether size, speed, agility, stamina, durability or strength, Jacob being the strongest of the pack. All shapeshifters senses are very sharp (ophthalmoception, audioception, olfacoception, equilibrioception "etc"). Within the series, they can also imprint which channels all their affections towards a single person and most likely-to-be spouse. A shapeshifter in human form retains many enhanced abilities and in human form is described as lifting Bella like an "empty box". The Quileute tribes shapeshifting werewolves are typically dark haired, dark skinned, dark eyed in the series and prefer to eat animal meat. Genetically, Carlisle discovers that they have 24 pairs of chromosomes, the same as vampire hybrids like Renesmee sparking speculation on Jacob and Renesmee having children, both of whom had human maternal parents. At the end of the fourth book, it is revealed that they are indeed shape-shifters. Aro claims shape-shifters can take other mega animal forms and Edward says that Caius is terrified of true werewolves because of an encounter with one centuries ago, leaving him almost obliterated. These true werewolves are called the ""Children of the Moon"" and these involuntarily phase in the full moon. Not much is revealed in the series, however in "Breaking Dawn" the distinction is briefly explained.
Sam Uley.
Sam Uley is the Alpha, or leader, and oldest member of the La Push pack. He is first introduced in "Twilight", where his aversion toward the Cullens eventually leads Bella to discover that they are vampires, but is given a larger role in "New Moon". His father, Joshua Uley, abandoned him and his mother when he was young, and Sam was thus forced to assume much adult responsibility at an early age. He is 19 when he first appears in the series, was the first wolf to phase, and is described as the calmest and most mature of his pack brothers. Before transforming, he dated Leah Clearwater, whom he is said to have loved. But because he was forbidden to tell her what he had become, their relationship fell apart and ended when he imprinted on Leah's cousin, Emily Young, and broke every promise he had made to Leah. According to Jacob, Sam feels guilty for betraying Leah and responsible for the bitter person she has become; he is also pained that his lack of control over his phasing one day led to the deep scars on Emily's face. All of this causes him to hate the Cullens, whom he blames for both his transformation and for causing him to break Leah's heart. The oncoming army of newborn vampires in "Eclipse", however, forces him to work together with the Cullens, and at the end of the novel it is suggested that he has begun to trust Carlisle.
His fur is pure black when he phases, and he was the largest wolf until "Breaking Dawn", in which it is noted that Jacob has grown taller than him. He is not Alpha by blood; that role belongs to Jacob, who initially refused the position although Sam willingly offered it to him. Sam's status as pack Alpha technically makes him, as Jacob explains in "Eclipse", the chief of the whole tribe. It also makes his pack brothers subject to any direct commands he gives them, though he dislikes taking their free will away from them and does so only when necessary, such as for coordination during fights. He proves to be highly protective of not only the tribe, but of all humans, and even goes so far as to plan an attack on the Cullens in "Breaking Dawn" because of the threat he believes Bella's unborn, half-vampire child presents. This sparks a conflict between him and Jacob, causing the latter to split from the pack. At the end of the series, Quil, Embry, and the Clearwaters join Jacob's pack, leaving Sam to lead the remaining wolves.
Solomon Trimble was credited as "Jacob's friend" in the "Twilight" film, but was widely recognized as playing the role of Sam. In "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse", Sam is portrayed by Chaske Spencer.
Quil Ateara V.
Quil Ateara V has chocolate-brown fur and is Jacob's best friend and second cousin. He is 16, and is described as muscular and loud. Upon meeting her, he takes an instant liking to Bella, who notes that he has a mischievous grin, and flirts with her. He first appears in "New Moon" but does not become a wolf until "Eclipse". In "New Moon" Bella notes his depression over being abandoned by Embry and Jacob, who joined the pack and were not allowed to tell him what was going on. Unlike most of the other pack members, he was happy about becoming a wolf because it allowed him to join his friends. Near the end of "Breaking Dawn" Quil, along with Embry, joins Jacob's pack.
In "Eclipse", Quil imprints on Emily Young's two-year-old niece, Claire. Although this appears to cause a scandal, Jacob explains that there is currently nothing romantic about his feelings, and that Quil will be whatever Claire needs him to be at each point in her life, whether it be a brother, friend, protector, or lover.
Quil is portrayed by Tyson Houseman in "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "[he Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Embry Call.
Embry Call is a wolf with gray fur and dark spots on his back, and is another one of Jacob's best friends. He is described as tall, thin, and shy, and is 16 when he first appears in "New Moon". He calls Bella "vampire girl" because of her relationship with the Cullens. His mother is of the Makah tribe, not the Quileute, and she moved to the Quileute reservation while she was pregnant with him; until he joined the pack, it was assumed that she had left his father behind. But because the shape-shifting wolf traits are inherited from father to son, he is therefore the half-brother of Quil Ateara, Jacob Black, or Sam Uley. This causes some stress within the pack, since all three of those boys' fathers were married before and at the time of Embry's birth. Near the end of "Breaking Dawn" Embry, along with Quil, joins Jacob's pack.
Embry is portrayed by Kiowa Gordon in "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Paul Lahote.
Paul Lahote is a dark gray wolf who is prone to angry outbursts that cause him to burst into his wolf form. At 16, he was the third wolf to phase. He is the most volatile pack member, and becomes so enraged when he learns that Jacob has told Bella about the pack that he bursts into his wolf form and tries to attack her. He later seems to have no ill feelings toward Bella or Jacob, though Jacob, Leah, and some of the other wolves find him annoying. In "Breaking Dawn", it is revealed that Paul has imprinted on Jacob's older sister, Rachel. This irritates Billy and Jacob because he is always at their house eating their food, but Billy is happy that Rachel visits home more often because of Paul.
Paul is portrayed by Alex Meraz in the "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Jared Cameron.
Jared Cameron was the first wolf to phase after Sam. In "Eclipse" he imprinted on Kim, a girl he sat next to in school who had always had a crush on him. Before he was a wolf he never paid attention to her, but after his transformation he looked at her once and imprinted.
Bronson Pelletier portrays Jared in "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse". Though Jared's personality is never really explored in the novels and he remains somewhat of a background character, it has been noted that Jared's portrayal in the films reflects Pelletier's own joking, light-hearted personality.
Leah Clearwater.
Leah Clearwater is the only known female shape-shifting wolf in the history of the Quileute tribe. She is the smallest wolf, has light gray fur, and is the fastest in the pack. At the age of 19, she transforms into a wolf during the events of "New Moon", around the same time as her younger brother, Seth. This transformation is believed to be what caused the heart attack and subsequent death of their father, Harry. She dated Sam Uley for years until her second cousin Emily came to visit and Sam imprinted on her. Sam thus left her for Emily, leaving Leah broken-hearted. She puts up a brave face, though, and in "Eclipse" it is suggested that she intends to serve as bridesmaid at Sam and Emily's wedding. Despite this, she is disliked by her pack brothers for her very bitter and cynical attitude. She constantly antagonizes the pack by thinking about things that make the others uncomfortable, such as Embry's paternity.
In "Breaking Dawn", Leah joins Jacob's pack with the intention of breaking free of Sam, since she is still heartbroken. She helps to protect Bella and the Cullens, despite her extreme hatred for vampires and her open dislike for Bella. She shares her insecurities with Jacob, such as the reasons for Sam's imprinting on Emily, her regrets that she might be menopausal due to her transformation, and her inability to rise higher in pack rank due to her gender. As she spends more time in Jacob's pack, she becomes happier, makes notable changes in her attitude, and is less negative. Later in the book, Jacob and Leah's feelings toward each other become a trusted comradeship, though they conceal their fondness for each other by constantly bickering. She displays quite a bit of loyalty to him, and even angrily confronts Bella about her unfair treatment of Jacob and the pain she has caused him. By the end of the novel, Leah has replaced Seth as Jacob's second-in-command.
In "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse", Leah is portrayed by Julia Jones.
Seth Clearwater.
Seth Clearwater is Leah's younger brother. He transformed into a wolf during the events of "New Moon", around the same time as his sister, Leah. He has sandy-colored fur, and at 15 he is among the youngest of the pack. In "New Moon" and "Eclipse" he is shown to idolize Jacob Black and is said to remind Bella of a younger Jacob. Like Quil, he is excited by his ability to transform into a wolf and not unhappy with it, as his other pack brothers are. During the newborn attack in "Eclipse", Seth stays with Bella and Edward due to his youth and acts as a connection to the pack because of the wolves' telepathic ability. When Victoria and Riley appear, Seth fights and destroys Riley with Edward's help. In "Breaking Dawn" he is shown to have developed an unlikely friendship with Edward, and attends his and Bella's wedding. Seth remains a constant presence throughout the final book in the series. He is initially the only wolf to feel completely comfortable being around the Cullen family, and becomes friendly with them by the end of the series. 
Although young, Seth appears to have sharp mind and quick thinking as he was the first to oppose the assault towards the Cullens because the pack refused to consult with the Elders (which they were supposed to do and initially aborted the mission due to lack of offensive force) and he was the first to recognize that Jacob isn't thinking properly when he wanted to attack the Cullens after Bella's arrival from Brazil due to the treaty without proper investigation. Seth was also the first one to discover that different pack has their own mental link and convinced both Jacob and the Cullens that Sam's pack will not launch an assault due to lack members because it will be a suicide mission for Sam if he did. He also has, according to Edward, very honest and pure thoughts, something that endears him to the Cullens, and Edward in particular. When Jacob splits from the pack, Seth quickly joined him because he opposes Sam's plan to attack the Cullens, whom he has become fond of. For most of "Breaking Dawn", Seth is Jacob's second-in-command, until he is replaced by Leah at the end of the novel.
In the "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse", Seth is played by Boo Boo Stewart.
Collin Littlesea and Brady Fuller.
Collin Littlesea and Brady Fuller are two of the youngest wolves in the pack. In "Eclipse", they are said to have phased at the age of thirteen, and they later make an appearance in "Breaking Dawn" as part of Sam's pack.
Others.
There are seven additional wolves present at the end of "Breaking Dawn". These unknown wolves are believed to be very young because of their oversized paws. The reason for their transformations is the presence of many visiting vampires at the Cullen residence.
Ephraim Black.
Ephraim Black, great-grandfather to Jacob Black, was the last chief of the Quileute tribe. He was a shape-shifter himself, and the Alpha of a pack of three which included Levi Uley and Quil Ateara Sr., the great-grandfathers of Sam Uley and Quil Ateara, respectively. He created a treaty with the Cullen family which maintained that the wolves would not expose the Cullens as vampires as long as they did not bite any humans.
Humans.
Charlie Swan.
Charlie Swan is Bella Swan's father and works as a police officer in Forks. His hobbies include fishing with Harry Clearwater and Billy Black, as well as watching various sports on TV. Charlie married Bella's mother, Renée, just after they both graduated high school, and they soon had Bella. Renée divorced Charlie not long after and moved to Phoenix, Arizona with Bella. Bella later mentions that Charlie still has not quite gotten over her mother. He became accustomed to living alone, except when Bella visited him in the summer. When Bella is seventeen, she moves to Forks to live with him after her mother remarries. Initially, Charlie accepts Edward as his daughter's boyfriend, but after the events of "New Moon" he blames Edward for Bella's deep depression after he left her. Charlie is grateful to Jacob Black for his friendship with Bella during that difficult time, and he makes it clear that he'd rather Bella choose Jacob over Edward. At the end of "Eclipse", Bella and Edward agree to tell Charlie about their engagement, and he is shown to have reluctantly agreed to the marriage at the beginning of "Breaking Dawn". Charlie stays in Bella's life after her transformation; though he comes to suspect that Bella and the Cullens are not quite human, he is never informed that they are vampires though he is informed that Jacob is a werewolf. Nevertheless, he is introduced to his granddaughter, Renesmee, and is shown to be very fond of her. At the end of "Breaking Dawn", he and Sue Clearwater have developed a romantic relationship.
Charlie is portrayed by Billy Burke in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon", and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Renée Dwyer.
Renée Dwyer (formerly Renée Swan) married Charlie Swan right after high school, but left with their baby, Bella, and divorced him soon after. Renée is an eccentric, silly person who tends to brave new, risky things and then come to her senses later. Bella always felt herself to be the mother in their relationship, having to guide Renée away from doing ridiculous things, and Renée considered Bella her "middle-aged" child. After Renée remarries a much younger baseball player, Phil Dwyer, Bella sends herself to live with her father in Forks so that Renée and Phil can travel together. Edward describes Renée's mind as being insightful and almost childlike. In "Breaking Dawn", Bella is scared to tell her mother about her engagement to Edward because of Renée's strong opposition to young people marrying early, but Renée gives them her blessing. It is said that Bella resembles her mother, but that Renée has shorter hair and laugh lines. In "Twilight" she lives in Phoenix, Arizona, and in Jacksonville, Florida throughout the rest of the series. After Bella becomes a vampire she does not visit her mother, knowing Renée would never adapt to her change as Charlie did.
Renée is portrayed by Sarah Clarke in "Twilight" and in "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Harry Clearwater.
Harry Clearwater was an elder of the Quileute tribe who died of a heart attack in "New Moon". He left behind a wife, Sue, a daughter Leah, and a son, Seth. After Bella learns that Jacob is a werewolf, it is Harry and Billy Black who keep Charlie Swan occupied in La Push in to protect him from Victoria and her army of newborn vampires.
Harry is portrayed by Graham Greene in "The Twilight Saga: New Moon".
Billy Black.
Billy Black is Jacob Black's father, born and raised in La Push, and an elder of the Quileute tribe. He is described as being heavyset, having a wrinkled face and russet skin, and having black hair and black eyes. His other family members include his two daughters, Rachel and Rebecca, and his deceased wife, Sarah. Billy Black is directly descended from the last chief of the Quileute tribe, Ephraim Black, who was his grandfather. Among Billy's best friends in Forks is Bella Swan's father, Charlie Swan. Billy, who has diabetes and uses a wheelchair, sells his truck to Charlie to give to Bella. At the end of "Twilight", he employed Jacob to persuade Bella to break up with Edward Cullen. He becomes a semi-regular character throughout the remaining series.
Billy Black is portrayed by Gil Birmingham in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon", and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Tyler Crowley.
Tyler Crowley is one of Bella's classmates. In "Twilight" he nearly hits Bella with his van, but she is saved by Edward. Afterward, Tyler is desperate to make it up to her, bombarding her with constant apologies and asking her to a school dance, to which she refuses. He mistakenly assumes she will go to their prom with him and tells the rest of the school, only to hear from Edward that Bella will be unavailable to anyone but himself. His constant attention toward Bella causes Lauren, who is interested in him, to resent Bella.
Tyler is portrayed by Gregory Tyree Boyce in the "Twilight" film.
Lauren Mallory.
Lauren Mallory is a silver blonde, fishy-eyed student at Bella's high school. Despite being popular herself, she becomes jealous over the attention Bella receives after she moves to Forks and remains hostile toward her throughout the series. She is particularly jealous when Tyler Crowley, on whom Lauren has a crush, pays attention to Bella. She also tends to speak in a rather sneering tone, which Bella notices when she overhears Lauren talking about her.
In the films, Lauren's character was combined with that of Jessica Stanley, who is played by Anna Kendrick.
Mike Newton.
Mike Newton is a friendly boy who initially has a crush on Bella, though Bella does not return his affections. In "Twilight", he is described as a "cute, baby-faced boy" with "carefully" spiked "pale blond" hair. He crushes on Bella throughout the series and often asks her to accompany him on dates, though she always declines; he is also shown to be quite bitter and jealous over Bella and Edward's relationship. In "New Moon", Mike goes to the movies with Jacob and Bella and tries hard to compete with Jacob for Bella's attention. Mike's family owns a local sporting goods store, which serves as Bella's only job in the series. Mike and Jessica date in "Twilight" and are together again in "Breaking Dawn" at Bella and Edward's wedding, where Edward irritatedly comments that "Mike's having difficulty with improper thoughts about a married woman", suggesting that Mike is still attracted to Bella.
Mike is portrayed by Michael Welch in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Jessica Stanley.
Jessica Stanley is Bella's classmate and her first friend in Forks. She informs Bella about the Cullen family on her first day at school. She tends to be more interested in Bella's popularity than Bella's actual character, and is sometimes jealous of Mike's attention toward Bella. In an excerpt from "Midnight Sun", Edward hears that Jessica's thoughts toward Bella are actually quite rude, and that she only befriended Bella to share in her attention. Jessica is described as a petite "chatterbox" with curly dark hair. She and Bella have a falling out in "New Moon" because of Bella's social withdrawal, depression, and increasingly reckless behavior due to Edward's departure, but their friendship ends on a good note at graduation during "Eclipse". Jessica appears briefly in "Breaking Dawn" as a guest at Bella and Edward's wedding, which she attends with Mike. Jessica is valedictorian of her graduating class in the film version of "Eclipse".
Jessica is portrayed by Anna Kendrick in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Angela Weber.
Angela Weber is a friend and classmate of Bella's who is described as a tall, shy, quiet, and very kind girl. In an excerpt from "Midnight Sun", she is revealed to be among the few of Bella's newly acquired "friends" who do not exploit Bella's popularity to their own advantage. She has light brown hair and soft brown eyes. She respects other people's space, a characteristic much appreciated by Bella, and has a gentle disposition. Angela plays a minor role in the series but soon becomes Bella's best human friend. She has a strong relationship with her boyfriend, Ben Cheney. In "Breaking Dawn" her role is limited; her father reads Bella and Edward's vows at their wedding, and she catches Bella's bouquet.
Angela is portrayed by Christian Serratos in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Eric Yorkie.
Eric Yorkie is a classmate of Bella's who immediately became interested in her when she moved to Forks. He is described as an "overly helpful" chess-club type, is very tall, has a poor complexion, and has "hair as black as an oil slick". He resents Mike's similar interest in Bella, and, later in "Twilight", is seen walking away after Mike is hit with a snowball. He invites Bella to a school dance, but she declines, and he goes with Angela Weber instead. Eric is valedictorian of his graduating class in the book "Eclipse".
Eric is portrayed by Justin Chon in "Twilight", "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Emily Young.
Emily Young is Sam Uley's fiancée and second cousin to Leah and Seth Clearwater. She is described as having copper skin, raven black hair, and three long disfiguring scars running down the right side of her face and down her arms as the result of Sam's accidental loss of control in phasing when standing close to her. Though she and Leah are only second cousins, it is said that they were like sisters when they were young. While dating Leah, Sam imprinted upon Emily when she was visiting in La Push and began pursuing her. She was initially furious with him and rejected his advances; however, the adoration and loyalty that result from imprinting are difficult for even the imprintee to resist, and the accident eventually brought them together.
Emily, who is described as a cheerful, friendly person, befriends Bella in "New Moon". The left side of her face is extremely beautiful, as she was before the scars, which pull one of her eyes down and tug on the side of her mouth, causing her to have a scowl on one side of her face. Despite this, Emily bears no resentment towards Sam or any other members of the pack, and it is noted that the pack members have become her family. She often cooks for them and they appear to feel very comfortable and open in her house.
Emily is portrayed by Tinsel Korey in "The Twilight Saga: New Moon" and "The Twilight Saga: Eclipse".
Sue Clearwater.
Sue Clearwater is the widow of Harry Clearwater, who died in "New Moon" of a heart attack. Sue has two children, Seth and Leah, who are both werewolves. In "Breaking Dawn", Sue starts spending a lot of time with Charlie and occasionally cooks him meals after Bella moves out of his house. Near the end of "Breaking Dawn", Bella hints that Sue and Charlie are romantically involved.
J. Jenks.
Jason Jenks (alias Jason Scott) is a middle aged, balding attorney and forger of legal documents. Alice sends Bella to him when it seems likely that Renesmee and Jacob will need to go on the run to escape the Volturi. Jenks, having previously worked with Jasper several times, has a great fear of the Cullen family due to Jasper's belief that "some kinds of working relationships are better motivated by fear than by monetary gain". Bella employs Jenks to forge birth certificates, passports, and a driver's license for Jacob and Renesmee, and over the course of their relationship he starts to become more comfortable around her than he is with Jasper. An honorable man, he initially expresses reservations about giving Bella the documents she requests, under the belief that she intends to use them to kidnap Renesmee from her father, despite his fear that this might earn him the Cullen family's retribution. Bella assures him that this is not the case, and she decides afterwards to take over all relations with Jenks in order to spare him any further stress that Jasper might cause him.
J. Jenks is played by Wendell Pierce in .
