Gabriel S. Macht (born January 22, 1972) is an American actor. Macht is known for playing The Spirit in the film of the same name, and lately for his role as Harvey Specter on the USA Network series "Suits".
Personal life.
Macht was born in The Bronx, New York, the son of Suzanne Victoria Pulier, a museum curator and archivist, and actor Stephen Macht. He has three siblings, Jesse, a musician (who appeared on "The Next Great American Band"), Ari Serbin, and Julie. The family moved to California when Gabriel was five years old. Following high school, he attended Carnegie Mellon College of Fine Arts, graduating in 1994. During his time at Carnegie Mellon, he was a member of the Delta Upsilon fraternity.
Macht married Australian-born actress Jacinda Barrett in 2004. The couple had their first child, a girl, Satine Anais Geraldine Macht, born August 20, 2007 in Los Angeles.
He has been friends with his "Suits" co-star Sarah Rafferty for over 20 years and during the filming of the show in Toronto, they share a house.
Macht is from a Jewish family.
Career.
Macht was nominated for the Best Young Motion Picture Actor Award after playing his first role at age eight in the film "Why Would I Lie?" under the stage name Gabriel Swann. He has appeared in many film and television roles including "A Love Song for Bobby Long", "Because I Said So", "The Recruit", and "Archangel". For the 2001 film "Behind Enemy Lines", Macht spent a week at sea filming on the flight deck, corridors, and hangar bay #3 of the "USS Carl Vinson". Macht played the title role in Frank Miller's 2008 adaptation of Will Eisner's comic creation "The Spirit". Although the film was a failure upon theatrical release, the film and Macht himself both gained a cult following.
In July 2010, it was announced that Macht had signed on to star in the new USA drama "Suits", formerly known as "A Legal Mind". On August 11, 2011, "Suits" was renewed for a second season of 16 episodes. On October 12, 2012, USA Network renewed "Suits" for a third season, to consist of 16 episodes.
