Cthulhu is a fictional cosmic entity who first appeared in the short story "The Call of Cthulhu", published in the pulp magazine "Weird Tales" in 1928. The character was created by writer H. P. Lovecraft.
Spelling and pronunciation.
Cthulhu has also been spelled as "Tulu, Clulu, Clooloo, Cthulu, Cthullu, C'thulhu, Cighulu, Cathulu, C'thlu, Kathulu, Kutulu, Kthulhu, Q’thulu, K'tulu, Kthulhut, Kulhu, Kutunluu, Ktulu, Cuitiliú, Thu Thu," and in many other ways. It is often preceded by the epithet "Great, Dead," or "Dread."
Lovecraft transcribed the pronunciation of "Cthulhu" as "Khlûl'-hloo" ( ?). S. T. Joshi points out, however, that Lovecraft gave several differing pronunciations on different occasions. According to Lovecraft, this is merely the closest that the human vocal apparatus can come to reproducing the syllables of an alien language. Long after Lovecraft's death, the pronunciation became common, and the game "Call of Cthulhu" endorsed it.
Appearance.
In The Call of Cthulhu, Lovecraft describes Cthulhu as "A monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind." Cthulhu has been described as a mix between a giant human, an octopus and a dragon, and is depicted as being hundreds of meters tall, with human-looking arms and legs and a pair of rudimentary wings on its back. Cthulhu's head is depicted as similar to the entirety of a giant octopus, with an unknown number of tentacles surrounding its supposed mouth. Cthulhu is described as being able to change the shape of its body at will, extending and retracting limbs and tentacles as it sees fit.
Publication history.
H. P. Lovecraft's initial short story, "The Call of Cthulhu", was published in "Weird Tales" in 1928 and established the character as a malevolent entity hibernating within an underwater city in the South Pacific called "R'lyeh". The imprisoned Cthulhu is apparently the source of constant anxiety for mankind at a subconscious level, and also the subject of worship by a number of religions (located in New Zealand, Greenland, Louisiana, and the Chinese mountains) and other Lovecraftian monsters (called Deep Ones and Mi-Go). The short story asserts the premise that, while currently trapped, Cthulhu will eventually return. His worshipers chant ""Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn"" ("In his house at "R'lyeh", dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.")
Lovecraft conceived a detailed genealogy for Cthulhu (published as "Letter 617" in "Selected Letters") and made the character a central figure in corresponding literature. The short story "The Dunwich Horror" (1928) refers to Cthulhu, while "The Whisperer in Darkness" (1930) hints that one of his characters knows the creature's origins ("I learned whence Cthulhu first came, and why half the great temporary stars of history had flared forth."). The 1931 novella "At the Mountains of Madness" refers to the "star-spawn of Cthulhu", who warred with another race called the Elder Things before the dawn of man.
According to Derleth's scheme, "Great Cthulhu is one of the Water Beings" and was engaged in an age-old arch-rivalry with a designated Air elemental, Hastur the Unspeakable, described as Cthulhu's "half-brother". Based on this framework, Derleth wrote a series of short stories published in "Weird Tales" 1944–1952 and collected as "The Trail of Cthulhu", depicting the struggle of a Dr. Laban Shrewsbury and his associates against Cthulhu and his minions. 
Derleth's interpretations have been criticised by Lovecraft enthusiast Michel Houellebecq. Houellebecq's "H P Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life" (2005) decries Derleth for attempting to reshape Lovecraft's strictly amoral continuity into a stereotypical conflict between forces of objective good and evil.
The character's influence also extended into recreational literature: games company TSR included an entire chapter on the Cthulhu mythos (including statistics for the character) in the first printing of "Dungeons & Dragons" sourcebook "Deities & Demigods" (1980). TSR, however, were unaware that Arkham House—copyright holder on almost all Lovecraft literature—had already licensed the Cthulhu property to the game company Chaosium. Although Chaosium stipulated that TSR could continue to use the material if each future edition featured a published credit to Chaosium, TSR refused and the material was removed from all subsequent editions.
Legacy.
Artist Stephen Hickman created a statue of Cthulhu, which is featured in "Spectrum 3: The Best in Contemporary Fantastic Art" and is exhibited in the John Hay Library of Brown University of Providence.
The Californian spider species "Pimoa cthulhu", described by Gustavo Hormiga in 1994, is named with reference to Cthulhu.
