Inkaar is a 2013 Indian romance crime film, directed by Sudhir Mishra, starring Arjun Rampal and Chitrangada Singh in the lead roles. Shantanu Moitra has composed the music. Deepti Naval, Vipin Sharma, Gaurav Dwivedi are featured in supporting roles. The film was produced and distributed under the Viacom 18 Motion Pictures and the Tipping Point Films banners. The film deals with sexual harassment in corporate set-up. The movie follows the story of Rahul Verma, the CEO of an ad advertising company, who has to follow the lawsuit of sexual harassment filed by Maya Luthra, his protégé. The two are battling for the top job of the company. A committee is set up by the agency to hear both sides of the story and work through the layers of lies and accusations to find out the truth. 
The development of the film commenced in 2011. The movie was completed in early 2012 and was titled ""Inkaar"". It was scheduled to release in May but conflicts started rising over the title of the movie which delayed its release. After a lot of options, ""Kaam"" was chosen as the title but ultimately ""Inkaar"" was finalized to be the title. 
After the title conflict was resolved, the release date of the movie was delayed to 2013. The movie was released on 18 January 2013. The film received positive to mixed responses but the performances of the lead pair and the direction of Sudhir Mishra earned positive reviews from critics. The movie took a very dull start at the box office and grossed in the first week.
Plot.
At one of India's leading ad agencies, the battle for the top job between Rahul Verma (Arjun Rampal), a venerated advertising CEO, and Maya Luthra (Chitrangada Singh) his ambitious protégé takes a dramatic turn when she files a sexual harassment complaint against him. Now its the job of the committee headed by Mrs. Kamdhar (Deepti Naval) set up by the agency to hear both sides of the story and work through the layers of lies and accusations to find out who's really telling the truth and who's lying. The stakes are high because only one of them (Rahul or Maya) will walk away with their reputation intact and get the top job. Will the committee really be able to uncover the truth? How will the agency deal with the dilemma of choosing between its two most talented people?
Production.
Casting.
In mid-2011, Sudhir Mishra announced that he was creating a new movie based on the topic of sexual harassment. Arjun Rampal was cast in to play the male protagonist and Chitrangada Singh, who had previously worked with Mishra in "Hazaaron Khwaishein Aisi" (2005) and "Yeh Saali Zindagi" (2011) was cast to portray the female protagonist. This film marked her third collaboration with Mishra. Mishra is known for directing niche movies. However, in an interview with Bollywood Hungama, the lead actress Singh said that it was a commercial film. The film was created on a budget of .
Filming.
Filming took place between late 2011 to early 2012. The film was extensively shot in actual advertising agencies including Leo Burnett Worldwide and Grey Worldwide. It was announced that the film would release in May 2012.
Controversy.
Title Conflict.
The initial title of Sudhir Mishra's next project with Arjun Rampal and Chitrangada Singh was chosen to be "Inkaar" but after the completion of filming, a title conflict rose as Mishra and the production team decided to opt a title out of six titles for the film based on its story. New five titles were "Dream Factory", "Power Play", "Agency", "Yeh Kahan Aa Gaye Hum" and "The Boss". Mishra stated in an interview with Bollywood Hungama, "Our film is about gender politics and power play in a corporate house. Given this brief, we'll decide which title suits the film the best and we'll go by it." After some conflict, the title was chosen to be "Kaam – The Unofficial Story". The release date was delayed to 25 August but "Kaam" was also removed as a title as the release date came closer. After four title hunts, the original title "Inkaar" was finalized as the title of the movie. The release date of the movie was pushed to 18 January, thus making it one of the early films of 2013.
Ad Agencies.
In late 2012, news circulated that ad agencies in which "Inkaar" was filmed refused any kind of association with the film. Leo Burnett Worldwide and Grey Worldwide agencies in which "Inkaar" was extensively shot, warned the production team that they did not want any branding or reference to their respective agencies in the film.
Release.
Critical reception.
"Inkaar" earned positive to mixed response from critics. Rachit Gupta of "Filmfare" gave 4 out of 5 stars. He appreciated the performances of the lead pair and quoted "What works is the chemistry between Arjun Rampal and Chitrangda Singh. Not just their individual performances but their love-hate relationship drives the drama of Inkaar. Both Arjun and Chitrangda handle their characters to great effect. But good performances can give you a watchable film, but not a believable story. And that is the big letdown in Inkaar. The film’s logic and the climax just don’t make sense. Not from characters who spent the last two hours (or seven years in case of the movie’s narrative) convincing you that they’d do anything to come out on top. A film that promises to hit you hard in the solar plexus, doesn’t even tickle you." "India Today" wrote "The dynamics of office politics have never been more dynamic. "Inkaar" is one helluva jolt in January." Rummana Ahmed of Yahoo! Movies wrote "What works for 'Inkaar' is the solid performances by the lead characters and the supporting cast. Arjun might not been very strong in the emotional bits but he delivers one of his best performances till date. Chitrangda looks and acts sharp, it’s a pleasure to watch Vipin Sharma, Deepti Naval and Kanwaljeet on the big screen after quite a while. Shantanu Moitra music is as usual peppy and hummable. This one is definitely a must watch." Karan Anshuman of "Mumbai Mirror" gave 4 out of 5 stars, quoting ""Inkaar" is not about office politics as you might imagine, even though many moments shape an accurate portrayal. It is not about sexual harassment in the workplace as it is being marketed though that is the searing crucible in which complex, often unnatural dollops of human emotion are left to sputter and interact, never coalescing. Everything else is an elaborate backdrop. And finally when the truth unravels – when motives come to light – I had a great urge to watch the film again. And with movies, this urge supersedes all flaws."
Ananya Bhattacharya of Zee News wrote "'Inkaar' is another of Sudhir Mishra's brilliances captured on celluloid. Don't say a 'no' to this one." Mayank Shekhar of Daily Bhaskar.com wrote "In parts thoughtful, engaging and funny, this is a film then about ambition. As for sexual harassment, I would go with the women’s rights activist (Deepti Naval) judging this case: “Flirtation agar woman ko pasand na ho, toh harassment hoti hai.” If I were you, I’d definitely go for this movie too!" Prathamesh Jadhav of BollywoodLife praised the direction, techniques and performances of the cast. He gave 3.5 stars, quoting "In a nutshell, "Inkaar" arrests your attention with brilliant performances from its actors, sharp editing, excellent screenplay and director Sudhir Mishra's ability to tell a compelling story with an urge to drive home a solid point. Don't deny yourself this cinematic treat!" Shivesh Kumar of IndiaWeekly awarded the movie 3.5 out of 5 stars.
Taran Adarsh wrote "INKAAR is for spectators of serious cinema. Caters to a niche audience!" Martin D'Souza of Glamsham gave 3 stars and wrote "INKAAR is not your regular cinema. Mishra has tackled a very relevant subject. If you are willing to experiment with cinema that breaks the norms, then INKAAR is definitely for you." Saibal Chatterjee of NDTV Movies gave 3 out of 5 stars, writing "Inkaar does not dabble either in ‘yes’ and ‘no’, or in black and white. ‘May be’ and ‘perhaps’, in other words a whole lot of grays, underline the conclusions that it seeks to draw from what is obviously a complex thematic proposition." Srijana Mitra Das of "Times of India" gave 3 out of 5 stars, quoting ""Inkaar" is like that. Polished-looking, its edges - the tension of feeling harassed at work, office politics, ego flashes - hold rather well. But its centre collapses in a soft mess." Gautam Batra and Roma Heer rated it 3 out of 5 stars saying "Inkaar is a movie that will appeal to very small part of audience but it is definitely a good movie. Go for it for Sudhir Mishra’s direction & to see a fresh story onscreen."
Khalid Mohamed of "Deccan Chronicle" gave 2.5 out of 5 stars, writing "'Inkaar,' directed and co-written by Sudhir Mishra, may be thematically topical and significant since it deals with the exploitation of women at the workplace, but it’s the director’s tamest work yet. It’s just not in the league of his classy 'Hazaaron Khwaishen Hain' or 'Yeh Saali Zindagi' –primarily because it is overloaded with ping-ponging flashbacks, the content is toothpick thin and at points, seems to be located in the last millennium." Mansha Rastogi wrote "What happens to be a potent seed for a crackling story, Inkaar gets mired by the cliches of conventionalism and loses its steam. Watch it still for the brilliant performances and gripping narrative."
Sukanya Verma of Rediff.com has given 2 out of 5 stars, quoting ""Inkaar" trivialises something serious like sexual harassment into a terrible joke." Aniruddha Guha of "Daily News and Analysis" gave 2 out of 5 stars, writing "Sudhir Mishra seems to be in a weird space as a filmmaker right now. His penchant for simple storytelling and real, complex characters have resulted in some great films, and he tries to juggle his strengths with more mainstream elements in "Inkaar". Nothing wrong with that, except that the result is an unfortunately botched attempt at portraying a relevant issue, even as Mishra struggles to strike a balance between style and substance. The film starts out with promise, but a jarringly loud background score, hammy actors and a cliched ending ruin whatever chance "Inkaar" had at being considered watchable." Janhavi Samant of "Mid Day" gave 2 out of 5 stars, quoting "One expected more maturity from a Sudhir Mishra film." Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave 2 out of 5 stars as she wrote "This is a half watchable film despite all that melodrama flying around. Sadly, if it had kept its head, this thriller could have gone places." Roshni Devi of Koimoi.com gave 2 out of 5 stars, writing ""Inkaar" is a stylishly done movie that has very little else to offer in term of acting or performances." Suparna Sharma of Asianage wrote "For most part, "Inkaar" is expertly conceived. The director plays with us — he releases facts in driblets, paints his characters in grey tones and keeps us attentive and nicely ambivalent. There are moments, several ones in fact, when he could have, should have stopped. But he takes the film to a point where you wonder whether Inkaar really is made by Sudhir Mishra, he of unflinching cynicism and love for the tragic." Shubhra Gupta of "The Indian Express" wrote "Inkaar could have been truly radical. But it becomes a film that prefers to cop out, rather than deliver on the promise it held out so bravely in its initial passages." Sonia Chopra of Sify wrote "The film has taken an important subject and turned it into slush. In the end the film is a mockery of sexual harassment, of love, of the ad fraternity and of professionalism. Too bad, really."
Shalu Dhyani of BollySpice gave 1 out of 5 stars, quoting "A badly made film can still be forgiven to an extent if its intentions are good. However, "Inkaar" flatters to deceive. It promises to take on sexual harassment but dishes out a boring saga of office politics instead, which further turns out to be a convoluted love story. Handling a sensitive issue with sensitivity was something I thought I could expect from Sudhir Mishra, but his refusal to take a strong stand and then ending the film on such an infuriating note left me feeling thoroughly let down."
Box office.
"Inkaar" was released on 18 January 2013. The movie took a very dull start with 15% occupancy rate in multiplexes and major metros. It collected only in the opening day. The movie did not show any significant growth in business and collected only in the opening weekend. The film managed to earn within the first week and collected a total of approximately in the first week. "Inkaar" was declared a flop at the box office.
Soundtrack.
Music is composed by Shantanu Moitra. Musicperk rated the album 6.5/10 quoting "Needs time to grow! Might be better with visuals". Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave negative reviews to the album and rated it 2 out of 5, quoting ""Inkaar" turns out to be an out and out situational outing that doesn't really throw any chartbuster numbers. Even from being attached to the film from situational perspective, the end results are just about fine and one doesn't really foresee a long lasting feel to them." Suparna Sharma of Asianage gave 2 out of 5 stars, quoting "Sudhir Mishra's films usually have very good music, but here only Papon's rendition of the title song is going into my iPod. His voice has a transportive quality and offers the much required escape from the film's last 10-15 minutes."
