Aahoo Jahansouz "Sarah" Shahi (born January 10, 1980) is an American actress and former NFL Cheerleader. She played Kate Reed in the USA legal drama "Fairly Legal" from 2011-2012. She also appeared in supporting roles in "The L Word" and "Life".
Early life.
Shahi was born and grew up in Euless, Texas. She is the daughter of Mah Monir, an interior designer, and Abbas Jahansouz Shahi. Her father is from Iran, and her mother is from Spain. She has one older brother and a younger sister. Her father's family left Iran two years before the Iranian Revolution. Her birth name, Aahoo () means "gazelle" in Persian. She is a descendant of Fath-Ali Shah Qajar of the Qajar Dynasty, who ruled Iran from 1797-1834.
Shahi adopted Sarah as her name in second grade, after hearing the song "Sarah", because she was "tormented" by other children. At her father's behest she grew up speaking Persian, as well as English. Shahi's parents began entering her in beauty pageants at the age of eight. Her parents divorced when she was 10. Shahi attended Trinity High School, where she was captain of the volleyball and basketball teams, and Dallas' Southern Methodist University, majoring in English and Theater. Shahi won the Miss Fort Worth USA pageant in 1997; hoping to become an actress, she joined the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders 1999–2000 squad despite not having cheered before, and appeared on the cover of the squad's 2000 calendar before moving to Los Angeles.
Acting career.
While working as an extra on the set of "Dr. T and the Women" in Texas, Shahi met director Robert Altman, who encouraged her to move to Hollywood, where she received roles in several series, including "Alias", "Dawson's Creek", "Reba", and "Supernatural". She may be best known for her role as DJ Carmen de la Pica Morales on "The L Word", which she joined in its second season. Shahi did not renew her contract with the series for the fourth season, and consequently her character was written out. She also played Farah in the second season of "Sleeper Cell", and also appeared in HBO's "The Sopranos", in the Season 6b episode "Kennedy and Heidi" as "Sonya Aragon", a stripper and college student who spends a weekend with Tony after a death in his family. 
She co-starred with Damian Lewis in the two-season NBC series "Life" as homicide detective Dani Reese.
In October 2009, Shahi landed the lead role in the USA Network pilot, "Facing Kate". Shahi began filming in November 2009. The show follows the life of Kate Reed, a legal mediator who is frustrated with the bureaucracy and injustice she witnesses in the legal system. The series title was later changed to "Fairly Legal". The show was cancelled after two seasons in November 2012.
Shahi was cast as a recurring love interest for Taylor Kinney's character Lt. Kelly Severide on NBC's show "Chicago Fire" in October, 2012.
She was also cast as a regular on "Person of Interest" as Sam Shaw. She was featured in the sixteenth episode of the second season, "Relevance", which aired in February 2013.
Personal life.
Shahi married actor Steve Howey on February 7, 2009, in Las Vegas. On July 8, 2009, Shahi gave birth to their first child, son William Wolf Howey. Shahi gave birth during an at-home water birth.
Shahi was named no. 90 on the "Maxim" magazine "Hot 100 of 2005" list; she moved up to no. 66 in 2006 and rose to no. 36 in 2012. She ranked no. 5 on the AfterEllen.com hot list in 2007.
