Ashley Victoria Benson (born December 18, 1989) is an American actress and model best known as Hanna Marin on "Pretty Little Liars" and as Abby on "Days Of Our Lives"
Early life.
Ashley Benson was born and raised in Anaheim Hills, Anaheim, California. She has an older sister, Shaylene (a Laker Girl) and her parents are Shannon and Jeff Benson. She started dancing competitively in ballet, jazz, hip-hop, and lyrical at age 4. She also enjoys singing, and has appeared in several choir groups and musicals. At age 4, she was asked to audition to sing solo at four Christmas services at her 2,500-member church. At 5, she modeled in dance catalogs, and at 8 she was pursued by The Ford Modeling Agency and worked steadily in print thereafter. She made a very brief appearance on "Zoey 101", in the episode "Quinn's Date". She has also performed in NLT's music video "That Girl", One Call's music video "BlackLight" and Hot Chelle Rae's music video "Honestly."
Career.
In 1999, Benson started pursuing an acting career. She began working and appearing on a number of commercials, but quickly made the transition into film and television. In 2004, Benson signed a three-year contract with the daytime television series, "Days of our Lives", and on November 12, 2004 began her role as Abigail "Abby" Deveraux, the oldest child of supercouple Jack Deveraux and Jennifer Horton, until May 2, 2007. She explained that, because of the number of episodes filmed a day, "you can't really mess up; you have to know all of your lines", and that she did not get a break from work.
She recalled working on a movie set instead of a soap opera set "definitely weird", because she would spend days working on one or two scenes, whereas on the "Days of our Lives" set, she filmed two or three episodes a day. For "Bring It On: In It to Win It", she had to attend cheerleading practice, which was "hard for because [she is afraid of heights." Nonetheless, she was "glad" to do her own stunts, even though she "wasn't expecting for it to be so hard."
In 2008, she appeared in the Lifetime TV movie "," where she played head cheerleader Brooke of the Fab Five, which is based on a true story which took place at McKinney North High School in Texas. She "loved" working with her onscreen mother Tatum O'Neal, from whom she learned about acting. Furthermore, she was excited to land a supporting role in "Bart Got a Room", which aired mainly on film festivals in 2008 before having a limited release in 2009, because it allowed her to work with William H. Macy.
Benson starred in ABC's 2009 television series "Eastwick". The show was based on John Updike's novel, "The Witches of Eastwick", and the 1987 film adaption of the same name. Her character, Mia, was the teen-aged daughter of Roxie Torcoletti (Rebecca Romijn). The series was short-lived and only lasted 13 episodes before ABC cancelled the series due to low ratings but has since gained a cult following.
In December 2009, Benson was cast as Hanna Marin in the ABC Family Teen Drama television series "Pretty Little Liars" based on the book series by Sara Shepard. The series premiered to a successful 2.47 million viewers with Benson's performance being praised by critics. The series third season premiered on June 5, 2012. The role is considered Ashley's breakout role. In 2010 Benson starred in the Made-for-Television film "Christmas Cupid" with Christina Milian and Chad Michael Murray which also aired on ABC Family.
In January 2012, Benson replaced actress Emma Roberts in the drama-comedy film "Spring Breakers" after Roberts dropped out due to creative reasons. The film centers on four college students who are arrested and bailed out by a drug and arms dealer who sends them out to do some dirty work on Spring Break. The film stars Selena Gomez, Vanessa Hudgens and James Franco. Filming took place in March and April 2012. 
In May 2012, she was seen in an episode of Punk'd alongside Joe Jonas, who was supposed to get punked but he saw one of the cameras and figured it out.
Benson became the face of evening-wear designer Faviana in January 2013.
In the January 21, 2013 episode of How I Met Your Mother, Benson appeared as Carly Whittaker, Barney Stinson's half-sister who dated Ted Mosby.
