Christina Rene Hendricks (born May 3, 1975) is an American actress who plays Joan Harris on the AMC cable television series "Mad Men" and played Saffron on the FOX series "Firefly". A poll of female readers taken by "Esquire" magazine named Hendricks "the sexiest woman in the world". In 2010, she was voted Best Looking American Woman by "Esquire" magazine.
Personal life.
Hendricks was born in Knoxville, Tennessee. Her mother, Jackie Sue (née Raymond), was a psychologist. Her father, Robert Hendricks, who worked for the United States Forest Service, was from Birmingham, England. Through her father, she has dual U.S./U.K. nationality. Her family moved because of her father's profession, living in Fairfax, Virginia; Portland, Oregon; and Twin Falls, Idaho. Hendricks is a natural blonde and began coloring her hair red at the age of 10 after reading "Anne of Green Gables". She plays the accordion, and used her talent on an episode of "Mad Men".
On October 11, 2009, Hendricks married actor Geoffrey Arend.
Career.
Hendricks began acting in children's musical theater productions in Twin Falls. She was a model from the ages of 18 to 27. She made a number of guest television appearances, starting as a regular in the series "Beggars and Choosers". Since then, she has starred in the series "The Big Time" and "The Court", opposite Sally Field and Craig Bierko, as well as the legal drama "Kevin Hill". She has also had recurring roles in "ER" and "Firefly" and guest-starred in episodes of "Angel", "Miss Match", "Tru Calling", "Presidio Med", "Without a Trace", and "Las Vegas". Hendricks starred opposite Kip Pardue in "South of Pico". "La Cucina", an award-winning indie film, premiered on Showtime in December 2009 and stars Hendricks as a writer opposite Joaquim de Almeida. She has appeared in four episodes of the NBC TV show "Life" in the recurring role of Olivia, detective Charlie Crews' soon-to-be stepmother and Ted Earley's love interest. She also starred in music videos for "The Ghost Inside" by Broken Bells, and Everclear's "One Hit Wonder". 
She plays Joan Harris on the AMC series "Mad Men" where Hendricks' character is the office manager of advertising agency Sterling Cooper Draper Pryce (SCDP), providing mentoring to a group of women who must deal with the come-ons and callousness of professional advertising executives.
She appeared in the action-thriller "Drive", directed by Nicolas Winding Refn, alongside Carey Mulligan and Ryan Gosling.
Cultural influence.
Hendricks has been credited as having an ideal shape for a woman.
British Equalities Minister Lynne Featherstone praised Hendricks' hourglass figure as an ideal shape for women, saying "Christina Hendricks is absolutely fabulous... We need more of these role models. There is such a sensation when there is a curvy role model. It shouldn't be so unusual." "Los Angeles Times" television critic Mary McNamara says her portrayal of Holloway has revolutionized perceptions of beauty on television. She has been called the "new modern ideal of Hollywood glamour—full figured, voluptuous; a throwback to the days of Marilyn Monroe, Jane Russell and Veronica Lake." British designer Vivienne Westwood selected her to represent its "Get A Life" Palladium jewelry collection in March 2011. Westwood described Hendricks as "the embodiment of beauty."
In recent times, Hendricks has moved away from accepting the term "full-figured" and once lambasted a reporter who used the term when interviewing her. Hendricks commented in September 2010 that the media is too focused on women's bodies and not their actual talents, "I was working my butt off on the show ["Mad Men"] and then all anyone was talking about was my body." A study by the British Association of Aesthetic Plastic Surgeons attributed a 10% rise in 2010 of the number of British women receiving breast augmentation surgery in part to Hendricks' influence.
