Keri Lynn Russell (born March 23, 1976) is an American actress and dancer. After appearing in a number of made-for-television films and series during the mid-1990s, she came to fame for portraying the title role of Felicity Porter on the series "Felicity", which ran from 1998 to 2002, and for which she won a Golden Globe Award. Russell has since appeared in several films, and currently stars in the FX television series "The Americans".
Early life.
Russell was born in Fountain Valley, California, the daughter of Stephanie (née Stephens), a homemaker, and David Russell, a Nissan Motors executive. She has an older brother, Todd, and a younger sister, Julie. The family lived in Coppell, Texas; Mesa, Arizona; and Highlands Ranch, Colorado, moving frequently because of the father's employment. Although Russell is best known for her acting, she studied at Starstruck dance studio in a suburb of Denver. Russell's dancing earned her a spot on the "Mickey Mouse Club."
Career.
1991–2002.
Russell first appeared on television at age 15 as a cast member of the "All-New Mickey Mouse Club" variety show on the Disney Channel. She was on the show from 1991 to 1994 (Seasons 4-6) and co-starred with future actor Ryan Gosling and future pop stars Christina Aguilera, Britney Spears, JC Chasez, Justin Timberlake.
In 1992, she appeared in "Honey, I Blew Up the Kid" alongside Rick Moranis and in 1993, had a role on the sitcom "Boy Meets World" as Mr. Feeny's niece. Russell appeared on "Married with Children" in a 1995 episode ("Radio Free Trumaine", production 9.24). She subsequently starred in several film and television roles, including the 1996 made-for-television film "The Babysitter's Seduction." That year she also had a role on the short-lived soap opera series "Malibu Shores."
In 1994, she appeared as the "other woman" in Bon Jovi's music video "Always" with Jack Noseworthy, Carla Gugino, and Jason Wiles.
In 1997, she appeared in two episodes of "Roar" alongside Heath Ledger.
From 1998 to 2002, Russell starred as the title character on the successful WB Network series "Felicity"; she won a Golden Globe for the role in 1999. Russell's long and curly hair was one of her character's defining characteristics. A drastic hairstyle change at the beginning of the show's second season was thought to cause a significant drop in the show's television ratings.
During the show's run, Russell appeared in the films "Eight Days a Week", "The Curve", and "Mad About Mambo", all of which received only limited releases in North America. Her next role was in the film "We Were Soldiers" (2002), playing the wife of a United States serviceman during the Vietnam War. The film was released two months before the end of "Felicity"'s run.
2003–present.
When "Felicity" ended, Russell moved to New York City and made her off-Broadway stage debut in 2004, appearing opposite Jeremy Piven, Andrew McCarthy, and Ashlie Atkinson in Neil LaBute's "Fat Pig". In 2005, she returned to television and film, beginning with an appearance in the Hallmark Hall of Fame television movie "The Magic of Ordinary Days", theatrical film "The Upside of Anger" (alongside Kevin Costner, Joan Allen and Evan Rachel Wood), and the television miniseries "Into the West". Directing "" in 2005, Abrams asked Russell to join the cast and she accepted. She was screen tested for the role of Lois Lane in "Superman Returns" but lost the role to Kate Bosworth. 
She played "Melody" on the NBC show "Scrubs" in 2007. She starred as "Jenna" in "Waitress", which marks the fourth time Russell had played a pregnant woman. Russell's performance was positively received by critics, with Michael Sragow of "The Baltimore Sun" writing that Russell's performance had "aesthetic character" and "wields tenderness and fierceness with quiet heat". She has completed roles in "" (titled "Rohtenburg" for its German release), in which she plays Katie Armstrong, a graduate student who writes a thesis paper on an infamous cannibal murder case, and the thriller "The Girl in the Park", opposite Sigourney Weaver, Kate Bosworth and Alessandro Nivola. 
Russell next appeared in "August Rush", released in November, 2007. She also appeared on the cover of the "New York Post"'s Page Six magazine on November 11, 2007.
Russell later appeared in "Bedtime Stories". In an appearance on "The View" on December 15, 2008, Russell said she got the part because Sandler's wife Jackie had seen Russell in "Waitress" and suggested her for the movie. She starred alongside Brendan Fraser and Harrison Ford in the Tom Vaughan-helmed "Extraordinary Measures" for CBS Films. The drama, which started filming on April 6, 2009 and was released on January 22, 2010, was the first film to go into production for the new company. 
Russell played Aileen Crowley, a mother who tries to build a normal home life for her sick children while her husband, John (Fraser), and an unconventional scientist (Ford) race against time to find a cure. Russell played Emmy Kadubic in the premiere season of "Running Wilde", a Fox comedy series cancelled in May 2011.
In the summer of 2006, Russell was chosen to be a celebrity spokeswoman for CoverGirl Cosmetics. In the summer of 2007, Russell appeared in "The Keri Kronicles", a reality show/sitcom sponsored by CoverGirl and airing on MySpace; the show was filmed at Russell's home in Manhattan and spotlighted her life.
Russell voiced Wonder Woman in a direct-to-video animated feature released March 3, 2009.
Russell has worked with the FX network twice, the first time on the original FOX/FX series "Running Wilde", from 2010 to 2011, and again in 2013 in the new series "The Americans", playing a deep undercover KGB spy living as an American in the early 1980s.
Personal life.
Russell and Shane Deary, a carpenter she met through mutual friends, became engaged in 2006 and were married on February 14, 2007 in New York. The couple have two children: son River Russell Deary (born June 9, 2007) and daughter Willa Lou Deary (born December 27, 2011).
