Madhuri Dixit (born 15 May 1967) is an Indian film actress who has appeared in Hindi films. Often cited as one of the best actresses in Bollywood, Dixit made her film debut in "Abodh" (1984) and received wider public recognition with "Tezaab" (1988). She went on to establish herself as one of Hindi cinema's leading actresses, acknowledged for several of her performances, her beauty, and her accomplished dancing.
Some of her proceeding films include such box-office hits as "Dil" (1990), "Saajan" (1991), "Beta" (1992), "Khalnayak" (1993), "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!" (1994) and "Raja" (1995). After a relatively low phase, she reinvented herself with the romance "Dil To Pagal Hai" (1997) and subsequently received critical acclaim for her work in films like "Mrityudand" (1997), "Pukar" (2000), "Lajja" (2001) and "Devdas" (2002). In 2002, she took a sabbatical from films in order to raise her children and made a comeback with the musical "Aaja Nachle" in 2007. Dixit also judged two seasons of "Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa" '. Currently, she is working on two projects, "Gulaab Gang" and "Dedh Ishqiya". She also plans to open her own production house and her first home production is in pre-production stage.
Dixit has won five Filmfare Awards, four for Best Actress and one for Best Supporting Actress. She holds the record for the highest number of Best Actress nominations (13) at Filmfare. In 2008, she was awarded the Padma Shri, India's fourth-highest civilian award by the Government of India.
She is married to Dr Shriram Chandra Nene, with whom she has two children. The couple resided in the United States before moving to India in 2011.
Early life.
Madhuri Dixit is a native of Mumbai, India. She was born Madhuri Shankar Dixit to Shankar and Snehlata Dixit, of a Marathi family. Dixit attended Divine Child High School and Mumbai University and studied to be a microbiologist. She is a trained Kathak dancer and a great admirer of it.
Film career.
1984–87: Early roles.
Dixit made her acting debut in Rajshri Productions' movie "Abodh" in 1984. The film failed but Dixit earned positive reviews from critics. Aakash Barvalia on Gomolo praised her as he wrote "Madhuri excels in her role as a young naive bride who acquits herself well as the naive village girl and does not realize what marriage actually entails." Her only release of 1985 was "Awara Baap" that turned out to be another failure for Dixit.
In 1986, Dixit starred in two movies, "Swati" and "Manav Hatya" but both films flopped at the box office. Dixit had three releases in 1987 with "Mohre", "Hifazat" and "Uttar Dakshin" but her films continued to flop at the box office.
1988–89: Breakthrough.
Dixit finally attained stardom after a series of consecutive flops when she landed the lead female role of Mohini in N. Chandra's blockbuster "Tezaab" opposite Anil Kapoor. The film went on to become that year's highest grossing movie. It was Dixit's first hit at the box office. Akshay Shah of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit for her dancing skills and her acting was also noticed. He wrote "Mahduri Dixit gives a fine tuned performance. Though she is more remembered for her crowd pleasing dance act "Ek Do Teen", her acting needs to be noted, specially in the scenes where she is pitted against Anupam Kher. She looks and dances like a dream." Dixit received her first nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award for her work in "Tezaab".
In 1989, her first release was Subhash Ghai's movie "Ram Lakhan", in which she was paired once again with Anil Kapoor. The film became a super-hit and went on to become the second highest grossing film of the year. Dixit's next release "Prem Pratigyaa", in which she starred opposite Mithun Chakraborty, earned her second nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Thereafter Dixit got success in Rajiv Rai's multi-starrer "Tridev", in which she starred opposite Naseeruddin Shah, Jackie Shroff, Sunny Deol, Sangeeta Bijlani, Sonam and Amrish Puri. Dixit was paired with Deol. The movie became the year's third highest grossing film but Dixit did not get much acting. Dixit continued her success with her third pairing with Anil Kapoor in Vidhu Vinod Chopra's "Parinda". Although Dixit's work was limited, she earned critical acclaim. Aniket Joshi has praised her as he wrote "Madhuri Dixit, the only female character in the film, has a small role as Paro (Karan´s love interest and Prakash´s sister) yet still does well in the few scenes she has."
1990–99: Superstardom.
In 1990, Dixit starred in the super-hit "Dil" opposite Aamir Khan. She played the role of a rich and arrogant girl who falls in love with a poorer boy and later leaves her house to marry him. The film became the biggest box-office hit of the year in India and Dixit's performance earned her the first Filmfare Best Actress Award of her career.
After the success of "Dil", Dixit became one of the top actresses of Bollywood. The following year she starred in the super-hit movie "Saajan" opposite Salman Khan and Sanjay Dutt. The movie became the year's highest-grossing movie. Dixit's performance earned her the fourth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.
In 1992, Dixit featured in the blockbuster "Beta" opposite Anil Kapoor. Dixit's performance of Saraswati, a woman married to an illiterate, well-meaning man who exposes her scheming mother-in-law earned her critical accclaim. Upperstall.com praised Dixit's work "She made Beta her own film totally stealing a march over the film's hero, Anil Kapoor. While the highlight of the film was undoubtedly Dhak Dhak Karne Laga – probably the sexiest and most popular dance of Madhuri's career, her blazing performance – that of a woman married to an illiterate, well-meaning man and who exposes her scheming mother-in-law whom her husband dotes on – had film reviewers gushing with several people jokingly saying the film should have been called Beti instead!" Dixit's performance in "Beta" won her a second Filmfare Best Actress Award. Following the film's success, Dixit became famously known as the "Dhak Dhak Girl" for her performance in the famous song "Dhak Dhak Karne Laga".
In 1993, Dixit starred in the controversial super-hit "Khalnayak" opposite Sanjay Dutt and Jackie Shroff. Her portrayal of the police officer Ganga earned her critical acclaim. Shahid Khan of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit's dancing and acting skills in the movie "In any other film, the heroine would not have much to do with a plot like this. So immense is the star-power of Madhuri Dixit that Subhash Ghai actually carved out a solid role for her in this macho tale of a bad boy and his shenanigans. She gives real competition to Sanjay Dutt. The audiences ran in their droves to witness the Madhuri Dixit magic. In every scene, she holds you captive with her stunning beauty, demanding screen presence, expressive acting and excellent dancing skills. Saroj Khan’s dance choreography is entertaining to watch, particularly in “Choli Ke Peeche Kya Hai”. Madhuri’s entrance is a riot with a prison inmate asking her, “Kaisi aurat hai tu? (What kind of a woman are you?)” and she responds by slapping her and saying, “Aisi aurat hoon main! (This is the kind of woman I am!)”." Dixit's performance in "Khalnayak" earned her a sixth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award and became the year's second highest grossing film.
In 1994, Dixit starred in "Anjaam", being paired with Shahrukh Khan for the first time. Dixit's performance of a revenge-seeking wife and mother earned her a seventh nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Dixit was praised for her performance, though the film was a below average performer at the box office. Her next starring role was in the all-time blockbuster "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!" opposite Salman Khan. The film became one of the biggest hits in the history of Hindi cinema and made 135 crore worldwide, breaking the record of the film "Sholay" (1975). It became the highest grossing Bollywood film in Hindi cinema history after its theatrical run and held the record for 7 years till the release of "" (2001). Dixit's role of a modern yet family-oriented young girl fetched her the third Filmfare Best Actress Award of her career. Critics believed the film to be "too sweet" but appreciated Dixit's performance as she mesmerized on the screen. In the Millenium Edition of the "Guinness Book of World Records", "Hum Aapke Hain Kaun" became the Bollywood's highest grossing film. Upperstall.com wrote "Madhuri Dixit, reunited with the banner that launched her, stands out and is undoubtedly the life of the film as Nisha. Be it the mischievous but strong-minded, independent girl who gives it to Prem as good as she gets or the woman willing to sacrifice her love believing she is doing the right thing, Madhuri is absolutely spot on creating one of the more memorable female characters of Hindi Cinema."
1995 saw Dixit star in the hit "Raja" opposite Sanjay Kapoor. The film became the fourth highest grosser of the year and the success of the film was attributed to her immense popularity. Her next release was David Dhawan's "Yaraana" opposite Rishi Kapoor, in which she played a dancer on the run from her abusive lover. This film was a below average performer at the box office. Both films earned her nominations for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.
Dixit's career went into a slump during 1996 as many of her films like "Prem Granth" and "Rajkumar" flopped at the box office. In 1997, Dixit bounced back with Prakash Jha's "Mrityudand", in which she performed opposite Shabana Azmi and Shilpa Shirodkar. Dixit played the role of Ketki, one of the three troubled women and earned immense critical acclaim for her performance. Upperstall.com wrote "Madhuri gives a wonderful, insightful performance as the self-respecting educated woman married into a family of male chauvinistic upper class landlords and who is humiliated by her husband when she objects to his misdeeds, never hitting a false note. She more than matches up to seasoned artists like Shabana and Om Puri in their scenes together. In a word, she is mesmerizing."
Dixit earned commercial success with Yash Raj Films' super-hit musical-romance "Dil To Pagal Hai" starring opposite Shahrukh Khan and Karisma Kapoor. Her portrayal of a young woman faced with a moral dilemma fetched her a fourth Filmfare Best Actress Award. The movie became the second highest grosser of the year.
In 1998, Dixit had only one release "Wajood" opposite Nana Patekar and Mukul Dev. The film did below average business. In the following year, Dixit had again only one release "Aarzoo" opposite Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan. Anjali Abrol of Planet Bollywood praised Dixit's performance and wrote "Madhuri, despite any role given, carries it off with ease and grace... even despite the mismatch of age, she does justice to her role, and is the best actress in Bollywood today, comparatively. She also is what I consider a classic Indian beauty... her natural, distinctive Indian looks set her apart from many other heroines (I say heroines because many have yet to learn to act, and cannot justfully be called actresses yet), she proves that she does not need blatant blond/red highlights, tons of body paint and makeup, blue contacts, and scraps of clothes to look beautiful...and that the complete following of Western trends isn´t worth sacrificing traditional Indian beauty, grace, and respect for popularity...a mixture of both that remains respectable...it´s quality rather than quantity (or lackthereof, in the clothes department)." "Aarzoo" was a failure in India but was a modest success overseas.
2000–06: Continuing in other roles and hiatus.
In 2000, Dixit earned critical acclaim and commercial success with Rajkumar Santoshi's "Pukar" opposite Anil Kapoor and Namrata Shirodkar. "Pukar" was a moderate success at the box office. Dixit's performance of Anjali, a jealous lover was praised by critics. Anish Khanna of Planet Bollywood wrote "Her character has a gamut of emotions to run through – childish immaturity, obsession, evil, anger, anguish – and Madhuri really sinks her teeth into each one. She is magical in the dance sequences but even more amazing in the dialogue sequences. Dixit's performance in "Pukar" earned her twelfth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award. Dixit's next release of the year was "Gaja Gamini", which was a failure at the box office.
In 2001, Dixit starred in Deepak Shivdasani's love triangle "Yeh Raaste Hain Pyaar Ke" opposite Ajay Devgan and Preity Zinta. The film was a flop but Dixit was praised for her performance. Dixit followed up by reuniting with Rajkumar Santoshi in the multi-starrer "Lajja". She was featured in a supporting role opposite Samir Soni. Despite being a multi-starrer movie, the film failed in India but it was an overseas success. Dixit again earned critical acclaim for her performance and Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama praised her saying that "Madhuri Dixit is simply fantastic. The ease with which she emotes this complex character deserves full marks. Her expressions when her lover dumps her during the course of the play, proves what a magnificent actress she is." Dixit's performance earned her a nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress.
In 2002, Dixit starred in a lead role in the much-delayed love triangle "Hum Tumhare Hain Sanam" opposite Shahrukh Khan and Salman Khan. The film received mainly negative reviews but did above average business at the box-office, becoming the fifth highest grossing movie of the year. Dixit's next release was Sanjay Leela Bhansali's hit film "Devdas", co-starring Shahrukh Khan and Aishwarya Rai. Dixit portrayed the role of Chandramukhi, a courtesan in love with Devdas. She was praised by Sita Menon of Rediff "The most understated role and perhaps the one that is most lingering, in terms of virtuosity, is that played by Madhuri Dixit. As Chandramukhi, she is simply stunning, lending passion, fire and gentleness with such consummate ease that watching her perform is sheer delight." The film was the highest grossing movie of 2002 and Dixit's performance earned her the Filmfare Best Supporting Actress Award. It was also featured at the Cannes Film Festival. It turned out to be Dixit's last movie as she took a sabbatical from films in order to raise her children.
The following year a film named after her, "Main Madhuri Dixit Banna Chahti Hoon", was released in which a woman (played by Antara Mali) aspires to become the new Madhuri Dixit by trying her luck in Bollywood.
Dixit, also made her first appearance on Television as a host for the India's first reality show "Kahin Na Kahin Koi Hai" on Sony TV.
2007–present: Return with "Aaja Nachle".
In 2006, Dixit returned to Mumbai with her husband and sons to start filming for "Aaja Nachle". The film released in November 2007 and, despite the critics panning it, Dixit's performance was highly appreciated, with the "New York Times" commenting about her that "she's still got it". Her performance in "Aaja Nachle" earned her the record-setting thirteenth nomination for the Filmfare Best Actress Award.
On Women's International Day in 2007, Dixit topped Rediff's list of the Best Bollywood Actresses Ever. In May 2008, she was given a tribute by Indian Film Festival at Los Angeles. In March 2010, "The Economic Times" named Dixit in the list of the "33 women who made India proud".
She also received a Filmfare Special Award in honor of her 25 years in the Bollywood industry. In 2011, Rediff.com listed her in top 10 "Readers Choice: The Greatest Actresses of all time".
Recently she has launched an application, Madhuri Dixit HDon the iPad to connect with her fans.
Currently, she is working on "Gulaab Gang", a film based on the life of social-activist Sampat Pal and her group Gulabi Gang. "Gulaab Gang" has been written and directed by Soumik Sen. In February 2013, she will start shooting for Vishal Bhardwaj's "Dedh Ishqiya", a sequel to critically acclaimed "Ishqiya". "Dedh Ishqiya" will be directed by Abhishek Choubey.
Artistry.
Dance.
Dixit is not only known for her acting skills, but for her dancing skills as well. Often referred to as the ""Dhak Dhak Girl"", she is famous for her dance in the song "Dhak Dhak Karne Laga" from the film "Beta". She is also known for her dance sequences accompanying Bollywood songs such as "Ek Do Teen" (from "Tezaab"), "Humko Aaj Kal Hai" (from "Sailaab"), "Bada Dukh Deenha" (from "Ram Lakhan"), "Chane Ke Khet Mein" (from "Anjaam"), "Didi Tera Devar Deewana" (from "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!"), "Choli Ke Peechhe" (from "Khalnayak"), "Akhiyan Milaun" (from "Raja"), "Mera Piya Ghar Aaya" (from "Yaraana"), "Kay Sera Sera" (from "Pukar"), and "Maar Daala" (from "Devdas").
Pandit Birju Maharaj, a Kathak dancer, who choreographed Dixit in the film "Devdas" for the song "Kaahe Chhed" calls her as "the best Bollywood dancer due to her versatility." Film critic Raja Sen describes Dixit as "the industry's numero uno in every sense."Further he elaborates,"She is an exemplary dancer.From Kathak to Dhak Dhak,she's done it all and wowed us every step of the way."
Television appearances.
In the year 1985, she appeared in the Rajshri Production's tv show 'Paying Guest'. She came in the first episode of the show as Neena. 
In 2001 on the popular game show Kaun Banega Crorepati's first season, hosted by Amitabh Bachchan, she won 50,00,000 that she donated for people affected in natural calamities. She also made an appearance in Season 4's Grand Finale that aired in 2010.
In 2002, Dixit hosted a TV show "Kahina Kahi Koi Hai" which was a match-making show that aired on Sony Entertainment. She also made appearances on Koffee with Karan in Season 2 & Season 3 that aired in 2007 & 2011. Her Season 2 appearance was a solo appearance and in Season 3 she shared the chat show with Sonakshi Sinha.
Dixit has been guest on Nach Baliye Season 1 and 3, a celebrity-couple dancing competition in 2005 (aired on Star One) & 2007 (aired on Star Plus).
In 2011, she appeared as a judge on the dance reality show Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 4 along with other co-judges Remo D'souza and Malaika Arora Khan.
The following summer, in 2012, Dixit rejoined for Jhalak Dikhhla Jaa 5 along with her co-judges Remo D'souza and Karan Johar.
Social work.
In 2001 on the popular game show Kaun Banega Crorepati's first season hosted by Amitabh Bachchan she won 50,00,000 that she donated for the welfare of Gujarat's earthquake victims.The show was aired on February 10 at 8 pm on Star Plus.Madhuri Dixit is also requested to the producers of KBC to send part of her winnings to an orphanage in Pune.
In 2009 Dixit performed for NDTV Toyota Greenathon — India's first-ever nationwide campaign for save the environment and creating awareness about environmental issues. NDTV organised India's first 24-hour live telethon — a fund-raising event that brings in people to donate money to support TERI's initiative — Lighting a Billion Lives which aims at providing solar power to villages without electricity. Dixit became a part of this great social cause, and she performed her hit numbers on the live show.
On 3 February 2011 Dixit spent an evening with 75 orphanage kids of farmers at an ashram in Trimbakeshwar and participated in the birthday of two children: Hrishikesh and Rani. "We artists are ready to help such children. People from the higher society should come forward and stand firmly behind them," she said on the occasion.
Dixit is a Goodwill Ambassador and a patron for "Emeralds for Elephants" — a charity project for the conservation of Asian Elephants and other endangered species. This project has been designed to create awareness and raise vital funds for the protection of the critically endangered Asian Elephant. A collaborative project between the World Land Trust (a UK based nonprofit environmental organisation) and the Wildlife Trust of India that is creating protected wildlife corridors connecting National Parks and protected areas to others. Speaking about the issue she said: "Elephants are one of my favourite animals and I love them. So what we need to do today is to see how we can preserve our animals. I feel very strongly about this."
On 4 February 2012 Madhuri Dixit interacted with Cancer affected children on World Cancer Day organised by Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd at Juhu, Mumbai.On World Cancer Day Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited offered a Free Joy Ride to Cancer affected children with the support of Cancer Patients Aid Association.
Personal life.
On 17 October 1999, Dixit married Shriram Madhav Nene, a UCLA-trained cardiovascular surgeon who practiced in Denver. Nene is also from a Marathi Brahmin family. They have two sons, Arin (born in March 2003) and Raayan (born in March 2005). After marriage, Dixit had relocated to Denver, US for almost a decade. In October 2011, Dixit again shifted her base back to Mumbai, India, along with her family.
Dixit has been the muse for the famous Indian painter M.F. Husain. He was so fascinated by Dixit in "Hum Aapke Hain Koun..!" that he watched the film 67 times, and in 2007 he booked an entire theatre to see her comeback movie "Aaja Nachle" He made a series of paintings of her, and in 2000 made a film named "Gaja Gamini" starring her, which was intended as a tribute to Dixit herself.
