Aquarius () (Greek: "Ύδροχόος", "Hudrokhoös", Latin: "Aquārius") is the eleventh astrological sign in the Zodiac, originating from the constellation Aquarius.
It spans the 300-330th degree of the zodiac, between 305.25 and 332.75 degree of celestial longitude, which in the Tropical zodiac the Sun transits this area on average between January 21 to February 19 each year. 
Under the Sidereal Zodiac, the Sun is in the astrological sign of Aquarius from February 12th to 14th and leaves between March 8th and 10th, depending on leap year.
Background.
On early Babylonian stones, the astrological symbol for Aquarius was depicted as a man or boy pouring water from a bucket or urn. Ancient Arabian astrologists omitted the human figure, with a mule carrying two water-barrels representing the constellation.
The constellation Aquarius is not conspicuous; its fainter set of stars being those which are typically depicted as the "water running down into the mouth of the Southern fish."
Mythology.
Associations.
In astrology, a planet's domicile is the zodiac sign over which it has rulership. The traditional planets said to be rulers of Aquarius are Uranus and Saturn. A result of the ancient hieroglyph for water, the symbol for Aquarius (♒) is two undulating lines of waves. Similarly, the color that is associated with the zodiacal Aquarius is an aqueous blue.
Aquarius is one of the three signs which compose the air triplicity, along with Gemini and Libra. It is also one of the masculine signs, and a fixed sign.
Influence.
In the arts.
The English Romantic poet John Keats wrote of the personified Aquarius and his urn in the 1818 poem "Endymion".
Modern arts.
Originally appearing in the musical "Hair", written by James Rado & Gerome Ragni, the song "Aquarius/Let the Sunshine In" (more commonly known as "The Age of Aquarius") was released in 1969 by The 5th Dimension and is a medley of two songs. Lyrically, the song is based on the astrological belief that the world would soon be entering the "Age of Aquarius." The song peaked at number one for six weeks on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100 pop singles chart in the spring of 1969. The single became the first medley to top the American pop charts and was eventually certified platinum in the U.S. by the RIAA.
