Paul Thomas Anderson (born June 26, 1970) is an American film director, screenwriter, and producer. He has written and directed six feature films: "Hard Eight" (1996), "Boogie Nights" (1997), "Magnolia" (1999), "Punch-Drunk Love" (2002), "There Will Be Blood" (2007), and "The Master" (2012). He has been nominated for five Academy Awards — "There Will Be Blood" for Best Achievement in Directing, Best Motion Picture of the Year, and Best Adapted Screenplay; "Magnolia" for Best Original Screenplay; and "Boogie Nights" for Best Original Screenplay.
Anderson has been hailed as being "one of the most exciting talents to come along in years" and "among the supreme talents of today." After the release of "Boogie Nights" and "Magnolia", Anderson was praised as a wunderkind. In 2004, Anderson was ranked twenty-first on "The Guardian's" list of the forty best directors. In 2007, "Total Film" named him the twentieth greatest director of all time, while the American Film Institute regards him as "one of American film's modern masters." In 2011, "Entertainment Weekly" named him the tenth-greatest working director calling him "one of the most dynamic directors to emerge in the last twenty years." The following year, "The Guardian" ranked him number one on their list of "The 23 Best Film Directors in the World" stating "his dedication to his craft has intensified, with his disdain for PR and celebrity marking him out as the most devout film-maker of his generation."
Early life.
Paul Thomas Anderson was born on June 26, 1970, in Studio City, California, to Edwina (née Gough) and Ernie Anderson, who was an actor, the voice of A.B.C., and a Cleveland television late-night horror movie host known as "Ghoulardi" (for which Anderson later named his production company). Anderson grew up in the San Fernando Valley and had a troubled relationship with his mother but was close with his father who encouraged him to become a writer or director. He attended a number of schools, including Buckley in Sherman Oaks, John Thomas Dye School, Campbell Hall School, Cushing Academy and Montclair Prep.
Anderson was involved in film-making at a young age and never really had an alternative plan to directing films. He started making movies on a Betamax video camera which his dad bought in 1982 when he was twelve years old. He later started using 8 mm film but realized that video was easier. He began writing in adolescence, and at 17 years old he began experimenting with a Bolex sixteen millimetre camera. After years of experimenting with "standard fare", he wrote and filmed his first real production as a senior in high school at Montclair Prep using money he earned cleaning cages at a pet store. The film was a thirty-minute mockumentary shot on video called "The Dirk Diggler Story" (1988), about a pornography star (inspired by John Holmes, who also served as a major inspiration for "Boogie Nights").
Career.
Early career.
After two semesters as an English major at Emerson College and only two days at New York University so he could "garner ammunition" on what he called a "bad situation," Anderson began his career as a production assistant on television movies, music videos and game shows in Los Angeles and New York. With some money he won gambling, his girlfriend's credit card, and $10,000 his father set aside for college, Anderson decided to make a twenty minute film that would be his "college."
The film he made was "Cigarettes & Coffee" (1993), a short film made for $20,000 connecting multiple story lines with a twenty-dollar bill. The film was screened at the 1993 Sundance Festival Shorts Program and he decided to expand the film into a feature length film and was subsequently invited to the 1994 Sundance filmmakers' lab. At Sundance filmmakers' lab, Michael Caton-Jones served as his mentor and saw Anderson as someone with "talent and a fully formed creative voice but not much hands-on experience" and gave Anderson some hard and practical lessons.
1990s: "Hard Eight", "Boogie Nights" and "Magnolia".
While at the Sundance filmmakers' lab, Anderson already had a deal with Rysher Entertainment to direct his first feature. In 1996, Anderson made his first full-length feature, "Sydney", which was retitled "Hard Eight" (1996). Upon completion of the film, Rysher re-edited it. Anderson, who still had the workprint of his original cut, submitted the film which was accepted and screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival. Anderson was able to get his version released but only after he retitled the film and came up with the $200,000 necessary to finish it which was contributed by himself, Gwyneth Paltrow, and John C. Reilly. The version that was released was Anderson's and even though Rysher did nothing to promote it, the acclaim from the film launched his career.
Anderson began working on the script for his next feature film during his troubles with "Hard Eight" completing the script in the summer 1995. The result was Anderson's breakout film "Boogie Nights" (1997), a full-length major motion picture based on his short "The Dirk Diggler Story". The script was noticed by New Line Cinemas president, Michael De Luca, who felt "totally gaga" reading it. It was released on October 10, 1997 and was a critical and commercial success. The film revived the career of Burt Reynolds and provided breakout roles for Mark Wahlberg and Julianne Moore. The film received three Academy Award nominations, for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Burt Reynolds), Best Actress in a Supporting Role (Julianne Moore), and Best Original Screenplay.
After the success of "Boogie Nights", Anderson was told by New Line he could do whatever he wanted for his next film and granted Anderson creative control without hearing an idea for the film. Initially wanting to make a film that was "intimate and small-scale" as he started writing, the script "kept blossoming" and the resulting film was the ensemble piece "Magnolia" (1999), which tells the story of the peculiar interaction among the lives of several individuals in the San Fernando Valley, California.
Anderson used the music of Aimee Mann as a basis and inspiration for the film commissioning her to write eight new songs. "Magnolia" received three Academy Award nominations, for Best Actor in a Supporting Role (Tom Cruise), Best Original Song for "Save Me" by Aimee Mann and Best Original Screenplay. In an interview after the film's release Anderson was quoted as saying "... what I really feel is that Magnolia is, for better or worse, the best movie I'll ever make."
2000s: "Punch-Drunk Love" and "There Will Be Blood".
After the release of "Magnolia", Anderson stated that he would like to work with Adam Sandler in the future and that he was determined to make his next film 90 minutes long. His next feature was the comedy/romance film "Punch-Drunk Love" (2002), partly based on David Phillips (also called The Pudding Guy), starring Adam Sandler with Emily Watson as his love interest. The story centers on a beleaguered small-business owner (Sandler) with anger issues and seven emasculating sisters. Sandler received critical praise for his role in his first major departure from the mainstream comedies which made him a star. Roger Ebert wrote that "Sandler, liberated from the constraints of formula, reveals unexpected depths as an actor. Watching this film, you can imagine him in Dennis Hopper roles. He has darkness, obsession and power." At the 2002 Cannes Film Festival, the film won best director and was nominated for the Golden Palm.
"There Will Be Blood" (2007), was loosely based on the Upton Sinclair novel "Oil!". The budget of the film was $25 million, and it gained $76.1 million worldwide. Anderson had previously stated that he wanted to work with Daniel Day-Lewis who starred in and won an Oscar for Best Leading Actor for his role. Paul Dano received a BAFTA nomination for Best Supporting Actor. Anderson was nominated for Best Director from the Directors Guild of America. The film also received eight Academy Award nominations, tying with "No Country For Old Men" for the most nominations. Anderson received nominations for Best Picture, Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay, losing all three to the Coen Brothers for "No Country For Old Men". "There Will Be Blood" was largely regarded as one of the greatest films of the decade, and some parties further declaring it one of the most accomplished American films of the modern era.
2010s: "The Master".
In December 2009, "Variety" reported that Anderson was working on a new script tentatively titled "The Master", about a "charismatic intellectual" who starts a new religion in the 1950s. Though the film makes no reference to the movement, it has "long been widely assumed to be based on Scientology." Frequent Anderson collaborator Philip Seymour Hoffman was reported to be attached as the lead. Reese Witherspoon and Jeremy Renner were rumored to star opposite Hoffman but the roles went to Joaquin Phoenix and Amy Adams. "The Master" was released on September 14, 2012 by The Weinstein Company in the United States and Canada to critical acclaim.
Anderson's next project is to be an adaptation of Thomas Pynchon's 2009 novel "Inherent Vice". This will be the first time that Pynchon has allowed his work to be adapted for the screen. In September 2012 Anderson stated that he is currently writing the script describing it as being a Cheech & Chong movie. In January it is announced that Joaquin Phoenix will star the Films as Doc Sportello.
Other work.
In addition to films, Anderson has directed several music videos, including several for musician Fiona Apple. Anderson was a standby director for Robert Altman's "A Prairie Home Companion" for insurance purposes, as Altman was 80 years old at the time. In 2008, Anderson co-wrote and directed a 70 minute play at the Largo Theatre. The play consisted of a series of vignettes starring Maya Rudolph and Fred Armisen with a live musical score by Jon Brion.
Influences and style.
Influences.
Anderson only attended film school for two days, preferring to learn the craft by watching films by the filmmakers he liked, as well as watching films accompanied by director's audio commentary. In 2012 at Australia's Melbourne premier of The Master at the Astor Theatre, Anderson spoke candidly of his brief experiences at film school, remarking of his frustration at the 'dull silent movies' displayed by lecturers who tried to make movie watching feel 'as much like homework as possible.'
Anderson cites Martin Scorsese, Robert Altman, Jonathan Demme, Stanley Kubrick, Orson Welles, and Max Ophüls as his main influences as a filmmaker.
Themes and style.
Anderson is known for films set in the San Fernando Valley with realistically flawed and desperate characters. Among the themes dealt with in Anderson's films are dysfunctional familial relationships, alienation, surrogate families, regret, loneliness, destiny, and ghosts of the past. Anderson's films are known for their bold visual style which includes stylistic trademarks such as constantly moving camera, steadicam-based long takes, memorable use of music, and multilayered audiovisual imagery. 
Within his first three films, "Hard Eight", "Boogie Nights", and "Magnolia", Anderson explored themes of dysfunctional families, alienation, and loneliness. "Boogie Nights" and "Magnolia" were noted for their large ensemble casts. In "Punch-Drunk Love", Anderson explored similar themes but expressed a different visual style, shedding the influences and references of his earlier films, being more surreal and having a heightened sense of reality. It was also short, compared to his previous two films, at 90 minutes. "There Will Be Blood" stood apart from his first four films but shared similar themes and style such as flawed characters, moving camera, memorable music, and a lengthy running time. The film was more overtly engaged with politics than his previous films, examining capitalism and themes such as savagery, optimism, and obsession.
Frequent collaborators.
Anderson frequently collaborates with many actors and crew carrying them over from film to film. Anderson has referred to his regular actors as "my little rep company" which includes John C. Reilly, Philip Baker Hall, Philip Seymour Hoffman, Julianne Moore, William H. Macy, and
Melora Walters. Luis Guzmán is also considered an Anderson regular. Hoffman acted in Anderson's first four films as well as "The Master". With the exception of Paul F. Tompkins, who had an equally minor role in "Magnolia", "There Will Be Blood" had an entirely new cast. Additionally, Robert Elswit has been cinematographer for Anderson's first five features. 
Jon Brion has served as composer for three of his films ("Hard Eight", "Magnolia", and "Punch-Drunk Love") and Jonny Greenwood has served as composer on two ("There Will Be Blood" and "The Master"). Anderson also regularly works with producing partners JoAnne Sellar, Scott Rudin, Michael De Luca, and Daniel Lupi as well as casting director Cassandra Kulukundis.
Personal life.
Anderson's partner is former "Saturday Night Live" cast member Maya Rudolph. They have three children together: two daughters, Pearl Minnie, born October 15, 2005, and Lucille, born November 6, 2009, and one son, Jack, born July 3, 2011. They are expecting their fourth child in 2013. The couple currently resides in the San Fernando Valley with their three children.
