Kate Micucci (pronounced ; born March 31, 1980) is an American actress, comedian and singer-songwriter, whose first major television exposure was as Stephanie Gooch in "Scrubs", and later as Shelly in "Raising Hope". She is half of the musical comedy duo Garfunkel and Oates.
Early life.
Born in New Jersey of Italian descent, Micucci was raised in Nazareth, Pennsylvania, in the Lehigh Valley region of the state, where she first learned to play classical piano. Her mother taught classical piano. She graduated alongside Jordan White in 1998 from Nazareth Area High School.
She then received an A.A. in Fine Arts from Keystone College in La Plume, Pennsylvania, and a B.A. in Studio Art in 2003 from Loyola Marymount University, Los Angeles. As of 2008, she resides in Los Angeles.
Career.
Her TV credits include numerous television commercials, as well as Toni the barista on NBC's "Four Kings", and guest roles on "Malcolm in the Middle", '"Til Death", "How I Met Your Mother", "Cory in the House", "Campus Ladies", and recurring roles on "Scrubs" and "Raising Hope". Her film credits include "The Last Hurrah", "Bart Got a Room" and "When in Rome". She plays "Lily the IT girl" on "Elevator Show" produced by HBO's Runawaybox, which can be seen on YouTube. In early 2009, she released a five-track EP entitled "Songs". 
Micucci appeared in five episodes of "Scrubs" — "My Lawyer's In Love", "My Absence", "My Chief Concern", "Our Histories", and "My Finale" — as Stephanie Gooch, a ukulele player with whom Ted Buckland begins a relationship. She performs her song "Mr. Moon" as well as an adapted version of "Fuck You" (retitled "Screw You" for ABC), a song she typically performs with Riki Lindhome as part of the musical duo Garfunkel and Oates.
In 2009 she starred in the short "Imaginary Larry", co-written and co-directed by Riki Lindhome, her partner in Garfunkel and Oates. In August 2009, Micucci appeared in an advertising campaign for Hillshire Farms, and in January 2010, for H & R Block.
Micucci performs "Playin' with Micucci" on third Mondays at the Steve Allen Theater on Hollywood Boulevard, in Hollywood, California, most recently in August and October 2011. In the act, she presents "songs and stories in musical variety show." She says the title is the only dirty aspect of the show.
She can also frequently be seen performing with Lindhome in "An Evening with Garfunkel and Oates" at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater in Los Angeles.
She performed with William H. Macy on the ukulele to promote the DVD release of the film "Bart Got a Room". The video has been circulated around the Internet on sites such as YouTube and "The Huffington Post".
In 2010, she appeared in the Kristen Bell film "When in Rome" and also in an episode in the 6th season of the TV show "Weeds" as a slightly sedated waitress. She appeared in some episodes of the HBO series, "Bored to Death", and appeared as the babysitter/dogsitter/eldersitter Shelly in the series "Raising Hope".
In February 2011 Kate appeared briefly in a Progressive Insurance ad as a waitress.
She has also voiced a character on Pendleton Ward's animated series "Adventure Time", as well as the character of Julie Kane on the Disney XD animated series "Motorcity".
In July 2012, Kate appeared in Written by a Kid's production "Scary Smash", a Geek and Sundry creation that was executive produced by Kim Evey, Felicia Day, and Sheri Byrant.
In January 2013, Micucci's casting was announced for a recurring role on "The Big Bang Theory" as "a potential love interest for the confirmed bachelor Raj." Her character debuted on February 14, 2013.
She appeared as a guest judge on King of the Nerds, season 1, episode 6.
Awards.
On December 30, 2009, G4TV named her the #1 Woman of Comedy.
