Roman Arkadyevich Abramovich (, ; born 24 October 1966) is a Russian business tycoon and the main owner of the private investment company Millhouse LLC. He is known outside Russia as the owner of Chelsea Football Club, an English Premier League football team.
Abramovich is currently the 5th richest person in Russia and the 50th richest person in the world, according to the 2012 Forbes list. In February 2013, with an estimated fortune of U.S.$14.6 billion, Roman Abramovich docked his $1.5 billion yacht 'Eclipse', the world's largest, in New York City. 
Early life.
Abramovich's parents both died before he was four, and he was thereafter raised by his extended Jewish family in Ukhta, later moving to Moscow.
Business career.
Roman Abramovich started his multi-billion-dollar business during his army service where he sold stolen gasoline to some of the commissioned officers of his unit. After a brief stint in the Soviet Army, he married his first wife, Olga. He first worked as a street-trader and then as a mechanic at a local factory. At the peak of perestroika, Abramovich sold imported rubber ducks from his Moscow apartment. Some sources suggest that these ducks were imported illegally, but no evidence of this exists.
A 2,000-ruble wedding present from Olga's parents (about £1,000 or US$2,000 at that time) was invested by Abramovich in smuggling of black market goods or contraband to sell in Moscow in or around December 1987. Abramovich soon doubled, then tripled, the investment, his confidence growing with each success in this smuggling business. Soon he progressed to making plastic toys (including plastic sailors) and started up an automobile parts cooperative. He attended the Gubkin Institute of Oil and Gas in Moscow (where he sold retreaded car tires as a sideline), then traded commodities for Runicom, a Swiss trading company.
In 1988, as Perestroika opened up opportunities for entrepreneurs in the Soviet Union, Abramovich got a chance to legitimize his underworld business. He and Olga set up a company making dolls. "It brought success almost immediately," says Olga. Due to his business acumen, within a few years his wealth spread from oil conglomerates to pig farms and he also started investing in other businesses. Abramovich set up and liquidated at least 20 companies during the early 1990s, in sectors as diverse as tire retreading and bodyguard recruitment.
From 1992 to 1995, Abramovich founded five companies that conducted resale, produced consumer goods, and acted as intermediaries, eventually specializing in the trading of oil and oil products. However, in 1992, he was arrested and sent to prison in a case of theft of government property: AVEKS-Komi sent a train containing 55 cisterns of diesel fuel, worth 3.8 million roubles, from the Ukhta Oil Refinery; Abramovich met the train in Moscow and resent the shipment to the Kaliningrad military base under a fake agreement, but the fuel arrived in Riga. Abramovich co-operated with the investigation, and the case was closed after the oil production factory was compensated by the diesel's buyer, the Latvian-US company, Chikora International.
In 1995, Abramovich and Boris Berezovsky, an associate of President Boris Yeltsin, acquired the controlling interest in the large oil company Sibneft. The deal was within the controversial loans-for-shares program and each partner paid US$100 million for half of the company, below the stake's stock market value of US$150 million at the time, and rapidly turned it up into billions. The fast-rising value of the company led many observers, in hindsight, to suggest that the real cost of the company should have been in the billions of dollars. Abramovich later admitted in court that he paid huge bribes (in billions) to government officials and obtained protection from gangsters to acquire these and other assets (including aluminium assets during the aluminium wars).
Thus, the main stages of Abramovich's financial career were: January 1989 to May 1991, chairman of the Comfort Co-op (manufacturer of plastic toys); May 1991 to May 1993, director of the ABK small enterprise, Moscow. According to various sources, from 1992 to 1995 Roman Abramovich set up five companies engaged in the production of consumer goods and selling-and-buying. In May 1995, jointly with Boris Berezovsky, he set up the P.K. Trust close joint-stock company. In 1995 and 1996, he established another 10 firms: Mekong close joint-stock company, Centurion-M close joint-stock company, Agrofert limited liability company, Multitrans close joint-stock company, Oilimpex close joint-stock company, Sibreal close joint-stock company, Forneft close joint-stock company, Servet close joint-stock company, Branco close joint-stock company, Vector-A limited liability company, which, again together with Berezovsky, he used to purchase the shares of the Sibneft public company.
Friendship with Boris Berezovsky.
In 1992, Abramovich founded Mekong. He began selling oil from Noyabrsk. Eventually, he met fellow Russian businessman and entrepreneur Boris Berezovsky.
According to two different sources, he first met Berezovsky either at a meeting of the Russian businessmen in the Caribbean in 1993 or in the summer of 1995 on the yacht of his friend Pyotr Aven.
Berezovsky introduced Abramovich to "the family", the close circle around the then president, Boris Yeltsin, which included his daughter Tatyana Dyachenko and chief security adviser, Alexander Korzhakov.
Together with Berezovsky, Abramovich founded the offshore company Gibraltar-registered Runicom Ltd. and five Western European subsidiaries. Abramovich headed the Moscow affiliate of the Swiss firm, Runicom S.A. In August 1995, Sibneft was created by Boris Yeltsin’s presidential decree. It was rumored that Abramovich was the chief of the organization with Berezovsky promoting the business in higher circles.
Acquisition of Sibneft, aluminium wars, and loans-for-shares.
In 1995, Abramovich and Berezovsky acquired a controlling interest in the giant Soviet oil company Sibneft. Affiliates of Abramovich, with affiliates of Boris Berezovsky, purchased Russian oil company Sibneft for US$100.3 million (the company was worth US$2.7 billion at that time). Sibneft produces around US$3 billion worth of oil annually. Abramovich established several fly-by-night firms and together with his friend Boris Berezovsky used them to acquire the stock of Sibneft. As a result, the tycoon managed to pay for the company 25 times less than the market price. Bought for a total of US$200 million, Sibneft is now worth seventy five times as much.
"The Times" claimed that he was assisted by Badri Patarkatsishvili. This acquisition was under the controversial loans-for-shares programme initiated by then President Boris Yeltsin. After Sibneft, Abramovich's next target was the aluminium industry. After privatisation the 'aluminium wars' lead to murders of smelting plant managers, metals traders and journalists as groups battled for control of the industry. Abramovich famously emerged winner in the aluminium wars. "The Times" stated that in a BBC investigation into Abramovich's wealth, reporter John Sweeney noted that, after the oligarch (Abramovich) emerged at the top of the trade, the murders stopped.
Relationship with Boris Berezovsky and Badri Patarkatsishvili.
Mr Abramovich discloses that there was a showdown at St Moritz airport in Switzerland in 2001 when Mr Patarkatsishvili asked him to pay US$1.3 billion (€925 million) to Mr Berezovsky. “The defendant agreed to pay this amount on the basis that it would be the final request for payment by Mr Berezovsky and that he and Mr Patarkatsishvili would cease to associate themselves publicly with him and his business interests.” The payment was duly made.
Mr Abramovich was also willing to pay off Mr Patarkatsishvili. He states that he agreed to pay US$585 million (€416 million) “by way of final payment”.
Mr Abramovich denies that he helped himself to Mr Berezovsky's interests in Sibneft and aluminium or that he threatened a friend of the exile. “It is denied that Mr Abramovich made or was party to the alleged explicit or implicit coercive threats or intimidation,” he states.
Political career.
Duma member.
In 1999, Abramovich was elected to the State Duma as the representative for the Chukotka Autonomous Okrug, an impoverished region in the Russian Far East. He started the charity Pole of Hope to help the people of Chukotka, especially children, and in December 2000 was elected governor of Chukotka, replacing Alexander Nazarov.
Governor.
Abramovich was the governor of Chukotka from 2000 to 2008. It has been estimated that he spent over US$1.3 billion (€925 million) of his own money on the region, which now has one of the highest birth rates in Russia. Under Abramovich, living standards improved, schools and housing were restored and new investors were being drawn to the region.
Abramovich said that he would not run for governor again after his term of office expired in 2005, as it is "too expensive", and he rarely visits the region. However, Russian President Vladimir Putin changed the law to abolish elections for regional governors, and on 21 October 2005 Abramovich was reappointed governor for another term.
In 2003, Abramovich was named Person of the Year by "Expert", a Russian business magazine. He shared this title with Mikhail Khodorkovsky. 
Abramovich was awarded the Order of Honour for his "huge contribution to the economic development of the autonomous district Chukotka", by a decree signed by the President of Russia.
Resignation.
In early July 2008 it was announced that President Dmitri Medvedev had accepted Abramovich's latest request to resign as governor of Chukotka, although his various charitable activities in the region would continue. In the period 2000–2006 the average salaries in Chukotka increased from about US$165 (€117/£100) per month in 2000 to US$826 (€588/£500) per month in 2006.
The regional government estimates that, during his tenure, Abramovich directed investments in the range of $2.5 billion to rebuild Chukotka's crumbling housing, schools, hospitals and infrastructure, much of the money coming from his own pocket and through affiliated companies and his two foundations – Pole of Hope and Territoria.
Controversies.
Roman Abramovich has been alleged to be involved in various wrongdoings. "The Times" said that Abramovich "famously emerged triumphant after the “aluminium wars”, in which more than 100 people are believed to have been killed in gangland feuds over control of the lucrative smelters. He avoided the fate of a rival oligarch who annoyed the Kremlin and ended up being transported to jail in Siberia for ten years," and "Numerous officials and executives are said to have lost their lives". Nonetheless, many of the allegations against Abramovich are unproven and he has never been convicted of any crime in any world court.
BBC reporter John Sweeney asked a Russian editor: “Is Mr Abramovich more powerful than the gangsters?” The Russian paused, then smiled: “Good observation.”
Boris Berezovsky allegations.
Allegation of blackmail.
Boris Berezovsky (his one-time business partner) alleged in 2008 that Abramovich harassed him with "threats and intimidation" to cheat him to sell his valuable shares at less than their true worth.
In 2011 Berezovsky brought a civil case against Abramovich in the High Court of Justice in London, accusing Abramovich of blackmail, breach of trust and breach of contract, and seeking over £3 billion in damages.
On 31 August 2012, the High Court dismissed the lawsuit. The High Court judge stated that because of the nature of the evidence, the case hinged on whether to believe Berezovsky or Abramovich's evidence. The judge found "Mr Berezovsky an unimpressive, and inherently unreliable, witness, who regarded truth as a transitory, flexible concept, which could be moulded to suit his current purposes." The judge found Abramovich "to be a truthful, and on the whole reliable, witness".
Bribes.
In 2008, "The Times" reported that Abramovich admitted that he paid billions of dollars for political favours and protection fees to obtain a big share of Russia's oil and aluminium assets as was shown by court papers "The Times" obtained.
Allegations of illegal share-dilution.
Yugraneft, an affiliate of Sibir Energy, is seeking billions of dollars in damages in a lawsuit in London against Roman Abramovich and his investment company Millhouse Capital, alleging that it was cheated out of its Russian assets. The proceedings "involve substantial claims to recover the proceeds of the diluted interest", said Sibir Energy, a company co-owned by the billionaire Shalva Chigirinsky.
Arrest for theft.
In 1992 he was arrested in a case of theft of government property: AVEKS-Komi sent a train containing 55 cisterns (tankers) of diesel fuel, worth Р3.8 million (Roubles), from the Ukhta Oil Refinery (Case No. 79067 for the large-scale theft of state property); Abramovich met the train in Moscow and resent the shipment to the Kaliningrad military base under a fake agreement, but the fuel arrived in Riga. Abramovich cooperated with the investigation, and the charges were dropped after the oil production factory was compensated by the diesel's buyer, the Latvian-US concern, Chikora International.
Allegations of loan-fraud.
An allegation emerging from a Swiss investigation links Roman Abramovich, through a former company, and numerous other Russian politicians, industrialists and bankers to using a US$4.8 billion (€3.4 billion) loan from International Monetary Fund as personal slush fund; an audit sponsored by the IMF itself determined that all of the IMF funds had been used appropriately.
In January 2005, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) indicated that it would be suing Abramovich over a £9 million (US$14.9 million/€10.6 million) loan. The EBRD said that it is owed US$17.5 million (€12.45 million/£10.6 million) by Runicom, a Switzerland-based oil trading business which had been controlled by Abramovich and Eugene Shvidler. Abramovich's spokesman indicated that the loan had previously been repaid.
Antitrust law violation in Russia.
"International Herald Tribune" report that "Russia's antitrust body said Wednesday that Evraz Holding—part-owned by Kremlin-friendly businessman Roman Abramovich – has breached anti-monopoly rules, overcharging customers for coking coal."
Abramovich and European football.
Chelsea F.C..
In June 2003, Abramovich became the owner of the companies that control Chelsea Football Club in west London. Former owner of the club was Ken Bates, who then bought Leeds United with the money gleaned from the sale. The club immediately embarked on an ambitious programme of commercial development, with the aim of making it a worldwide brand on a par with footballing dynasties like Manchester United and Real Madrid, and also announced plans to build a new state-of-the-art training complex in Cobham, Surrey. 
Chelsea finished their first season after the takeover in second place in the Premiership, up from fourth the previous year. They also reached the semi-finals of the Champions League, which was eventually won by the surprise package of Porto, managed by José Mourinho. For Abramovich's second season at Stamford Bridge Mourinho was recruited as the new manager, replacing the incumbent Claudio Ranieri. Chelsea ended the 2004-05 season as league champions, for the first time in 50 years, and only the second time in their history. Since the takeover the club have won nine major trophies – the UEFA Champions League, the Premier League 3 times, the FA Cup 4 times (with 2010 providing the club's first ever league and FA Cup double) and the League Cup twice. Manchester United are the only English club to have won more honours in that time. 
 It is argued that Abramovich's involvement with Chelsea has distorted the football transfer market throughout Europe, as his wealth often allows the club to purchase players virtually at will although that has changed in recent years. He did however sanction the transfer of Andriy Shevchenko for a then British record transfer fee of around £30 million (€35.3 million).
In the year ending June 2005, Chelsea posted record losses of £140 million (€165 million) and the club is not expected to record a trading profit before 2010, though this did decrease to reported losses of £80.2 million (€94.3 million) year ending June 2006.
In a December 2006 interview Abramovich stated that he expected Chelsea's transfer spending to fall in years to come, although he subsequently seemed to move away from this position.
He is also present at almost every game Chelsea plays and shows visible emotion during matches, a sign taken by supporters to indicate a genuine love for the sport, and usually visits the players in the dressing room following each match, although this stopped for a time in early 2007 as rumours of a feud between Abramovich and manager Mourinho, regarding the appearances of certain players, notably Andriy Shevchenko, appeared in the press. 
In the early hours of 20 September 2007, José Mourinho announced his shock exit as Chelsea manager by mutual consent with the club following a meeting with the board. Former Israel coach and Chelsea's director of football, Avram Grant, was named as his replacement. Ever since Grant had joined Chelsea (in the summer of 2007) there had been friction between him and Mourinho. Mourinho reportedly told Grant not to interfere in team affairs but with Abramovich's backing, Grant's profile at the club rose after he was made a member of the board. This event apparently did not go down well with Mourinho and may have contributed to his surprise departure.
Avram Grant led Chelsea to the position of runners-up in the Premiership and the club's first Champions League final appearance, beaten by Manchester United on both accounts. Nevertheless, on 24 May, Grant was sacked as manager by Abramovich. 
On 11 June 2008, it was announced that Luiz Felipe Scolari, who had taken Brazil to World Cup glory in 2002, would be taking over as manager. But he only lasted until 9 February 2009 before being sacked. In February 2009, acclaimed coach Guus Hiddink was appointed caretaker manager for the rest of the 2008/09 season, delivering Chelsea's first post-Mourinho trophy with the FA Cup. 
Hiddink was replaced by another former European Cup winning boss, Carlo Ancelotti. In May 2010, Ancelotti won Chelsea their first league and FA Cup "double" in his first season as manager. The following season, in January 2011, Spanish footballer Fernando Torres completed his move to Chelsea on a five-and-a-half year contract on 31 January for an undisclosed fee reported to be £50 million, which set a new record for a British transfer and made him the fourth most expensive footballer in history. Ancelotti was sacked as manager at the end of his second season with the club in May 2011, after Chelsea's impressive form at the start of the campaign collapsed spectacularly during the winter months.
André Villas-Boas, after taking Porto to a Europa League triumph, and having previously worked alongside Mourinho at Stamford Bridge, was appointed as Abramovich's seventh different manager of Chelsea on 22 June 2011. However Villas-Boas was sacked in on 4 March due to a bad run of form, of one win in their last eleven games. The next manager was Roberto Di Matteo, who was appointed to this role after winning the UEFA Champions League and the FA Cup serving in a caretaker capacity. Roberto Di Matteo was also sacked on 21 November 2012 after their 3-0 loss to Juventus. Former Liverpool boss Rafael Benitez has now been appointed as Manager for the remainder of the club's campaign.
Few days ahead of the 2012 Champions League final, FC Bayern Munich President Uli Hoeneß attacked Roman Abramovich’s ownership of Chelsea. Hoeneß branded Abramovich one of the ‘oil mafia’ who take money from the public at petrol pumps to fund their football clubs. Nevertheless, Chelsea beat Bayern Munich on penalties in the 2012 Champions League final to become champions of Europe for the first time in their history; the success was commonly described as being the 'Holy Grail' for Abramovich, who prioritized the competition far above any domestic successes in England.
Abramovich then chose Rafael Benitez as his next manager and because of the rivalry between Chelsea and Benitez, there were a lot of boos from the Chelsea fans in his first game in charge. There were many banners in the Stamford Bridge crowd that were hostile to Benitez and which praised Di Matteo.
CSKA Moscow.
In March 2004, Sibneft agreed to a three-year sponsorship deal worth €41.3 million (US$58 million) with the Russian team CSKA Moscow. Although the company explained that the decision was made at management level, some viewed the deal as an attempt by Abramovich to counter accusations of being "unpatriotic" which were made at the time of the Chelsea purchase. Union of European Football Associations (UEFA) rules prevent one person owning more than one team participating in UEFA competitions, so Abramovich has no equity interest in CSKA. A lawyer, Alexandre Garese, is one of his partners in CSKA. 
Following an investigation, Abramovich was cleared by UEFA of having a conflict of interest. Nevertheless, he was named "most influential person in Russian football" in the Russian magazine "Pro Sport" at the end of June 2004. In May 2005, CSKA won the UEFA Cup, becoming the first Russian club ever to win a major European football competition. However, in October 2005, Abramovich sold his interest in Sibneft and the company's new owner Gazprom, which sponsors FC Zenit Saint Petersburg, cancelled the sponsorship deal.
Russian national team.
Abramovich also played a large role in bringing Guus Hiddink to Russia to coach the Russia national football team. Piet de Visser, a former head scout of Hiddink's club PSV Eindhoven and now a personal assistant to Abramovich at Chelsea, recommended Hiddink to the Chelsea owner. De Visser was also instrumental in the appointment of Hiddink as temporary Chelsea manager for the final months of the 2008–09 season.
National Academy of Football.
In addition to his involvement in professional football, Abramovich sponsors a foundation in Russia called the National Academy of Football. The organization sponsors youth sports programs throughout the country and has constructed more than fifty football pitches in various cities and towns. It also funds training programs for coaches, prints instruction materials, renovates sports facilities and takes top coaches and students on trips to visit professional football clubs in England, Holland and Spain. In 2006 the Academy of Football took over the administration of the Konoplyov football academy at Primorsky, near Togliatti, Samara Oblast, where over 1000 youths are in residence, following the death at 38 of its founder, Yuri Konoplev.
Relationship with Kremlin.
Boris Yeltsin.
The proposed merger of Sibneft with Yukos was seen by most as a move to distance himself from Russia, at a time when the Kremlin appears to have decided to bring at least some of the oligarchs to account for their colourful past business practices. Abramovich was a close associate of controversial Boris Berezovsky who sold him his stake in Sibneft, although in July 2005 Berezovsky announced his intention to sue Abramovich in the British courts for pressuring him into selling most of his Russian assets cheaply to Abramovich after Berezovsky fled the country.
The Kremlin press service reported that Abramovich's name had been sent for approval as governor for another term to Chukotka's local parliament, which confirmed his appointment on 21 October 2005.
Vladimir Putin.
Chris Hutchins, a biographer of Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin, describes the relationship between Russian president and Abramovich as like that between a father and a favorite son; Abramovich himself has stated that his relationship with Putin is a professional business relationship, as signified by his use of the Russian language's formal "Вы" (like Spanish "usted" or French "vous") in addressing Putin, as opposed to the informal "ты" (Spanish "tú" or French "tu").
Personal life.
Family.
His family was Jewish. Abramovich is a chairman of the Federation of Jewish Communities of Russia (which is allied with Putin's administration), and donates money to the Chabad movement.
However, they later divorced in Russia in March 2007, with a settlement reported as being US$300 million (€213 million).
"Private Army".
In 2007, Abramovich reportedly boosted his security staff to a 40 person "private army", making him one of the best protected businessmen in the world.
Wealth.
According to "Forbes", as of March 2011, he had a net worth of US$13.4 billion up from US$11.2 billion the previous year, ranking him as the 53rd richest person in the world. Prior to the financial crisis, he was considered to be the second richest person living within the United Kingdom. Early in 2009, "The Times" estimated that due to the global economic crisis he has lost £3 billion from his £11.7 billion wealth.
Other interests and activities.
Art.
Roman Abramovich sponsored an exhibition of photographs of Uzbekistan by renowned Soviet photographer Max Penson (1893–1959) which opened on 29 November 2006 at the Gilbert Collection at Somerset House in London. He previously funded the exhibition "Quiet Resistance: Russian Pictorial Photography 1900s–1930s" at the same gallery in 2005. Both exhibits were organized by the Moscow House of Photography.
In May 2008, Abramovich emerged as a major buyer in the international art auction market. He purchased Francis Bacon's "Triptych 1976" for €61.4 million (US$86.3 million) (a record price for a post-war work of art) and Lucian Freud's "Benefits Supervisor Sleeping" for €23.9 million (US$33.6 million) (a record price for a work by a living artist).
Russian Oligarch Roman Abramovich is the proud owner of the Pablo Picasso masterpiece painting “Nude, Green Leaves, and Bust” worth $106.5 million.
His partner Dasha Zhukova is managing a gallery of contemporary art in Moscow that occupies a historical Bakhmetevsky Bus Garage building by Konstantin Melnikov. The building, neglected for decades and partially taken apart by previous tenants, was restored in 2007–2008 and reopened to the public in September 2008. Speed and expense of restoration is credited to sponsorship by Abramovich.
Homes.
Abramovich qualified for the Sunday Times Rich List 2008, with an estimated fortune of €13.8 billion (£11.7 billion/US$19.3 billion), by virtue of retaining a property in Belgravia, London on Lowndes Square.
In May 2008, Abramovich bought the former Wildcat Ridge estate, near Aspen, Colorado, off American businessman Leon Hirsch, founder of United States Surgical Corporation, for €21.2 million (£18 million/US$29.7 million).
In late 2009, he purchased 9 apartments spread across 2 adjacent buildings in Lowndes Square, London. Planning to demolish all but the facades, the plan was to build a £150m (US$233m) eight bedroomed, eight story (3 below ground, 5 above) home. However, due to part of the complex being owned by the National Trust and the resultant time delays, he abandoned the project.
Aircraft.
He owns a private Boeing 767-33A/ER, registered in Aruba as P4-MES. It is known as "The Bandit" due to its cockpit paint detail. Originally the aircraft was ordered by Hawaiian Airlines but the order was cancelled and Abramovich bought it from Boeing and refitted it to his own requirements.He also owns an Airbus A340-300E
Abramovich also owns three Eurocopter helicopters, all with Aruba registration as well. An EC-145 with the registration P4-LGB, an EC-135T1 with the registration P4-XTC and an EC-155B with the registration P4-HEC.
He is also the owner of a private Falcon 700, registration LX-MES.
He has the biggest part of the BG ( Bulgariq airport)
Motor vehicles.
In 2004, Abramovich bought two Maybach 62 limousines, which were customized to be bomb and bullet-proof and reportedly cost £1 million (€1.18 million/US$1.65 million).
