Gerard James Butler (born 13 November 1969) is a Scottish actor who has appeared on film, stage, and television. A trained lawyer, Butler turned to acting in the mid-1990s with small roles in productions such as the James Bond film "Tomorrow Never Dies" (1997), which he followed with steady work on television, most notably in the American miniseries "Attila" (2001). In 2003, he played André Marek in the adaptation of Michael Crichton's "Timeline". He garnered critical acclaim for his work as the lead in Joel Schumacher's 2004 film adaptation of the musical "The Phantom of the Opera". In 2007, Butler gained recognition through his portrayal of King Leonidas in the film "300". Since then, he has appeared in projects including "P.S. I Love You" (2007), "Nim's Island" (2008), "RocknRolla" (2008), "The Ugly Truth" (2009), "Gamer" (2009), "Law Abiding Citizen" (2009), "The Bounty Hunter" (2010), and as a voice actor in "How to Train Your Dragon" (2010).
Early life.
Butler was born in Paisley in Renfrewshire, Scotland, the youngest of three children of Margaret and Edward Butler, a bookmaker. Of Irish descent, he was brought up in a strict Roman Catholic family.
Butler spent most of the first year of his life in Montreal, Quebec. His mother returned to Scotland with him, from Quebec, when her marriage broke down, when Gerard was aged 18 months. He attended High School in Paisley, rose to position of Prefect (and later Head Boy) at St Mirin's & St Margaret's High School and achieved respectable grades - good enough to win a place at Glasgow University to study law. He also attended Scottish Youth Theatre while a teenager. He did not see his father again until he was 16 years old, when Edward Butler called to meet him at a Glasgow restaurant. After this meeting, Butler cried for hours, and recalled of it later: 
"That emotion showed me how much pain can sit in this body of yours; pain and sorrow that you don’t know you have until it is unleashed."
Butler became close to his father after this reunion. Around the same time, he also accepted Glasgow University's offer to study law. During his time as a student, he became the President of the Law Society and sang in a rock band called Speed.
While a 22 year old student, his father was diagnosed with cancer and died. This caused Butler's lifestyle to spiral out of control. He would say of this period in his life: 
"I had gone from a 16-year-old who couldn’t wait to grasp life to a 22-year-old who didn’t care if he died in his sleep."
Upon graduation, he won a position as a trainee lawyer at an Edinburgh law firm. However, his lifestyle remained unrestrained and he frequently missed work due to his partying antics. One week before he qualified as a lawyer, he was fired. 
Now, aged 25, and an unqualified lawyer, Butler moved to London to pursue his dream of becoming famous. He admitted: 
"When I started out, I'm not sure I was actually in it for the right reasons. I wanted very much to be famous."
Unable to win any acting roles immediately, he was forced to accept blue collar jobs, which included being a waiter, a telemarketer and a demonstrator of how toys work at fairs. Whilst in London, he met an old friend from his teenage days in the Scottish Youth Theatre, who was now a London casting agent, and was for a time her boyfriend and her assistant. She took him to an audition for Steven Berkoff's play of Coriolanus. The director said of Butler's audition: 
"When he read, he had such vigour and enthusiasm – so much that it made the other actors seem limp – that I decided to cast him in the ensemble."
Now aged 27, Butler had his first professional acting job. Less than a year later, he won a part in a theater adaptation of "Trainspotting", which he performed at the Edinburgh Festival. By age 30, Butler decided to move to Los Angeles to make it in the big league; there he won parts in "Dracula 2000", "", "Dear Frankie", and "Phantom of the Opera". The director Vadim Jean said: 
"I have never seen anybody work so hard to make their career happen." 
Despite the early yearnings for fame, Butler would tell London's "Daily Telegraph" in a 2009 interview, when aged 39: 
"I did expect to succeed and I did have faith that I would. In reality, though, it has turned out to be something very different to what I wanted. It’s the work and not the adulation that has proved to be the most fulfilling."
Career.
In London, Butler held a series of odd jobs until being cast by actor and director Steven Berkoff (who later appeared alongside him in "Attila" (2001)) in a stage production of "Coriolanus". He was cast as Ewan McGregor's character Renton in the stage adaptation of "Trainspotting", the same play that had inspired him to become an actor. His film debut was as Billy Connolly's character's younger brother in "Mrs. Brown" (1997).
His film career continued with small roles, first in the James Bond film "Tomorrow Never Dies" (1997) and then Russell Mulcahy's "Tale of the Mummy" (1998). In 2000, Butler was cast in two breakthrough roles, the first being Attila the Hun in USA film "Attila" (2001/I) (TV). The film's producers wanted a known actor to play the part but kept coming back to Butler's screen tests and decided he was their man. He was cast as Dracula in "Dracula 2000" (2000).
He then appeared in "Reign of Fire" (2002) as Creedy and "" (2003) as Terry Sheridan, alongside Angelina Jolie. In the role of Andre Marek in the big-screen adaptation of Michael Crichton's novel "Timeline" (2003), Butler played an archaeologist who was sent back in time with a team of students to rescue a colleague.
In 2003, director Joel Schumacher was deciding on the principal casting for the film "The Phantom of the Opera", a film adaptation of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical of the same name, and thought of Butler, whom he had seen earlier in the film "Dracula 2000", to play the title character. Butler, who had had no musical experience other than singing in a rock band while he was studying to be a lawyer, was surprised at the interest, but immediately began taking singing lessons with a vocal coach. He then did an acting audition with Schumacher, and a singing audition with Lloyd Webber, both of whom were impressed by his performance. Despite the film receiving mixed reviews, Butler was praised for his performance.
Other projects that followed include "Dear Frankie" (2005), "The Game of Their Lives" (2005) and "Beowulf & Grendel" (2005).
In 2007, he starred as Spartan King Leonidas in the Warner Bros. production "300", which is often described as his breakthrough role. Butler, who said he "wanted to look really strong" in the film, trained with a high-intensity workout for four months prior to the film's shooting.
In 2007, he also appeared in "Butterfly on a Wheel" co-starring Pierce Brosnan and Maria Bello, which aired on network TV under the title "Shattered", and in the romantic comedy "P.S. I Love You" with Hilary Swank.
In 2008, he appeared in "Nim's Island" and "RocknRolla". In 2009, he starred in the Mark Neveldine/Brian Taylor film "Gamer", "The Ugly Truth" and "Law Abiding Citizen", which he also co-produced. In 2010 he starred in the action/comedy "The Bounty Hunter" with Jennifer Aniston, and did a voice-over in the 2010 animated film "How to Train Your Dragon" as Stoick the Vast.
On 15 and 16 October 2010, thanks to the popularity of his role as Spartan King Leonidas and the use of his lines during athletic events at Michigan State University, he was a guest at their Midnight Madness and homecoming football game, respectively.
On 18 December 2011, while filming "Chasing Mavericks", Butler was hospitalized after he was pulled under big waves. A safety patrolman spotted Butler and quickly rushed to his aid. He was taken to Stanford University Medical Center where he was observed and then later released.
On 19 August 2011, while filming "Playing For Keeps", Butler is said to be writing songs and in the process of recording an album. Marilyn Manson, Jack Black, and Johnny Depp are said to be advising him on becoming a rock star. "The 300 star sought advice from Depp on "putting a first-rate band together" and was then introduced to Manson and Black, who are reportedly guiding Butler along the path to rock and roll stardom." 
Personal life.
Butler has been open in interviews about struggling with alcoholism. In February 2012, Butler's publicist announced that Butler had completed a course of treatment for substance abuse of pain killers, at a rehab-centre. This was after Butler was concerned he was too reliant on prescribed pain relief medication which escalated when he was involved in a surfing incident before Christmas 2011.
A fan of the Glasgow football club Celtic and having played a charity match with them in 2011, Butler regularly attended Celtic Park as a supporter, but has found that moving to Hollywood can be a problem when trying to keep up with the results due to the time difference between Los Angeles and Glasgow.
