Merlin is a British fantasy-adventure television programme by Julian Jones, Jake Michie, Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps. It was broadcast on BBC One between 20 September 2008 and 24 December 2012. The show is loosely based on the Arthurian legends of the young wizard Merlin and his relationship with Prince Arthur but differs from traditional versions in many ways. The show was influenced by the U.S. drama series "Smallville", about the early years of Superman, and was produced by independent production company Shine Limited. 
The show was first greenlit by the BBC in 2006, after a number of unsuccessful attempts. The series premiered in 2008 to mixed reviews but decent ratings, and also proved popular on the BBC's digital catch-up service, iPlayer. Based on the popularity of its first series, it was commissioned by the BBC for a second series, and was picked up in the United States by one of the main broadcasters, NBC, though it later moved to the cable network Syfy due to low ratings. In 2012, the show's producers announced that its fifth series would be its last, with a two-part finale finishing the show on 24 December 2012.
Series overview.
Merlin is a young wizard who arrives in the kingdom of Camelot after his mother arranges for him to stay with the court physician, Gaius. He discovers that the king, Uther Pendragon, has outlawed magic and imprisoned the last Dragon deep under the kingdom. After hearing a mysterious voice inside his head, Merlin makes his way to the cavern beneath Camelot where the Dragon tells Merlin that he plays an important role: to protect Uther's son, Arthur, who will bring forth a great kingdom. When Merlin meets Arthur, he believes that he is an arrogant bully and Arthur, likewise, has a less than stellar opinion of Merlin. After saving the prince's life Merlin becomes his servant and the two eventually become friends. Uther's actions cause his ward Morgana to turn against Camelot, Merlin must ally himself with the Once and Future King to save the kingdom of Albion.
Production history.
The programme was conceived by Shine producers Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps, who had worked together on "Hex", a fantasy series produced by Shine for Sky One. The BBC had been keen on showing a drama based on the character of Merlin for some time; a little over a year before the Shine series was initiated, writer and producer Chris Chibnall had been developing a project aimed at a BBC One Sunday night slot, but this was ultimately not commissioned. The Shine version of the project was put into development in late 2006, commissioned by Controller of BBC One Peter Fincham and BBC Head of Fiction Jane Tranter, with Fincham keen on having more series on his channel which embodied "three generation TV – that's TV you can watch with your grandparents and children. There's not enough of that about."
"Merlin" is influenced by the U.S. show "Smallville", about the early years of Superman, according to Shine producers, Julian Murphy and Johnny Capps, who said that "Smallville" helped provide the idea that Merlin would see a "Camelot that existed before its golden age". Caps said: "Just as in "Smallville" we wanted to subvert expectations. Camelot is a land where magic is banned Merlin ... is a young boy who works as Arthur's manservant and has to hide his abilities."
The series went into production in March 2008, with filming taking place in Wales and France (at the Château de Pierrefonds). The series was produced by Shine in association with BBC Wales, whose Head of Drama Julie Gardner served as executive producer for the BBC. "Doctor Who"'s chief writer Russell T Davies had been an important influence on the tone and style of "Merlin". CGI special effects for the series were provided by The Mill. The Old English dialogue used for spells was written by a university scholar and later the script editing team. Consisting of an initial series of 13 episodes, "Merlin" began transmission in the UK on 20 September 2008. In advance of this, a special trailer was prepared for release on television, in cinemas and online.
After Series 1 was successful, U.S. broadcaster NBC began airing it on 21 June 2009; but, after a decline in viewers, it was moved to the cable network Syfy, where it began broadcasting Series 2 on 2 April 2010. On 19 September 2009, Series 2 began airing on BBC One. On 5 September 2010, BFI Southbank in London previewed Episodes 1 and 2 of Series 3 for its September Film Funday programme. A ten-episode fourth series was confirmed on 25 October 2010 (though it was rumoured to air in early 2012, later than its usual slot in autumn) so that it would not clash with the BBC's other prime time drama "Doctor Who" which would possibly run during the same period. In March 2011, this was revised, and the fourth series was extended to the standard 13 episodes. It was confirmed at the 2011 Comic-Con in San Diego that the fourth series will again be broadcast in the United States on the Syfy Channel "in early 2012." In UK, the fourth series began on Saturday 1 October 2011.
Johnny Capps and Julian Murphy, Executive Producers for Shine TV, confirmed on 24 July at the 2011 Comic-Con Merlin panel that BBC had commissioned a fifth series. Filming for the fifth series began March 2012 in Pierrefonds, France and near Cardiff, Wales. 13 episodes were ordered. Series 5 started broadcasting on 6 October 2012. On 26 November 2012, it was announced that the series 5 of Merlin will be the last, with a two-part special concluding the series over Christmas.
Broadcast.
A documentary series called "Merlin: Secrets and Magic" explains how the series was created. Apart from the initial 50 minute special, which was broadcast directly after the series two premiere, and the first episode, shown first on the Sunday repeat, all new 15 minute episodes were shown after each "Merlin" episode repeat on Saturday, Sunday, Monday or Friday evening on BBC Three. The show is also frequently shown on CBBC.
In April 2008, U.S. broadcasting rights were purchased by NBC, where it was shown on Sundays at 8 pm (EST), starting 21 June 2009. This made it the first British drama in over 30 years to be shown on US network television, as opposed to PBS or cable. The programme moved to Syfy, a cable channel also owned by NBC, for the second series, which premiered on 2 April 2010.
Syfy aired the third series in early 2011, after the conclusion of the initial broadcast on BBC. It was later announced the series would air after Friday Night SmackDown beginning 7 January 2011 at 10 pm (9 pm Central). The distributor, FremantleMedia Enterprises, also sold broadcast rights to CTV in Canada and Network Ten in Australia. The series was broadcasted in 183 countries.
DVD releases.
Series one and two were released on DVD in the United Kingdom, the United States and Australia. Series three is currently available in the UK, and was released in Australia on 4 August 2011. Accompanying all box sets are featurettes, video diaries, and commentaries. Behind the Magic, a two-part overview of making "Merlin" is included with the UK series one box set, while the documentary series, Secrets and Magic, is included with series two.
In Australia Series 1 was released on DVD and later re-released in new packaging on 4 August 2010. Series 2 was released on 22 July 2010 and then re-released in new packaging on 6 January 2011. Series 3 was released on 1 August 2011. Series 4 was released on 1 March 2012. Series 5 was released on February 13, 2013. 
Soundtrack.
A soundtrack for the each of the first two series, featuring music from selected episodes, has been released on the MovieScore Media record label. "Merlin" composer Robert Lane was nominated for Best Original Score for Television for the 10th annual Movie Music UK Awards (2008), the 8th edition GoldSpirit Awards (2008), and the 5th annual International Film Music Critics Association (IFMCA) Awards (2008). In early October 2012 MovieScore Media released the soundtrack from the third and fourth series along with that from the start of the fifth series.
Official magazine.
UK publisher Attic Brand Media launched an official magazine for the show in September 2011 featuring articles, puzzles and a comic strip written by Damian Kelleher and drawn by Lee Carey. The monthly magazine costs £3.20 per issue and is distributed in UK newsagents.
