Odd Future Wolf Gang Kill Them All, often abbreviated to OFWGKTA (stylized OFWGK†Δ) or simply Odd Future, is an American hip hop collective from Los Angeles, California. The collective is led by rapper/producer Tyler, The Creator, and includes rappers Hodgy Beats, Earl Sweatshirt, Domo Genesis, and Mike G, singer-songwriter/rapper Frank Ocean, producers Left Brain, Syd Tha Kyd, Matt Martians, Hal Williams and other non-musical members, notably pseudo rappers Jasper Dolphin and Taco Bennett. Tyler has said that there are 60 members in the group.
There are multiple groups inside the collective: MellowHype, The Internet, The Jet Age of Tomorrow, EarlWolf, and MellowHigh.
History.
2007–2009: Early career.
Odd Future formed around 2006-2007 in Los Angeles. The original members were founder Tyler, the Creator (Tyler Okonma), Left Brain (Vyron Turner), Hodgy Beats (Gerard Damien Long), Matt Martians (Matthew Martin), Jasper Dolphin (Davon Wilson) and Casey Veggies (Casey Jones), the latter of which appeared only on the group's debut mixtape before branching out to other projects. However Casey Veggies remains a close contributor. At some point before the release of "Bastard", Chicago based rapper brandUn DeShay collaborated with the group, and appeared on the track "Session," but Tyler and DeShay had a falling out, and his vocals on "Session" were replaced by Mike G. Much of their music was recorded in a room in Syd the Kyd's and Taco's house, known as the Trap, located in South Central Los Angeles.
2010: Rise in popularity.
2009-2010 saw several new members arrive, Domo Genesis (Domonique Cole), Earl Sweatshirt (Thebe Kgositsile) (then Sly Tendencies), Mike G (Michael Griffin II), Frank Ocean (Christopher Breaux), Taco and Syd tha Kyd (Travis and Sydney Bennett).
After the release of his debut album "Earl", member Earl Sweatshirt was absent from the group when he was 16 years old, but returned shortly before his 18th birthday, and started showing up to tours and interviews in the middle of March 2012. It was rumored that his mother sent him to an all-boys boarding school for kids with drug issues and depression in Samoa. Earl confirmed in an interview after returning to the U.S. that he attended a therapeutic retreat school for at-risk boys situated outside the Samoan capital of Apia called Coral Reef Academy, because he was getting himself into trouble.
The group completed a two-stop tour, their first outside of Los Angeles and in London, England, on November 5, 2010, and New York City on November 8. The concert at The Drop in London sold out within 48 hours of announcement by the group. At the highly anticipated show at Webster Hall in New York City, the venue was packed to its 300-person maximum capacity. Their concerts have frequently been compared to punk rock shows, with stagediving, moshing and antagonizing the crowd.
2011–present: Solo releases and TV show.
MellowHype re-released their album "BlackenedWhite" through Fat Possum Records. Tyler, the Creator also signed a one album deal with XL Recordings and released his sophomore effort, "Goblin", on May 10, 2011.
They have collected a cult following, and have been getting press from blogs as well as magazines. Though they are often labeled as horrorcore, the group has universally dismissed it on Twitter, in interviews, and on tracks such as "Sandwitches". Pitchfork Media has labeled the group as indie rap.
On February 18, 2011, two of Odd Future's members, Tyler and Hodgy Beats, performed "Sandwitches" on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon with The Roots.
Odd Future performed "Yonkers" and "Sandwitches" on the mtvU Woodie Awards in New York City on March 16, 2011.
On April 5, 2011, MellowHype performed the song "64" on the Fuel TV program The Daily Habit with Bass Drum of Death. They along with Tyler the Creator also performed their song "65" for the BBC music showcase. A "clean" version of the song "Sandwitches" and the song "Analog" by Tyler the Creator was also performed for the same venue by Tyler and Hodgy Beats.
In April 2011, the group signed a deal with RED Distribution to start their own label, Odd Future Records. According to Tyler, "Bastard" will be re-released as a physical copy sometime in the future.
On August 2, 2011, Odd Future announced on their website the Golf Wang Tour 2011. The tour included 27 stops, beginning on September 28, 2011 in San Diego, California at the House of Blues.
On September 8, 2011, it was announced that Odd Future would be receiving a television show called "Loiter Squad". The show is to be a sketch comedy show featuring various skits and pranks and originally aired on March 25, 2012 on Adult Swim. Although the show only features Tyler, Jasper, Taco, and Lionel. The program is produced by Dickhouse Productions, which also is the production company for "Jackass".
On October 3, 2011, Tyler, The Creator tweeted a link to iTunes with an album of 12 old Odd Future songs from artists within the group Domo Genesis, Hodgy Beats, Mike G, and himself. Also, groups The Jet Age of Tomorrow, MellowHype, and The Internet had songs on the album. The album is simply named ""12 Odd Future Songs"", despite there being 13 songs including a brand new song from The Internet.
On March 20, 2012, the collective released their debut album, "The OF Tape Vol. 2". The album is a sequel to the original mixtape, "The Odd Future Tape". On the same day, Earl Sweatshirt, who was absent from Odd Future from June 2010 until February 2012, first performed with the group at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York.
Frank Ocean released his debut studio album "Channel Orange" on July 17, 2012. Other solo releases for the second half of 2012 include Domo Genesis's "No Idols", released on August 1, MellowHype's "Numbers", released on October 9, and Tyler, The Creator's "Wolf" which has yet to be released.
It has also been mentioned that Earl Sweatshirt and The Jet Age of Tomorrow are working on albums, "Doris" and "Jellyfish Mentality" respectively, although release dates have not been confirmed.
On December 5, 2012 it was announced Frank Ocean was nominated for six Grammy awards at the 55th Grammy Awards including Best New Artist, Record of the Year for "Thinkin Bout You" and Album of the Year for "Channel Orange".
