Microsoft Office 2013 (formerly Office 15) is the latest version of the Microsoft Office productivity suite for Microsoft Windows and the successor to Microsoft Office 2010. Office 2013 includes extended file format support, user interface updates, and support for touch. Office 2013 is suitable for IA-32 and x64 systems and requires Windows 7, Windows Server 2008 R2 or later version of either. A version of Office 2013 comes included on Windows RT devices.
Development on this version of Microsoft Office was started in 2010 and ended on October 11, 2012 when Microsoft Office 2013 was released to manufacturing. Microsoft released Office 2013 to general availability on 29 January 2013. This version includes new features such as integration support for online services (including SkyDrive, Outlook.com, Hotmail, Skype, Yammer and Flickr), improved format support for Office Open XML (OOXML), OpenDocument (ODF) and Portable Document Format (PDF) and support for multi-touch interfaces.
Microsoft Office 2013 comes in twelve different editions, including three boxed editions for retail outlets, two boxed editions for volume licensing channel, five subscription-based editions available through Microsoft Office 365 program, the web application edition known as Office Web Apps and the Office RT edition made for tablets and mobile devices. Office Web Apps are available free of charge on the web although enterprises may obtain for on-premises installation for a price. Microsoft Office applications may be obtained individually; this includes Microsoft Visio, Microsoft Project and Microsoft SharePoint Workspace which are not included in any of the twelve editions.
The license agreement for retail editions of Microsoft Office 2013 is different from the license agreements of retail editions of previous versions of Microsoft Office in two significant ways: The license cannot be transferred to another computer. Previous versions of retail Office allowed uninstalling from one computer to install on another computer. In previous versions of Office, this restriction applied only to OEM editions. Additionally, the software can be installed on only one computer. Previous versions of retail Office allowed installing on two or three computers, depending on the Office edition.
Licensing change.
Microsoft changed its licensing terms for the regular, single-PC, standalone Office 2013 product. In contrast to previous versions of the applications suite, Office 2013 "cannot" be purchased on physical media (e.g., DVD). Instead, buyers receive just the "license key", allowing them to download the actual software/product to their PC from a Microsoft website. Once activated, this digital copy of Office is said to be permanently 'locked' to that PC's hardware, preventing it from being transferred to any other computing device. Should the buyer wish to use Office 2013 on a different computer, or if they later become unable to use the computing device that the original license was downloaded to (e.g., hardware becomes inoperable due to malfunction(s); original user sells the hardware) then a completely new, full-priced copy of Office 2013 must be purchased to replace the prior one. 
Microsoft publicly stated that this change was meant to reduce (or, even eliminate) the pirating of Office that has been rampant for years, worldwide (often committed by everyday people who claimed that Office's relatively high retail price justified their illegally copying it for friends/relatives' free use). However, many commentators see this change as a "Trojan horse"-style effort to forcibly move its entire customer base from a one-time-purchase business model, to its new Office 365/subscription-based business model (in which users must keep paying Microsoft, on a monthly or other periodic basis, for Office to remain functional on their PC). 
This may be illegal in the European Union. 
Development.
Development started in 2010 while Microsoft was finishing work on Office 14, released as Microsoft Office 2010. On January 30, 2012, Microsoft released a technical preview of Office 15, build 3612.1010, to a selected group of testers bound by non-disclosure agreements.
On July 16, 2012, Microsoft held a press conference to show off Office 2013 and to release the Consumer Preview. The Office 2013 Consumer Preview is a free, fully functional version but will expire 60 days after the final product's relesase. An update was issued for the Office 2013 Customer Preview suite on October 5.
Office 2013 was released to manufacturing on October 11, 2012. It was made available to TechNet and MSDN subscribers on October 24. On November 15, 2012, 60-days trial versions of Microsoft Office 2013 Professional Plus, Project Professional 2013 and Visio Professional 2013 were made available to the public over the Internet. Microsoft has released Office 2013 for general availability on 29 January 2013.
New features.
Office 2013 is more "cloud-based" than previous versions. This is notable as the default save location is the user's SkyDrive. Also, Microsoft offers Office 2013 through Office 365 subscriptions as an alternative pricing model to the standard retail versions.
Microsoft Office 2013 includes updated support for ISO/IEC 29500, the International Standard version of Office Open XML (OOXML) file format: in particular it supports saving in the "Strict" profile of ISO/IEC 29500 (Office Open XML Strict).. It also supports OASIS version 1.2 of ISO/IEC 26300:2006, Open Document Format, which Office 2013 can read and write. Additionally, Office 2013 provides full read, write, and edit support for ISO 32000 (PDF). 
New features include a new read mode in Microsoft Word, a presentation mode in Microsoft PowerPoint and improved touch and inking in all of the Office programs. Microsoft Word can also insert video and audio from online sources as well as the capability to broadcast documents on the Web. Word and PowerPoint also have bookmark-like features which sync the position of the document between different computers. 
Removed features.
The following features are removed from Microsoft Office 2013.
Editions.
Boxed editions.
Traditionally, Microsoft Office suite comes on physical media in retail computer stores or through volume licensing channels. All physical editions of Microsoft Office 2013 contain Word, Excel, PowerPoint and OneNote.
Microsoft Office 2013 includes the following physical editions: 
Office 365.
Office 2013's retail suites are complemented by four Office 365 subscriptions that also provide Office 2013 applications. There are 4 online suites, licensed for subscription services, updates and multiple users.
Office RT.
A special version of Office 2013 known as Office 2013 Home & Student RT is shipped with all Windows RT devices, consisting of Word, Excel, PowerPoint, and OneNote. This edition, whilst visually indistinguishable from normal versions of Office 2013, contains special optimizations for ARM-based devices, such as changes to reduce battery usage (including, for example, freezing the animation of the blinking cursor for text editing during periods of inactivity), enabling touch mode by default to improve usability on tablets, and using the graphics portion of a device's SoC for hardware acceleration.
Office RT modifies or excludes other various features for compatibility reasons or resource reduction. To save disk space; templates, clip art, and language packs are downloaded online rather than stored locally. Other excluded features include the removal of support for third-party code such as macros/VBA/ActiveX controls, the removal of support for older media formats and narration in PowerPoint, editing of equations generated with the legacy Equation Editor, data models in Excel (PivotCharts, PivotTables, and QueryTables are unaffected), and searching embedded media files in OneNote.
Windows RT devices on launch were shipped with a "preview" version of Office Home & Student 2013 RT. When the final version is released in the user’s language, Windows Update on Windows RT will update Office RT automatically. The exact release date varies depending on the user’s language. As the version of Office RT included on Windows RT devices is based off the Home & Student version, it cannot be used for "commercial, nonprofit, or revenue-generating activities" unless the organization has a volume license for Office 2013 already, or the user has an Office 365 subscription with commercial use rights.
Office Web Apps.
Microsoft has updated the Office Web Apps that previously shipped with Office 2010. Office Web Apps include updated online versions of Microsoft Word, Microsoft Excel, Microsoft PowerPoint and Microsoft OneNote. The web apps feature the same flat look as their desktop counterparts. The Office Web Apps Preview were released to SkyDrive on 16 July 2012. Users can use the Office Web Apps to create documents, and can download them locally on to their computer.
System requirements.
Each Microsoft Office 2013 application has the following requirements, although there may be app-specific requirements.
In addition to these, graphics hardware acceleration requires a screen resolution of 1024×576 pixels or larger and a DirectX 10-compliant GPU with at least 64 MB of video memory.
