A definition is a statement that explains the meaning of a term (a word, phrase, or other set of symbols). The term to be defined is the '. The term may have many different senses and multiple meanings. For each meaning, a ' is a cluster of words that defines that term (and clarifies the speaker's intention). As an example: To successfully define the word "Vegan", the definiendum (the word "Vegan" itself) must be given a definiens (actually vegan has at least two definiens: One is "someone who avoids using animal products", and another definiens is "someone from a place called Vega, Norway").
A definition will vary in aspects like precision or popularity (e.g. globally, the word "Vegan" rarely refers to the definiens "someone from Vega, Norway"). There are also different types of definitions with different purposes and focuses (e.g. intensional, extensional, descriptive, stipulative, and so on). 
A chief difficulty in the management of definitions is the necessity of using other terms that are already understood or whose definitions are easily obtainable or demonstrable.
A dictionary definition typically contains additional details about a word, such as an etymology and the language or languages of its origin, or obsolete meanings. 
Basic considerations.
In formal languages like mathematics, a "stipulative" definition guides a specific discussion. A stipulative definition can only be disproved by showing a logical contradiction. A stipulative definition might be considered a temporary, working definition. On the other hand, a "descriptive" definition can be shown to be "right" or "wrong" with reference to general usage.
A "precising definition" extends the descriptive dictionary definition (lexical definition) of a term for a specific purpose by including additional criteria, which narrow the set of things that meet the definition.
C.L. Stevenson has identified "persuasive definition" as a form of stipulative definition which purports to state the "true" or "commonly accepted" meaning of a term, while in reality stipulating an altered use (perhaps as an argument for some specific belief). Stevenson has also noted that some definitions are "legal" or "coercive" — their object is to create or alter rights, duties, or crimes.
Intension and extension.
An "intensional definition", also called a "coactive" definition, specifies the necessary and sufficient conditions for a thing being a member of a specific set. Any definition that attempts to set out the essence of something, such as that by genus and differentia, is an intensional definition.
An "extensional definition", also called a "denotative" definition, of a concept or term specifies its "extension". It is a list naming every object that is a member of a specific set.
Thus, the "seven deadly sins" can be defined "intentionally" as those singled out by Pope Gregory I as particularly destructive of the life of grace and charity within a person, thus creating the threat of eternal damnation. An "extensional" definition would be a list of the seven. In contrast, while an intensional definition of "Prime Minister" might be "the most senior minister of a cabinet in the executive branch of government in a parliamentary system", an extensional definition is not possible since it is not known who future prime ministers will be.
One important form of the extensional definition is "ostensive definition". This gives the meaning of a term by pointing, in the case of an individual, to the thing itself, or in the case of a class, to examples of the right kind. So you can explain who "Alice" (an individual) is by pointing her out to me; or what a "rabbit" (a class) is by pointing at several and expecting me to 'catch on'. The process of ostensive definition itself was critically appraised by Ludwig Wittgenstein.
An "enumerative definition" of a concept or term is an "extensional definition" that gives an explicit and exhaustive listing of all the objects that fall under the concept or term in question. Enumerative definitions are only possible for finite sets and only practical for relatively small sets.
"Divisio" and "partitio".
"Divisio" and "partitio" are classical terms for definitions. A "partitio" is simply an intensional definition. A "divisio" is not an extensional definition. "Divisio" is an exhaustive list of subsets of a set, in the sense that every member of the "divided" set is a member of one of the subsets. An extreme form of "divisio" lists all sets whose only member is a member of the "divided" set. The difference between this and an extensional definition is that extensional definitions list "members", and not sets.
Definition by genus and differentia.
Rules for definition by genus and differentia.
Certain rules have traditionally been given for this particular type of definition.
Essence.
In classical thought, a definition was taken to be a statement of the essence of a thing. Aristotle had it that an object's essential attributes form its "essential nature", and that a definition of the object must include these essential attributes.
The idea that a definition should state the essence of a thing led to the distinction between "nominal" and "real" essence, originating with Aristotle. In a passage from the Posterior Analytics, he says that we can know the meaning of a made-up name (he gives the example 'goat stag'), without knowing what he calls the 'essential nature' of the thing that the name would denote, if there were such a thing. This led medieval logicians to distinguish between what they called the "quid nominis" or 'whatness of the name', and the underlying nature common to all the things it names, which they called the "quid rei" or 'whatness of the thing'. (Early modern philosophers like Locke used the corresponding English terms 'nominal essence' and 'real essence'). The name 'hobbit', for example, is perfectly meaningful. It has a "quid nominis". But we could not know the real nature of hobbits, even if there were such things, and so we cannot know the real nature or "quid rei" of hobbits. By contrast, the name 'man' denotes real things (men) that have a certain "quid rei". The meaning of a name is distinct from the nature that thing must have in order that the name apply to it.
This leads to a corresponding distinction between "nominal" and "real" definition. A nominal definition is the definition explaining what a word means, i.e. which says what the 'nominal essence' is, and is definition in the classical sense as given above. A real definition, by contrast, is one expressing the real nature or "quid rei" of the thing.
This preoccupation with essence dissipated in much of modern philosophy. Analytic philosophy in particular is critical of attempts to elucidate the essence of a thing. Russell described it as "a hopelessly muddle-headed notion". 
More recently Kripke's formalisation of possible world semantics in modal logic led to a new approach to essentialism. Insofar as the essential properties of a thing are "necessary" to it, they are those things it possesses in all possible worlds. Kripke refers to names used in this way as rigid designators.
Recursive definitions.
For instance, we could define natural number as follows (after Peano): 
So "0" will have exactly one successor, which for convenience we can call "1". In turn, "1" will have exactly one successor, which we would call "2", and so on. Notice that the second condition in the definition itself refers to natural numbers, and hence involves self-reference. Although this sort of definition involves a form of circularity, it is not vicious, and the definition has been quite successful.
Working definitions.
A working definition is chosen for an occasion and may not fully conform with established or authoritative definitions. Not knowing of established definitions would be grounds for selecting or devising a working definition. Or it refers to a definition being developed; a tentative definition that can be tailored to create an authoritative definition.
Limitations of definition.
Given that a natural language such as English contains, at any given time, a finite number of words, any comprehensive list of definitions must either be circular or rely upon primitive notions. If every term of every "definiens" must itself be defined, "where at last should we stop?" A dictionary, for instance, insofar as it is a comprehensive list of lexical definitions, must resort to circularity.
Many philosophers have chosen instead to leave some terms undefined. The scholastic philosophers claimed that the highest genera (the so-called ten "generalissima") cannot be defined, since we cannot assign any higher genus under which they may fall. Thus we cannot define being, unity and similar concepts. Locke supposes in "An Essay Concerning Human Understanding" that the names of simple concepts do not admit of any definition. More recently Bertrand Russell sought to develop a formal language based on logical atoms. Other philosophers, notably Wittgenstein, rejected the need for any undefined simples. Wittgenstein pointed out in his "Philosophical Investigations" that what counts as a "simple" in one circumstance might not do so in another. He rejected the very idea that every explanation of the meaning of a term needed itself to be explained: "As though an explanation hung in the air unless supported by another one", claiming instead that explanation of a term is only needed when we need to avoid misunderstanding.
Locke and Mill also argued that we cannot define individuals. We learn names by connecting an idea with a sound, so that speaker and hearer have the same idea when the same word is used. This is not possible when no one else is acquainted with the particular thing that has "fallen under our notice". Russell offered his theory of descriptions in part as a way of defining a proper name, the definition being given by a definite description that "picks out" exactly one individual. Saul Kripke pointed to difficulties with this approach, especially in relation to modality, in his book "Naming and Necessity".
There is a presumption in the classic example of a definition that the "definiens" can be stated. Wittgenstein argued that for some terms this is not the case. The examples he used include "game", "number" and "family". In such cases, he argued, there is no fixed boundary that can be used to provide a definition. Rather, the items are grouped together because of a family resemblance. For terms such as these it is not possible and indeed not necessary to state a definition; rather, one simply comes to understand the "use" of the term.
