Resident Evil, known in Japan as , is a media franchise owned by the video game company Capcom. It was created by Shinji Mikami as a survival horror video game series that was initiated with "Resident Evil" in 1996. Since then, the game series has branched out to include action games, and has sold 50 million units as of 30 June 2012.
The franchise has been expanded to comic books, novels and novelizations, sound dramas, a series of live-action and animated feature films, and a variety of associated merchandise, such as action figures.
History.
The survival horror video game "Resident Evil" made its debut on the PlayStation in 1996, and was later ported to the Sega Saturn. It was a critical and commercial success, leading to the production of two sequels, "Resident Evil 2" in 1998 and ' in 1999, both for the PlayStation. A port of "Resident Evil 2" was released for the Nintendo 64. In addition, ports of all three were released for Windows. The fourth game in the series, ', was developed for the Sega Dreamcast and released in 2000, followed by ports of "2" and "3". "Resident Evil Code: Veronica" was later re-released for Dreamcast in Japan in an updated form as "Code: Veronica Complete", which included slight changes, many of which revolved around story cutscenes. This updated version was later ported to PlayStation 2 and Nintendo GameCube under the title "Code: Veronica X".
Despite earlier announcements that the next game in the series would be released for the PlayStation 2, which resulted in the creation of an unrelated game titled "Devil May Cry", series' creator and producer Shinji Mikami decided to make the series exclusively for the Nintendo GameCube. The next three games in the series—a remake of the original "Resident Evil" and the prequel "Resident Evil Zero", both released in 2002, as well as "Resident Evil 4"—were all released initially as GameCube exclusives. "Resident Evil 4" was later released for Windows, PS2 and Wii. In addition, the GameCube received ports of the previous "Resident Evil" sequels. Despite this exclusivity agreement between Capcom and Nintendo, Capcom released several "Resident Evil" titles for the PS2 that were not considered direct sequels.
A trilogy of GunCon-compatible light gun games known as the "Gun Survivor" series featured first person game play. The first, "Resident Evil Survivor", was released in 2000 for the PlayStation and PC, but received mediocre reviews. The subsequent games, ' and ', fared somewhat better. "Dead Aim" is actually the fourth "Gun Survivor" game in Japan, with "Gun Survivor 3" being the "Dino Crisis" spin-off "Dino Stalker". In a similar vein, the "Chronicles" series features first person game play, albeit on an on-rails path. ' was released in 2007 for the Wii, with a follow up, ' released in 2009.
"Resident Evil Outbreak" is an online game for the PS2, released in 2003, depicting a series of episodic storylines in Raccoon City set during the same time period as "Resident Evil 2" and "3". It was the first in the series and the first survival horror title to feature cooperative gameplay and online multiplayer support. It was followed by a sequel, "Resident Evil Outbreak File #2". Raccoon City is a metropolis located in the Arklay Mountains of North America that succumbed to the deadly T-virus outbreak and was consequently destroyed via a nuclear missile attack issued by the United States government. The town served a critical junction for the series' progression as one of the main catalysts to Umbrella's downfall as well as the entry point for some of the series' most notable characters. 
"Resident Evil Gaiden" is an action-adventure game for the Game Boy Color featuring an RPG-style combat system. There have also been several downloadable mobile games based on the "Resident Evil" series in Japan. Some of these mobile games have been released in North America and Europe through T-Mobile. At the Sony press conference during the E3 2009, it was announced that "Resident Evil Portable" would be released for the PlayStation Portable, described as an all-new title being developed with "the PSP Go in mind" and "totally different for a "Resident Evil" game". However, as of 2012, no further announcements have been made, and the game is considered to have been delayed indefinitely, if not cancelled.
In March 2011, Capcom revealed the third-person shooter ', which is developed by Slant Six Games for the PlayStation 3, Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows and released in March 2012. A survival horror game for the Nintendo 3DS, ', was released in February 2012. In October of the same year, the next numbered entry in the main series, "Resident Evil 6", was released to mixed reviews, but enthusiastic pre-order sales.
HD Collections released HD ports of "Resident Evil 4", "Resident Evil: Code Veronica X", "Resident Evil: The Umbrella Chronicles", and "Resident Evil: The Darkside Chronicles".
Related media.
In addition to video games, the plot of "Resident Evil" has been introduced as officially licensed material for films, comic books and novels.
Films.
Five live action films have been released under the title of "Resident Evil". These films do not follow the games' premise but do include game characters Jill Valentine, Claire Redfield, Nemesis, Chris Redfield, Carlos Oliviera, and Albert Wesker, and were all written and produced by Paul W. S. Anderson. The series' main protagonist is Alice, an original character created for these films. Despite a negative reaction from critics, the live action film series has made over $600 million worldwide. They are, to date, the only video game adaptations to increase the amount of money made by each successive film. The series holds the record for the "Most Live-Action Film Adaptations of a Video Game" in the 2012 "Guinness World Records Gamer's Edition", which also described it as "the most successful movie series to be based on a video game."
Two CGI movies have been produced based on the video game series rather than the film franchise, starring Leon S. Kennedy and Claire Redfield.
In addition, there is a stand-alone short film, "Biohazard 4D-Executer" (2000).
Novels.
The earliest "Resident Evil" novel was Hiroyuki Ariga's novella "Biohazard: The Beginning" published in 1997 as a portion of the book "The True Story of Biohazard", which was given away as a pre-order bonus with the Saturn version of "Biohazard". The story serves as a prelude to the events of the original "Resident Evil", in which Chris investigates the disappearance of his missing friend, Billy Rabbitson.
The novels often took liberties with the plot of the games by exploring events occurring outside and beyond the games. This often meant that the novels would later be contradicted by the games and, on a few occasions, themselves. One notable addition from the novels is the original character Trent, who often served as a mysterious behind-the-scenes string-puller who aided the main characters. Perry's novels were translated and released in Japan with new cover arts by Wolfina. Perry's novels, particularly "The Umbrella Conspiracy", also alluded to events in "Biohazard: The Beginning", such as the disappearance of Billy Rabbitson and Brian Irons' bid to run for Mayor. A reprinting of Perry's novels with new cover artwork began in 2012 to coincide with the release of "" and it's respective novelization.
There was also a trilogy of original "Biohazard" novels in Japan. was published in 1998 and was written by Kyū Asakura and the staff of Flagship. Two additional novels were published in 2002, "To the Liberty" by Suien Kimura and "Rose Blank" by Tadashi Aizawa. While no official English translation of these novels has been published yet, the last two books were translated into German and published in 2006.
Novelizations of four of the five films; "Genesis", "Apocalypse", "Extinction" and "Retribution", were written by Keith R. A. DeCandido, while "Retribution" was written by John Shirley, though "Afterlife" did not receive a novelization. The "Genesis" novel was published over two years after that film's release while the "Extinction" novel was released in late July 2007, two months before the film's release. There was also a Japanese novelization of the first film, unrelated to DeCandido's version, written by Osamu Makino. Makino also wrote two novels based on the game "Resident Evil: The Umbrella Chronicles". The books are a two-part direct novelization of the game and have been published in Japanese and German only. The first novel which was titled "Biohazard: The Umbrella Chronicles Side A" in Japan and "Resident Evil: The Umbrella Chronicles 1" in Germany was released on December 22, 2007. The second novel which was titled "Biohazard: The Umbrella Chronicles Side B" in Japan and "Resident Evil: The Umbrella Chronicles 2" in Germany was published in January 2008.
Comics.
In 1997, Marvel Comics published a single-issue prologue comic based on the original "Resident Evil", released through a promotional giveaway alongside the original PlayStation game.
In 1998, Wildstorm began producing a monthly comic book series based on the first two games titled "Resident Evil: The Official Comic Magazine", which lasted five issues. The first four issues were published by Image, while the fifth and final issue was published by Wildstorm themselves. Each issue was a compilation of short stories that were both adaptations of events from the games, as well as related side-stories. Like the Perry novels, the comics also explored events occurring beyond "Resident Evil 2" (the latest game during the series' publication) and thus were contradicted by later games. Wildstorm also published a four-issue miniseries titled "Resident Evil: Fire & Ice", which depicted the ordeal of Charlie Team, a third STARS team created specifically for the comic. In 2009, Wildstorm reprinted "Fire & Ice" in a trade paperback collection.
In Hong Kong, there has been officially licensed "Biohazard" manhua adaptations of "Biohazard 3" and "Code: Veronica" by Lee Chung Hing. The latter was translated into English and published by Wildstorm as a series of four graphic novel collections.
In 2009, Wildstorm began publishing a comic book prequel to "Resident Evil 5", simply titled "Resident Evil", which centers around two original members of the BSAA named Mina Gere and Holiday Sugarman. Written by Ricardo Sanchez and illustrated by Kevin Sharpe and Jim Clark, the first issue was published on March 11, 2009. On November 11, 2009, the third issue was released and the fourth was released March 24, 2010. The sixth and final book was finally published in February 2011.
Merchandise.
Over the years, various toy companies have acquired the "Resident Evil" license and each producing their own unique line of "Resident Evil" action figures or models. These include, but not limited to, Toy Biz, Palisades Toys, NECA and Hot Toys. 
Tokyo Marui also produced replicas of the guns used in the "Resident Evil" series in the form of gas blow-back airsoft guns. Some models included the STARS Beretta featured in "Resident Evil 3", and the Desert Eagle in a limited edition that came with other memorabilia in a wooden case, along with the Gold Lugers from "Code: Veronica" and the "Samurai Edge" pistol from the "Resident Evil" remake. Other merchandise includes an energy drink called "T-Virus Antidote".
"Resident Evil Archives" is a reference guide of the "Resident Evil" series written by staff members of Capcom. It was translated into English and published by BradyGames. The guide describes and summarizes all of the key events that occur in "Resident Evil Zero", "Resident Evil", "Resident Evil 2", "Resident Evil 3", and "Code: Veronica". Along with the main plot analysis, it also contains character relationship charts, artwork, item descriptions and file transcripts for all five games. 
"Resident Evil" theme restaurant Biohazard Cafe & Grill S.T.A.R.S. opened in Tokyo in 2012.
Reception.
Using horror elements, puzzle solving, and a lot of action, most of the games in the main "Resident Evil" series have been released to positive reviews.
Some of the games, most notably "Resident Evil", "Resident Evil 2" and "Resident Evil 4", have been bestowed with multiple Game of the Year honors and often placed on lists of the best video games ever made. In 2012, "Complex" ranked "Resident Evil" at number 22 on the list of the best video game franchises. That same year, G4tv called it "one of the most successful series in gaming history."
