Emma Rose Roberts (born February 10, 1991) is an American actress, model and singer. She is the daughter of actor Eric Roberts and niece of Julia Roberts. Roberts became known for her role as Addie Singer in the Nickelodeon television series "Unfabulous". She released her debut album, which also served as the show's soundtrack "Unfabulous and More". Roberts then pursued a solo singing career by recording two songs for the soundtracks of "Ice Princess" and "Aquamarine" (in which Roberts starred as one of the leads). Roberts then began to focus on her acting career, the title character in the 2007 film "Nancy Drew", and her voice-over debut in "The Flight Before Christmas".
In 2008 and 2009, Roberts was cast in the coming-of-age movies "Wild Child", "Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac" and "Lymelife". Roberts appeared in the 2009 family film "Hotel for Dogs" and "The Winning Season". In 2010, she appeared in "Valentine's Day", which also starred Julia Roberts. Later the same year, she had a leading role in "It's Kind of a Funny Story". In 2010, she played the role of Molly in the Joel Schumacher film "Twelve". In 2011, she starred as one of the leads, Jill Roberts, in the slasher film "Scream 4".
Early life.
Roberts was born in Rhinebeck, Dutchess County, New York. She is the daughter of actor Eric Roberts and Kelly Cunningham. She is the stepdaughter of Eliza Roberts and Kelly Nickels (formerly of L.A. Guns), and the niece of actresses Julia Roberts and Lisa Roberts Gillan. She has two stepsiblings, Morgan and Keaton Simons, and a half sister, Grace Nickels. Roberts attended Archer School for Girls in the Brentwood district of Los Angeles, California, from 2004–2005 for 7th and 8th grade.
Acting career.
2001–2005: Early career and "Unfabulous".
During her childhood, Roberts spent time on the sets of her aunt Julia Roberts's films. These experiences sparked a desire in Emma, from the age of five, to follow her father and aunts into the film industry. Although her mother initially wanted her to have a normal childhood, Roberts made her acting debut at age nine in Ted Demme's 2001 drama "Blow". It was the first film for which she ever auditioned. In the film, she portrayed Kristina Jung, the daughter of Johnny Depp's character, cocaine smuggler George Jung. In 2001, Roberts also had a role in Leif Tilden's 10-minute short "bigLove", and was an uncredited extra in some scenes featuring her aunt Julia Roberts in "America's Sweethearts".
She went on to appear in smaller roles in two family films, in 2002's "Grand Champion", as the sister of the main character Buddy (Jacob Fisher); and in 2003's "Spymate", as the kidnapped daughter of former secret agent Mike Muggins (Chris Potter), who tries to rescue her with the help of a spy monkey. "Grand Champion" had a brief theatrical release in August 2004, while "Spymate" was not released until February 2006, when it was given a theatrical run in Canada, followed by its DVD release in April 2006. In August 2003, Roberts was scheduled to shoot an independent film called "Daisy Winters", starring as the title character, alongside Rachel Weisz. However, the film, which would have been Roberts's first leading role, never began shooting due to financial problems. In 2004, Roberts became a teen idol at the age of 13, starring as the lead character Addie Singer in the Nickelodeon series "Unfabulous", which debuted in September 2004. Nickelodeon had wanted to cast her for the role from the beginning, and the teen sitcom earned Roberts a Teen Choice Award nomination and several Young Artist Award nominations. The show aired for three seasons from 2004–2007 and aired 42 episodes; the third season ended on December 16, 2007.
The television series focused on Addie Singer (Roberts) a seventh grader whose life is "unfabulous" and she writes songs about her life. The television series had had various TV movies which include: "The Perfect Moment" which premiered on Nickelodeon on October 6, 2006. In 2004, Roberts guest-starred in an episode of the Nickelodeon series "Drake and Josh", Roberts was in the episode "Honor Council". Because her character on "Unfabulous" writes songs and plays guitar, Nickelodeon soon considered a career in music for Roberts.
2006–present: Theatrical films.
In 2006, Roberts returned to the big screen, starring alongside Sara Paxton and singer JoJo in "Aquamarine". Roberts won a 2007 Young Artist Award for Best Supporting Young Actress in a Feature Film for her role in the film. The film "Aquamarine" took No. 5 place at the box office on its opening weekend making $8 million. In early 2006, Roberts finished shooting her title role in "Nancy Drew". The film was released to theaters on June 15, 2007, and grossed over $7 million in its opening weekend, though the film was not well received by critics. In December 2007, Roberts began filming "Hotel for Dogs". In 2008, Roberts had her voiceover debut when she voiced the English version of the character Wilma in the CGI-animated family film "The Flight Before Christmas".
In 2009, Roberts starred alongside Jake T. Austin in "Hotel for Dogs", based on the novel by Lois Duncan. The film premiered on January 15, 2009, and was released to theaters on January 16, 2009, and took No.5 place in its opening weekend with over $17 million. The film has to-date grossed over $114 million, and received generally mixed reviews from critics. Roberts starred as the lead in the film "Wild Child", about a rebellious teen from Malibu sent to a boarding school in England. Roberts described her character as "pretty much your typical spoiled-brat Malibu socialite who gets shipped off to British boarding school." Roberts also appeared in the indie film "Lymelife" with Alec Baldwin, which was premiered at the 2008 Toronto International Film Festival. Roberts said that "Lymelife" is “kind of like "American Beauty" meets "The Ice Storm"”, and that her reasoning for doing the film was that, "Some people look at me and think, She's just Julia Roberts's niece. So I wanted to do something smaller and edgier, something that would show I really am an actress."
Roberts co-starred as Grace in the hit 2010 film "Valentine's Day" with her aunt Julia Roberts. Roberts is set to reunite with "Nancy Drew" director Andrew Fleming on both "Rodeo Gal" and a "Nancy Drew" sequel, although the latter has been put on hold since 2007. She appeared in the sports comedy "The Winning Season". In 2010, Roberts also appeared in "Twelve" and "It's Kind of a Funny Story".
According to BloodyDisgusting.com Roberts will be starring in the horror film, "Grimm", which follows the Quinn family that moves to Marburg, Massachusetts, a town that turns out to be haunted by the most horrific nightmares spawned by the imagination of the Brothers Grimm. She co-starred in the film adaptation of "Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac", as well as "A Great Education". She also starred alongside with Freddie Highmore in 2011's romantic comedy "The Art of Getting By". In May 2010, Roberts received the role of Jill Roberts in the Wes Craven film "Scream 4". The film opened in theaters April 15, 2011. She also appeared on "Take Two With Phineas and Ferb".
In February 2012, Roberts began filming a new movie in Syracuse, NY called "Adult World". The film also takes place in Syracuse and will co-star John Cusack. Roberts plays a recent college graduate who works at an adult bookstore to make ends meet. Roberts appears in a supporting role in Dustin Lance Black's "Virginia", which will receive a limited theatrical release in May 2012 after a two and a half year delay.
Roberts appeared in the August 2012 film "Celeste and Jesse Forever", parodying pop stars such as Ke$ha with her performance as Riley Banks, an incurious blonde singer. Roberts said in an interview that her role as Banks tempted her to write an album of songs using her character as an alter ego.
On February 7 The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that Roberts was cast to star a pilot for Fox called "Delirium", based on the Laurel Oliver novels. Roberts will be playing Lena Holoway a girl who lives in a place where love is deemed illegal and is able to be eradicated with a special procedure. With 95 days to go until her scheduled treatment, Lena does the unthinkable: She falls in love.
Music career.
In 2005, Roberts had a debut album "Unfabulous and More". The album was released on September 27, 2005, through Columbia Records and Nick Records. It also served as the soundtrack to the television series, "Unfabulous", in which Roberts stars. The album peaked at No. 46 on "Billboard"'s Top Heatseekers chart. In September 2005, two promotional singles were released from the album—"I Wanna Be" and "Dummy." The album includes several original songs (among them "Dummy" and "I Wanna Be," both of which were also released as music videos, "I Have Arrived" and "This Is Me," which was co-written by Roberts), as well as some of Addie's songs from the first season, including "Punch Rocker" and "New Shoes" (both from the episode "The Party"), "94 Weeks (Metal Mouth Freak)" (from "The Bar Mitzvah") and "Mexican Wrestler" (which had previously appeared on Jill Sobule's 2000 album Pink Pearl and in the episode "The 66th Day" from "Unfabulous"). During the same year, Roberts recorded "If I Had It My Way" for the soundtrack of the 2005 Disney film "Ice Princess". In 2006, Roberts covered the song "Island in the Sun", which was originally recorded by Weezer in 2001; she recorded the song for the "Aquamarine's" soundtrack, a film where she starred as one of the leads.
Roberts said in a 2007 interview, "Right now I am focusing on movies. I am getting ready to start a new movie this summer so that is taking a lot of my time. I think when I am a little bit older it is definitely something I’d like to pursue." In another interview, she said, "My musical career is indefinitely on hold. I don't like people who become like 'actor slash singer.' I think people should be one or the other because usually you're not going to be great at both. You're going to better at one, so you might as well stick to the one you're good at. I'm going for acting."
Spokesmodel.
In February 2009, she was named the brand ambassador for Neutrogena, appearing in print and television ads for the company. Roberts has also appeared multiple times as part of "Teen Vogue"’s Best Dressed list, including June 2007, September 2008, December 2008 and February 2009.
Personal life.
In September 2011, Roberts began attending Sarah Lawrence College. However, in January 2012, Roberts's publicist announced that Roberts had chosen to "defer her college experience" due to work commitments. Emma dated Chord Overstreet for a few months from 2011 to April 2012. Emma is currently dating Evan Peters and has been seen with him consistently since July 2012.
