Happy Endings is an American television sitcom which premiered on ABC on April 13, 2011. The single-camera ensemble comedy originally aired as a midseason replacement with a one-hour premiere of two back-to-back episodes starting at 9:30 pm ET/PT. In the weeks that followed, the show continued to air back-to-back episodes that began airing at 10:00 pm ET/PT. The show is currently in its third season, airing Tuesdays, at 9:00 pm ET/PT.
On February 13, 2013, ABC announced that, starting March 29, the series will move to Fridays at 8:00-9:00 p.m ET/PT with back-to-back original episodes.
Plot.
Happy Endings follows the dysfunctional adventures of six best friends living in Chicago: "crazy-in-love" married couple, businessman overachiever Brad (Damon Wayans Jr.) and type-A control freak Jane (Eliza Coupe); ditzy Alex (Elisha Cuthbert), a happy-go-lucky boutique owner and Jane's younger sister; daydreamer Dave (Zachary Knighton), an aspiring restaurateur and food truck owner who used to be engaged to Alex; slacker manchild Max (Adam Pally), who deals with trying to hold a job and maintaining a consistent relationship; and serial dating single girl Penny (Casey Wilson), who fears she's forever doomed for spinsterhood.
The series first begins with the six friends dealing with their group dynamic drastically changing after the breakup of the couple that first brought them all together, Dave and Alex. This leaves the rest of the group (Max, Brad, Jane, and Penny) in the awkward position of either trying to stay together as friends or having to choose sides. Dave and Alex decide to stay friends, but there are many more complications down the road.
While the initial "complications following Alex and Dave's breakup" premise was the focal point in the earlier episodes, this premise has mostly been abandoned as the series went on, as the focus became more about the group dynamic of six best friends, in a similar vein of "friends hanging out" ensemble comedies like "Friends" and "How I Met Your Mother". Typically, each episode features two plot lines, in which varying combinations of the six characters find themselves involved.
Production.
On January 19, 2010, ABC green-lit the pilot episode, which was written by David Caspe and directed by Anthony Russo and Joe Russo. The show is from production companies Sony Pictures Television, ABC Studios, and executive producer Jamie Tarses' FanFare Productions. Executive producers are Jamie Tarses, Jonathan Groff and The Russo Brothers.
Casting announcements began in February 2010, with Damon Wayans, Jr. first cast as Brad, Jane's husband who does whatever she says. Next to join the series was Casey Wilson as Penny, the group's desperate and single friend. Eliza Coupe and Adam Pally shortly joined that cast, with Coupe playing Jane, Alex's control freak sister who is married to Brad, and Pally playing Max, Dave's close friend and roommate. Elisha Cuthbert later joined the cast as Alex, Dave's ex-fiancé who leaves him at the altar. Zachary Knighton was last actor to be cast as the newly single Dave.
The pilot was ordered to series on May 13, 2010, as a mid-season entry in the 2010–11 United States network television schedule.
On May 13, 2011, the show was renewed for a second season, which premiered on September 28, 2011. On October 13, 2011, the show received an additional episode order of 6 scripts from ABC, citing improved ratings for the series On November 3, 2011, ABC picked up the series for a full 22-episode second season.
Edits.
In the sixth episode of the first season to air, "Of Mice and Jazz-Kwon-Do", Dave refers to the mouse he is trying to catch as "his bin Laden" and then went on to joke that he was referring to "Jessica bin Laden, a super hot Arab girl I went to college with. She was the one that got away". The episode, which was taped prior to the death of Osama bin Laden, aired with ABC muting the final line, and removing the line entirely from online streams of the episode. The episode aired with the line unmuted on Citytv in Canada and is also left intact on the DVD release.
The ninth episode of the first season to air, "You've Got Male", originally included a kiss between Max and Ian and was seen among several promotional images released prior to the episode airing. The kiss was ultimately removed from the episode. Before the episode aired, David Caspe explained that the kiss was cut purely as a creative decision and that there had been no pressure from the network to remove any gay content.
Release.
Broadcast.
Season one.
The first season of the show premiered on ABC on April 13, 2011, and concluded on May 25. The premiere aired at a special time at 9:31PM after "Modern Family" and was followed by another episode in the show's regular timeslot at 10PM. The show was originally set to air a single episode each week that followed, but ABC decided to air a fourth episode immediately after the third episode on April 20, 2011, at 10:30PM. On April 29, 2011, it was announced that the show would air two episodes a week for three weeks at 10PM and 10:30PM beginning May 4, 2011.
The season also aired mostly out of the intended broadcast order to make the initial episodes more "stand alone" in an effort to get more people invested in the show. As a result, the episodes "Bo Fight" and "Barefoot Pedaler", which were intended to air as the second and third episodes as they show the events in the weeks after Alex and Dave's wedding, aired as episodes 10 and 11. It was later revealed that the decision to air the episodes out-of-order was ultimately made by ABC. The episodes later appeared in the intended order on the DVD release.
The episode "Why Can't You Read Me?" was initially left unaired, however it later aired on August 24, 2011.
Season two.
The second season of the show premiered September 28, 2011, and ended on April 4, 2012. The season saw the show move to the 9:30PM timeslot, previously occupied by "Cougar Town". The show then left the schedule to make room for "Don't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23".
Despite picking up the show for a full 22-episode second season, the 21st episode to air was labeled as the season finale by ABC as they needed to premiere "Don't Trust the B---- in Apartment 23" on April 11, 2012. The episode, titled KickBall 2: The Kickening, later aired on E4 in the UK on May 17, 2012 and also aired in other international markets, despite the episode officially being held until the third season. Additionally, the episode was excluded from the second season DVD.
Season three.
The third season premiered in the fall of 2012. The show moved to the Tuesday at 9PM timeslot, where it will be airing immediately after "Dancing with the Stars". While previous seasons have aired simultaneously in Canada on Citytv, the third season will see the show move to 8:30PM on Sunday where episodes will air two days prior to their airdate on ABC.
Online.
Full episodes of the series are available for streaming on both ABC.com and Hulu and are also available to purchase on iTunes.
On February 29, 2012, ABC premiered the first of a six part webisode series titled "Happy Rides", which follows the events from Penny deciding to get rid of her storage space, which leads to her selling her first car. The webisodes were sponsored by Subaru.
Reception.
Critical reception.
The series was initially criticized, being negatively compared to several similar "relationship sitcoms" that had premiered earlier in the season (all canceled at the end of that season) - "Perfect Couples", "Mad Love", "Traffic Light" and "Friends with Benefits". The series also drew comparisons from the hit 1990s sitcom "Friends". However, as the season progressed, the reviews from critics became much warmer - with some admitting that it had grown on them and that it had improved since the pilot. "Happy Endings" was the second "relationship sitcom" of the season that was renewed for a second season, second to CBS' "Mike & Molly". BuddyTV ranked "Happy Endings" #7 on its list of 2011's best new TV shows.
The second season of Happy Endings received widespread critical acclaim, landing on multiple "Best of Year" lists; The New York Magazine, the A.V. Club, Hulu, the Associated Press, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, and Yahoo!TV all included the series in lists of the top television programs of 2011.
