Uma Karuna Thurman (born April 29, 1970) is an American actress and model. She has performed in leading roles in a variety of films, ranging from romantic comedies and dramas to science fiction and action movies. She has been nominated for an Academy Award, two BAFTA Awards and won a Golden Globe Award for miniseries "Hysterical Blindness" (2000). Her most notable roles include two projects for director Quentin Tarantino: "Pulp Fiction" (1994) and the central role in two "Kill Bill" films (2003/2004).
Early life.
Thurman was born in Boston, to model Nena von Schlebrügge and professor Robert Thurman. She grew up mostly in Amherst, Massachusetts, where she went to Amherst Regional Middle School, and then moved to Woodstock, New York. While her father gave his children a Buddhist upbringing, she has the same name as one of the Hindu goddess Parvati's alternate names, "Uma", which means "Light" in Sanskrit. Regarding religion, she now calls herself agnostic. She has three brothers, Ganden (b. 1968), Dechen (b. 1973), and Mipam (b. 1978), and a half-sister named Taya (b. 1960), from her father's previous marriage. She and her siblings spent time in Almora, Uttarakhand, India, during childhood, and the Dalai Lama sometimes visited their home. She is described as having been an awkward and introverted girl who was teased for her tall frame, angular bone structure, enormous feet and unusual name (sometimes using the name “Uma Karen” instead of her birth name). When she was 10 years old, a friend's mother suggested a nose job. As a child, she suffered bouts of body dysmorphic disorder, which she discussed in an interview with "Talk" magazine in 2001. She attended Amherst Public Schools. In the 8th grade she discovered her love for acting. Talent scouts noticed her performance as Abigail in a production of "The Crucible", and offered her the chance to act professionally. Thurman attended Northfield Mount Hermon School, a preparatory school in Massachusetts, before dropping out to pursue a career in acting.
Family background.
Thurman's father, Robert Alexander Farrar Thurman (b. August 3, 1941), was born in New York City, to Elizabeth Dean (Farrar), a stage actress, and Beverly Reid Thurman, Jr., an Associated Press editor and United Nations translator. Robert Thurman was professor of religion at Amherst College from 1973 to 1988, when he accepted a position at Columbia University, where he was a professor of Tibetan Buddhism. Robert is of English, Scottish, and Irish ancestry.
Uma Thurman's mother, Nena von Schlebrügge, was a model born in Mexico City, Mexico, in 1941. Uma's maternal grandfather was Colonel Baron Friedrich Karl Johannes von Schlebrügge, a German cavalry officer in the first World War, in business in Berlin during the '20s and '30s; he left for Mexico when the Nazis were seeking to jail him, after he refused to continue in the army to train younger soldiers. Uma's maternal grandmother was Swedish-born Birgit Holmquist, from Trelleborg, who in 1930 modelled for a nude statue that overlooks the harbor of Smygehuk, Sweden (Birgit's father was of Swedish descent and Birgit's mother was of German and Danish descent). Thurman's mother was previously married to LSD guru Timothy Leary.
Career.
Early work (1987–1989).
Thurman began her career as a fashion model at age 15, and signed with the agency Click Models. Her modeling credits included "Glamour", the December 1985 supplement cover of "Vogue" and the May 1985 cover of British Vogue when she was only 15 years old. She made her movie debut in 1988, appearing in four films that year. Her first two were the high school comedy "Johnny Be Good" and teen thriller "Kiss Daddy Goodnight." She had a small role in "The Adventures of Baron Munchausen", playing the goddess Venus alongside Oliver Reed's Vulcan; during her entrance she briefly appears nude, in a homage to Botticelli's "The Birth of Venus". The most acclaimed of these first four films was Oscar-winning drama "Dangerous Liaisons", in which Thurman's character of Cecile de Volanges is seduced by the manipulative Vicomte de Valmont (John Malkovich). At the time, insecure about her appearance, she spent roughly a year in London, during which she often wore loose, baggy clothing. Malkovich said of her "there is nothing twitchy teenager-ish about her, I haven’t met anyone like her at that age. Her intelligence and poise stand out. But there's something else. She's more than a little haunted."
Career prominence (1990–1993).
In 1990, Thurman appeared with Fred Ward and Maria de Medeiros in sexually provocative drama "Henry & June", the first film to receive an NC-17 rating. Partly because many American newspapers refused to advertise films with the new rating, it did not get wide release in the United States, but the film won her some good notices. "The New York Times" wrote: "Thurman, as the Brooklyn-accented June, takes a larger-than-life character and makes her even bigger, though the performance is often as curious as it is commanding".
In 1993 she was for the first time the main star, in Gus Van Sant's 1993 adaptation of Tom Robbins' novel "Even Cowgirls Get the Blues". It was a critical and financial disappointment; Thurman was nominated for a Worst Actress Razzie. "The Washington Post" described her acting as shallow, writing that, "Thurman's strangely passive characterization doesn't go much deeper than drawling and flexing her prosthetic thumbs". She also starred opposite Robert De Niro in the drama "Mad Dog and Glory", another box office disappointment. Later that year she auditioned for Stanley Kubrick while he was casting for unmade film "Wartime Lies". Her agent said she described working with Kubrick as a "really bad experience."
1994–1998.
After "Mad Dog and Glory", Thurman auditioned for Quentin Tarantino ensemble movie "Pulp Fiction", which grossed over $107 million on a budget of only $8 million. The "Washington Post" wrote that Thurman was "serenely unrecognizable in a black wig, is marvelous as a zoned-out gangster's girlfriend." Thurman was nominated for the Best Supporting Actress Oscar the following year. She became one of Tarantino's favorite actresses to cast; he told "Time" magazine in 2003 that she was "up there with Garbo and Dietrich in goddess territory."
1996 would see Thurman in two moderately successful films, the first of which was "Beautiful Girls", where she played the female lead and love interest of Timothy Hutton and was supported with a high-profile cast (for that time) of Mira Sorvino, Martha Plimpton, and Natalie Portman. The film was well received by the critics for the script and acting, particularly that of Hutton and Portman. It performed moderately well at the box office. Thurman also starred opposite Janeane Garofalo in the moderately successful 1996 romantic comedy "The Truth About Cats & Dogs" as a ditzy blonde model. In 1997, she starred opposite her future husband Ethan Hawke in the science fiction film "Gattaca". Although "Gattaca" was not a success at the box office, it drew many positive reviews and became successful on the home video market. Some critics were not as impressed with Thurman, such as "The Los Angeles Times", which wrote that she was "as emotionally uninvolved as ever." 
Her next role was Poison Ivy in "Batman & Robin", the fourth of the series. Her performance received mixed reviews, and critics compared her to Mae West. "The New York Times" wrote, "like Mae West, she mixes true femininity with the winking womanliness of a drag queen." A similar comparison was made by the "Houston Chronicle": "Thurman, to arrive at a '40s femme fatale, sometimes seems to be doing Mae West by way of Jessica Rabbit." The next year brought "The Avengers", another major financial and critical flop. CNN described her as "so distanced you feel like you’re watching her through the wrong end of a telescope." She received Razzie Award nominations for both films. She closed out 1998 with "Les Misérables", a film version of Victor Hugo's novel of the same name, directed by Bille August, in which she played Fantine.
Hiatus (1998–2002).
After the birth of her first baby in 1998, Thurman took a rest from major roles to concentrate on motherhood. Her next roles were in low-budget and television films, including "Vatel", "Tape", in which she appeared with then husband Ethan Hawke, and "Chelsea Walls", directed by Hawke.
She would win a Golden Globe award for her acting in HBO cable movie "Hysterical Blindness"; she was also one of the executive producers. Thurman played a New Jersey woman in the 1980s searching for romance. The "San Francisco Chronicle" review said, "Thurman so commits herself to the role, eyes blazing and body akimbo, that you start to believe that such a creature could exist—an exquisite-looking woman so spastic and needy that she repulses regular Joes. Thurman has bent the role to her will."
In 2000, she narrated John Moran opera "Book of the Dead (2nd Avenue)" at New York's Public Theater.
2003–present.
In 2003 Thurman co-starred in John Woo's "Paycheck", which was only moderately successful with critics and at the box office. 
It would be Quentin Tarantino's "Kill Bill" which relaunched her career. She played assassin Beatrix Kiddo, out for revenge against her former lover. Tarantino wrote the part specifically for her. He cited Thurman as his muse while writing the film, and gave her joint credit for the character, whom the two conceived on the set of "Pulp Fiction" from the sole image of a bride covered in blood. Production was delayed for several months after Thurman became pregnant, as Tarantino refused to recast the part. The film took nine months to shoot, and was filmed in five different countries. The role was also her most demanding, and she spent three months training in martial arts, swordsmanship, and Japanese. Originally designed to be one film, "Kill Bill" was ultimately released in two parts and would become a cult classic and scored highly with critics. Thurman earned was nominated for a Golden Globe for both entries, plus three MTV Movie Awards for Best Female Performance and two for Best Fight. "Rolling Stone" likened her to "an avenging angel out of a 1940s Hollywood melodrama".
The inspirations for The Bride were several B-movie action heroines. Thurman's main inspiration for the role was the title character of "Coffy" (played by Pam Grier) and the character of Gloria Swenson from "Gloria" (played by Gena Rowlands). She said that the two characters are "two of the only women I've ever seen be truly women holding a weapon". "Coffy" was screened for Thurman by Tarantino prior to beginning production on the film, to help her model the character.
By 2005, Thurman was commanding a salary of $12.5 million per film. Her first film of the year was "Be Cool", the sequel to 1995's "Get Shorty", which reunited her with her "Pulp Fiction" castmate John Travolta. In the film, she played the widow of a deceased music business executive. The film received poor reviews, and came in below expectations at the box office. In 2005, she starred in "Prime" with Meryl Streep, playing a woman in her late thirties romancing a man in his early twenties. Thurman's last film of the year was a remake of "The Producers" in which she played Ulla, a Swedish stage actress hoping to win a part in a new Broadway musical. Originally, the producers of the film planned to have another singer dub in Thurman's musical numbers, but she was eager to do her own vocals. She is credited for her songs in the credits. The film was considered a bomb at the box office, but many praised Thurman's efforts, including A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" who said: "Uma Thurman as a would-be actress is the one bit of genuine radiance in this aggressively and pointlessly shiny, noisy spectacle."
With a successful film career, Thurman once again became a desired model. Cosmetics company Lancôme selected her as its spokeswoman. It also named several shades of lipstick after her, though they were sold only in Asia. In 2005, Thurman became a spokeswoman for the French fashion house Louis Vuitton. On February 7, 2006, she was also named a knight of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres of France for outstanding achievement in the field of art and literature.
In May 2006, Thurman bought the film rights to the Frank Schätzing novel "The Swarm", which is in development and due for release in 2015. When the film remake "The Women" was in pre-production in 2006, Thurman was cast as Crystal Allen, alongside Annette Bening, Julia Roberts, Meg Ryan, Sandra Bullock, Ashley Judd, Lisa Kudrow and Anne Hathaway, being directed by James L. Brooks, but the director was changed and Thurman was no longer part of the cast. In July 2006, she starred opposite Luke Wilson in "My Super Ex-Girlfriend". Thurman portrayed a super-heroine named "G-Girl" who is dumped by her boyfriend and then takes her revenge upon him. She received a reported $14 million for the role, but the film flopped. Once again she was well-received, but the film was not.
In February 2008, she starred opposite Colin Firth and Jeffrey Dean Morgan in "The Accidental Husband", a romantic comedy about a woman who finds herself married while engaged to another man. It seems like archetypal Hollywood contrivance, but according to Thurman, a similar situation happened in New York. Also in 2008, she starred as Elsa in the British film "My Zinc Bed", in which she plays a cocaine addict, starring opposite Paddy Considine and Jonathan Pryce. In 2010, her movie "Motherhood", set a record for the biggest bomb in British cinema history garnering just £88 on 11 tickets on its opening weekend. In the United States it earned just $93,388 in three weeks of release.
Thurman will star in the film version of the 1950s books "Eloise In Paris", playing the role of Nanny, to be directed by Charles Shyer. In 2011, Thurman was a member of the jury for the main competition at the Cannes Film Festival. In December 2011, James Hibberd of "Entertainment Weekly" reported Thurman had joined the cast of NBC's "Smash" as Rebecca Duvall. Thurman will appear in five episodes of the drama series. For her portrayal of Duvall, Thurman was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series.
Personal life.
Relationships.
Thurman met English actor Gary Oldman on the set of "State of Grace"; they married in 1990 and divorced two years later.
On May 1, 1998, she married actor Ethan Hawke, whom she met on the set of "Gattaca". Hawke's novel "Ash Wednesday" is dedicated to "Karuna", Thurman's middle name. She acknowledged that they had married because she was pregnant – seven months at their wedding. The marriage produced two children: daughter Maya Ray, born in 1998, and son Levon, born in 2002. The couple separated in 2003. When asked on "The Oprah Winfrey Show" whether the break-up involved betrayal, she said, "There was some stuff like that at the end. We were having a difficult time, and you know how the axe comes down and how people behave and how people express their unhappiness." In a 2004 "Rolling Stone" cover story, Thurman and director Quentin Tarantino denied having had a romantic relationship, despite Tarantino once having told a reporter, "I'm not saying that we haven’t, and I'm not saying that we have."
She began dating London-based financier Arpad Busson in 2007 and became engaged to him in June 2008, but the relationship ended in November 2009. In 2011, the couple were back together at the Louis Vuitton spring/summer fashion show in Paris. In February 2012, it was announced that Thurman and Busson were expecting their first child together. Thurman gave birth to the couple's daughter, Rosalind Arusha Arkadina Altalune Florence Thurman-Busson (nickname Luna), in July 2012.
Activism and charity work.
Thurman has been involved in various philanthropic and activist causes. She supports the United States Democratic Party, and has given money to the campaigns of John Kerry, Hillary Clinton, and Joseph R. Driscoll. She supports gun control laws, and in 2000, she participated in "Marie Claire"’s “End Gun Violence Now” campaign. She is a member of the board of Room to Grow, a charitable organization providing aid to families and children born into poverty. She serves on the board of the Tibet House. In 2007, she hosted the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway with actor Kevin Spacey.
In 2011, Thurman was also one of a few celebrities attached to USAID and Ad Council's FWD campaign, an awareness initiative tied to that year's East Africa drought. She joined Geena Davis, Chanel Iman and Josh Hartnett in TV and internet ads to "forward the facts" about the crisis.
