Silk Road is an online black market operated as a Tor hidden service.
History.
The website launched in February 2011 with development having begun six months prior. Buyers can register on Silk Road for free, but sellers must purchase new accounts through auctions to purportedly mitigate the possibility of malicious individuals distributing tainted goods.
, monthly sales are estimated to be slightly over 1.2 million US dollars, which corresponds to approximately 92,000 US dollars per month in commissions for the Silk Road operators.
Products.
The majority of products available to purchase on Silk Road qualify as contraband in most jurisdictions. Most sellers are based in the United Kingdom and the United States, and offer products such as heroin, LSD, cannabis, and other drugs. However, the site's operators prohibit goods or services intended to harm others, such as stolen credit card numbers, counterfeit currency, firearms, personal information, assassinations, weapons of mass destruction, and materials used to make such weapons. There are also a range of other products for sale, such as art, apparel, books, jewelry, pornography, and writing services.
Transactions.
Buyers and sellers conduct all transactions with Bitcoin, a crypto-currency that can provide strong anonymity. Most of the BTC prices on Silk Road are pegged to the United States dollar and fluctuate in accordance to the current BTC/USD exchange rate.
An administrator claims "over 99% of all transactions conducted within the escrow system are completed to the satisfaction of both buyer and seller, or a mutually agreed upon resolution is found."
Reception.
Press.
Gawker wrote a comprehensive article on Silk Road, describing it as "the underground website where you can buy any drug imaginable"; NPR has referred to the site as the "Amazon.com of illegal drugs"; The Economist has likewise described it, in an article on Bitcoin, as "a sort of eBay for drugs hidden in a dark corner of the web known as Tor."
After this attention, traffic to the website increased dramatically and Bitcoin saw a corresponding rise in value. The site was also used during the markup hearing for the 2011 Stop Online Piracy Act as an exemplar of the evolution of some websites to distributed networking and computer systems which by design are not blockable by domain name filtering such as proposed in SOPA.
Legal.
Australia.
The Australian Federal Police has stated that "anyone engaging in illegal activity through online marketplaces such as Silk Road...will not always remain anonymous and when caught, they will be prosecuted," in a press release. In February 2013, an Australian cocaine and MDMA dealer became the first person to be convicted of crimes directly related to Silk Road.
