Bryan Lee Cranston (born March 7, 1956) is an American actor, voice actor, writer, and director. He rose to mainstream fame in the recurring role of dentist Tim Whatley in the sitcom "Seinfeld", and is best known for his roles as Hal in the Fox sitcom "Malcolm in the Middle" and Walter White in the AMC drama series "Breaking Bad". He won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series three consecutive times for "Breaking Bad". Cranston is also known for supporting roles in the films "Saving Private Ryan", "Little Miss Sunshine", "Drive", and "Argo".
Early life.
Cranston was born in Canoga Park, California, to Peggy Sell, a radio actress, and Joseph L. "Joe" Cranston, an actor and Hollywood producer. His ancestry includes German and Irish (one of his great-grandmothers was from County Clare, Ireland). He was raised partly by his grandparents, living on their farm and working with poultry. Cranston grew up in the Los Angeles area, where he graduated from Canoga Park High School, and earned an associate degree in police science from Los Angeles Valley College.
Career.
1982–1999.
He began his acting career after college in local and regional theatres, getting his start at the Granada Theatre in the San Fernando Valley. He had previously performed as a youth, but his show business parents had mixed feelings about their son being involved in the profession, so he did not continue until years later. Cranston has worked regularly since the late 1980s, mostly in minor roles. His advertising work includes commercials for Lay's potato chips, Excedrin, Honda Accord, and Coffee-Mate. His voice acting includes English dubbing of Japanese anime, under the name "Lee Stone." He was an original cast member of the ABC soap opera "Loving", where he played Douglas (Doug) Donovan from 1983 to 1985. Cranston also starred in the short-lived series "Raising Miranda" in 1988. His largest role prior to "Malcolm in the Middle" was as astronaut Buzz Aldrin in the HBO series "From the Earth to the Moon". Cranston has also played astronaut Gus Grissom in the film "That Thing You Do!". In 1998, he appeared in Steven Spielberg's "Saving Private Ryan" as the colonel who insists that Private Ryan be saved.
From 1994 through 1997, Cranston appeared in the recurring role of Dr. Tim Whatley, Jerry's dentist, on "Seinfeld". Several episodes focused upon his relationship with Jerry and his paranoia about the dentist, in bizarre situations such as when he becomes obsessed with the notion that Tim and his female assistant were molesting him while he was unconscious during dental surgery, or when Whatley converts to Judaism and starts telling Jewish jokes while retaining the right to tell Catholic jokes as well (according to Jerry, Tim needs only Polish citizenship for ""total" joke-telling immunity"). 1999 marked his second appearance for a recurring role, on the CBS sitcom "The King of Queens" as Doug Heffernan's annoying neighbor, Tim Sacksky. He works in marketing then in a later episode as a water purifier salesman and recruits Doug to sell them as well. In 1997, Cranston had a small role in "Babylon 5" as Ericsson, the captain of a White Star vessel ordered into a suicide mission to plant misinformation within the enemy ranks.
In 1999, Cranston wrote and directed the film "Last Chance".
Cranston’s theatrical credits include starring roles in "The God of Hell, Chapter Two, The Taming of the Shrew, A Dolls House, Eastern Standard, Wrestlers, Barefoot in the Park", and "The Steven Weed Show", for which he won a Drama-Logue Award.
2000–present.
In 2000, Cranston landed a leading role on the series "Malcolm in the Middle". He would eventually direct several episodes of the series, and received three Emmy nominations for his performance on the show. Cranston reprised his role in a cutaway gag in the "Family Guy" episode "I Take Thee Quagmire", killing his former "Malcolm in the Middle" wife with a refrigerator door because of her incessant babbling, thus "freeing" himself and the kids.
Cranston has guest-starred in many television series, including "The Flash" where he plays a white-collar criminal searching for his estranged wife and daughter; "Sabrina the Teenage Witch" in which he was a lawyer attempting to free Sabrina from a contract; the sixth season episode of "The X-Files," "Drive," playing a bigoted man who is being driven insane by extremely low frequency sonar waves. He also had a guest role in late 2006 on the CBS sitcom "How I Met Your Mother", playing main character Ted Mosby's obnoxious co-worker and former boss Hammond Druthers. He more recently had a role as Lucifer in the ABC Family miniseries, "Fallen".
He appeared as Nick Wrigley, the irresponsible uncle who steals Santa's sleigh to have a crazy ride to practically destroy Christmas in Twas the Night", a Disney Channel Original Movie that was released in the winter of 2001. He appeared in 2007 Academy Award Best Picture nominee "Little Miss Sunshine" as the more successful business colleague of Greg Kinnear's character. He has done voice acting for English dubbed anime series, including "Royal Space Force – The Wings of Honneamise", "Macross Plus", and "Armitage III Polymatrix." In September 2008, Cranston narrated a pre-teen adventure/fantasy audiobook called "Adventures with Kazmir the Flying Camel". More recent voice work includes the voice of Jim Gordon in the animated '.
Since 2008, Cranston has appeared in the starring role on AMC's original series "Breaking Bad" in which he plays Walter White, a high school chemistry teacher who is diagnosed with terminal lung cancer. His character teams up with former student Jesse Pinkman, played by Aaron Paul, to manufacture methamphetamine. For his work on the series, Cranston won the "Emmy Award" for lead actor in a drama series in each of the first three seasons of the show, becoming the only person to win the award three consecutive times. For the fourth season Cranston also became a producer for the series, and was Emmy-nominated once again.
Cranston's 2010s work includes a supporting role in the drama "The Lincoln Lawyer", and supporting roles in successful thrillers such as "Drive" and the Steven Soderbergh film "Contagion". In 2012, He had supporting roles in "John Carter", "", and "Rock of Ages", and a major role in the Ben Affleck Iranian hostage drama "Argo". He also participated in several episodes of the animated series "Robot Chicken". In 2012, he starred in the remake of the 1990 movie "Total Recall", playing the villain, Chancellor Vilos Cohaagen, the corrupted president of a fictional war-ravaged United Federation of Britain. In the same year, Cranston made a guest appearance as Kenneth Parcell's step father, Ron, on the NBC sitcom "30 Rock". Also, he was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
Additionally, Cranston has produced an instructional DVD called "KidSmartz", which is designed to educate families on how to stay safe from child abduction and Internet predators. "KidSmartz" raises money for the National Center for Missing & Exploited Children, by donating half the proceeds from sales.
Personal life.
Cranston revealed on Howard Stern on October 9th, that he was previously married at the age of 23 and the marriage ended in amicable divorce. Cranston was previously married to Mickey Middleton, a writer. He remarried at the age of 35 to Robin Dearden, whom he met on the set of the show "Airwolf" (1984). He was playing the villain of the week, and she played his hostage (held at gunpoint). Their daughter, Taylor Dearden Cranston, is a theatre studies student at the University of Southern California. Taylor was born in 1993 and played an extra in one of the Breaking Bad episodes directed by her father. Cranston played baseball when he was a student. He is a collector of baseball memorabilia and an avid fan of the Los Angeles Dodgers.
In accepting his third Emmy as best lead actor in a drama series, Cranston thanked his wife and daughter and told them that he loves them "more than baseball". He resides in Albuquerque, New Mexico when filming "Breaking Bad". Cranston is a part-owner of the independent theater Cinemas Palme d'Or in Palm Desert, CA. He is a strong supporter of LGBT rights and supports same sex marriage in the United States. In 2010, he designed a house for himself.
