In medicine, Raynaud's phenomenon () is a vasospastic disorder causing discoloration of the fingers, toes, and occasionally other areas. This condition may also cause nails to become brittle with longitudinal ridges. Named after French physician Maurice Raynaud (1834–1881), the phenomenon is believed to be the result of vasospasms that decrease blood supply to the respective regions. Stress and cold are classic triggers of the phenomenon.
Raynaud's phenomenon includes Raynaud's disease (also known as "Primary Raynaud's phenomenon") where the phenomenon is idiopathic, and Raynaud's syndrome ("secondary Raynaud's"), where it is caused by some other instigating factor, most commonly connective tissue disorders such as systemic lupus erythematosus. Measurement of hand-temperature gradients is one tool used to distinguish between the primary and secondary forms.
In extreme cases, the secondary form can progress to necrosis or gangrene of the fingertips.
Raynaud's phenomenon is an exaggeration of vasomotor responses to cold or emotional stress. More specifically, it is a hyperactivation of the sympathetic nervous system causing extreme vasoconstriction of the peripheral blood vessels, leading to tissue hypoxia. Chronic, recurrent cases of Raynaud phenomenon can result in atrophy of the skin, subcutaneous tissues, and muscle. In rare cases it can cause ulceration and ischemic gangrene.
One of the most famous victims of Raynaud's Syndrome was Essad Bey (Lev Nussimbaum), immortalized in Tom Reiss' biography of his life, "The Orientalist".
Symptoms.
The condition can cause pain within the affected extremities, discoloration (paleness), and sensations of cold and/or numbness. This can often be distressing to those who are not diagnosed, and sometimes it can be obstructive. If someone with Raynaud's is placed in too cold a climate, it could potentially become dangerous.
All three colour changes are observed in classic Raynaud's. However, not all patients see all of the aforementioned colour changes in all episodes, especially in milder cases of the condition. Symptoms are thought to be due to reactive hyperemias of the areas deprived of blood flow.
In pregnancy, this sign normally disappears owing to increased surface blood flow. Raynaud's also has occurred in breastfeeding mothers, causing nipples to turn white and become extremely painful. Nifedipine, a calcium channel blocker and vasodilator, was recommended to increase blood flow to the extremities and noticeably relieved pain to the breast in an extremely small study group.
Epidemiology.
It is important to distinguish Raynaud's "disease" from "syndrome". In order to diagnose these two forms of Raynaud's, a doctor may look for signs of arthritis or vasculitis and may conduct a number of laboratory tests.
Primary Raynaud's (disease).
Raynaud's disease, or "Primary Raynaud's", is diagnosed if the symptoms are "idiopathic", that is, if they occur by themselves and not in association with other diseases. Some refer to Primary Raynaud's disease as "being allergic to coldness." It often develops in young women in their teens and early adulthood. Primary Raynaud's is thought to be at least partly hereditary, although specific genes have not yet been identified.
Smoking worsens frequency and intensity of attacks, and there is a hormonal component. Caffeine also worsens the attacks. Sufferers are more likely to have migraine and angina than controls.
Secondary Raynaud's (syndrome).
Raynaud's syndrome, or "Secondary Raynaud's," occurs "secondary to" a wide variety of other conditions.
It is important to realize that Raynaud's can "herald" these diseases by periods of more than twenty years in some cases, making it effectively their first presenting symptom. This may be the case in the CREST syndrome, of which Raynaud's is a part.
Patients with Secondary Raynaud's can also have symptoms related to their underlying diseases. Raynaud's phenomenon is the initial symptom that presents for 70% of patients with scleroderma, a skin and joint disease.
When Raynaud's phenomenon is limited to one hand or one foot, it is referred to as Unilateral Raynaud's. This is an uncommon form, and it is always secondary to local or regional vascular disease. It commonly progresses within several years to affect other limbs as the vascular disease progresses.
Examination.
A careful medical history will often reveal whether the condition is primary or secondary. Once this has been established, an examination is largely to identify or exclude possible secondary causes.
Treatment.
Treatment options are dependent on the type of Raynaud's present. Raynaud's syndrome is treated primarily by addressing the underlying cause but includes all options for Raynaud's disease as well. Treatment of primary Raynaud's focuses on avoiding triggers.
