Pixar is a CGI production company based in Emeryville, California, United States. The studio has earned numerous awards for their feature films and other work, including twenty-six Academy Awards, five Golden Globes and three Grammys. Pixar is best known for CGI-animated features created with PhotoRealistic RenderMan, its own implementation of the industry-standard Renderman image-rendering API used to generate high-quality images.
As of June 2012, Pixar has released thirteen films, all released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner. The company produced its first feature-length film, "Toy Story", in 1995. The film won an Academy Award and was nominated for three others. It set a benchmark in terms of animation to which other film companies have since aspired. The success of the film led Pixar to release a sequel, "Toy Story 2", in 1999, following their second CGI production, "A Bug's Life" in 1998. "Monsters, Inc." was the next project to be released in 2001, and the following six features "Finding Nemo", "The Incredibles", "Cars", "Ratatouille", "WALL-E", and "Up" were highly successful. The eleventh film, "Toy Story 3", has become the highest-grossing animated film of all time worldwide. Pixar's twelfth film is "Cars 2" which is a sequel to "Cars", the second film to have a sequel. Both "Toy Story 3" and "Cars 2" are the most expensive Pixar movies to ever be produced, at an estimated budget of $200 million each. Its thirteenth film, "Brave", had an estimated budget of $185 million.
Films.
Canceled projects.
A film entitled "Newt" was planned for a 2012 release, but was later canceled. John Lasseter noted that the film's proposed plot line was similar to that of another film, Blue Sky Studios' "Rio", which was released in 2011.
Possible future productions.
A sequel to "The Incredibles" is also being considered, and Tom Hanks indicated that a fourth "Toy Story" movie is in development, though Pixar still has yet to give an official confirmation. Other projects in development includes a film by Teddy Newton, written by Derek Connolly, and a Mark Andrews film.
Co-production.
"" is a 2000 traditionally animated film made by Disney Television Animation while Pixar made the opening as well as owning the Buzz Lightyear character. The show led to a television cartoon series of the same name with Pixar doing the CGI parts of the opening theme.
Related productions.
"Planes" is an upcoming movie that is a spin-off of "Cars" made by DisneyToon Studios and produced by John Lasseter. The film is conceived from the short film "" that introduces aspects of "Planes" and even ends with a hint of the movie. The release date will be August 9, 2013.
