Keeping Up with the Kardashians (often referred to simply as The Kardashians) is an American reality television series that premiered on October 14, 2007, on E!. It follows the lives of the Kardashian/Jenner family, including sisters Kourtney, Kim, and Khloé Kardashian.
The series' success has led to 4 spin-offs: "Kourtney and Kim Take New York", "Khloé & Lamar", "Kourtney and Khloe Take Miami", and "Kourtney and Kim Take Miami".
Background.
Defense attorney Robert Kardashian and Kris Houghton (now Jenner) married in 1978 and had four children together, daughters Kourtney (born 1979), Kim (born 1980), Khloé (born 1984) and son Rob (born 1987). The couple divorced in 1990. While she was in preschool, Kim became friends with future reality television star Paris Hilton. In 1994, Robert entered the media spotlight when he defended O.J. Simpson for the murders of Nicole Brown Simpson and Ronald Goldman during a lengthy trial. Kris married former Olympic champion Bruce Jenner in 1991. Bruce and Kris had two daughters together, Kendall (born 1995) and Kylie (born 1997). Robert died in 2003 eight weeks after being diagnosed with esophageal cancer. In 2004, Kim became a personal stylist to recording artist Brandy Norwood; she eventually developed into a full-time stylist, and was a personal shopper and stylist to actress Lindsay Lohan. Khloé, Kim and Kourtney further ventured into fashion, opening a high fashion boutique D-A-S-H in Calabasas, California. Throughout Kim's early career, she involved herself in some high-profile relationships including Norwood's brother rapper Ray J and later, singer Nick Lachey. In 2006, Kourtney starred in her first reality television series, "Filthy Rich: Cattle Drive". In February 2007, a home sex video that Kim made with Ray J years earlier was leaked. Vivid Entertainment bought the rights for $1 million and released the film as "Kim Kardashian: Superstar" on February 21. Kim sued Vivid for ownership of the tape, but dropped the suit in April 2007 and settled with Vivid Entertainment for $5 million.
Development.
In August 2007, it was announced that the Kardashians and Jenners would star in a yet-to-be-titled reality show on "E!", with Ryan Seacrest serving as executive producer. Seacrest said "At the heart of the series—despite the catfights and endless sarcasm—is a family that truly loves and supports one another [...] The familiar dynamics of this family make them one Hollywood bunch that is sure to entertain." The series announcement came one week after Hilton and her friend Nicole Richie announced that their popular E! series entitled "The Simple Life" was ending. "Keeping Up With the Kardashians" premiered on October 14, 2007. 
On November 14, 2007 it was announced that E! renewed the show for its second season. The following year, it was renewed for a third season. Lisa Berger, executive vice president of original programming and series development for the network, said "viewers have embraced the Kardashian family and the series has become one of television's most-talked-about shows [...] We are fortunate to work with Seacrest and Bunim-Murray, which have an exceptional ability to capture the Kardashians' hilarious, chaotic and always entertaining personalities and family dynamics." "The Hollywood Reporter" reported that the family made an estimated $65 million throughout 2010.
In 2011, Kim married NBA player Kris Humphries in a highly publicized wedding ceremony, but filed for divorce 72 days later. This caused widespread backlash from the public and media. Several news outlets surmised that Kardashian's marriage to Humphries was merely a publicity stunt, to promote the Kardashian family's brand and their subsequent television ventures. A widely circulated petition asking to remove all Kardashian-related programming from the air has followed since their split. As of September 2012, seven seasons of the series have aired. On April 24, 2012, E! signed a new three-year deal with the Kardashian family that will keep the series on the air until 2015. The deal was estimated at $40 million.
Spin-offs.
In April 2009, it was announced that "Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami", would premiere in August, following the two as they open a second D-A-S-H store in Miami. The series premiered to 2.7 million viewers and averaged 1.89 million viewers. The second season began in June 2010 and averaged 2.717 million viewers, a 43% increase from the first season.
"Kourtney and Kim Take New York" premiered in January 2011, following the two as they oversee the opening of a third D-A-S-H store in SoHo. The show premiered on January 23, 2011. "Khloé & Lamar" premiered on April 10, 2011. The second season began on February 19, 2012, but it is no longer airing. On September 16, 2012, E! aired a teaser at the end of the season 7 finale that confirmed "Kourtney and Kim Take Miami" will air in January 2013.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Reception.
The show was an instant hit for E! – in its first month on the air it became the highest-rated series on Sunday nights among men and women aged 18 to 34 and was also seen by 1.3 million total viewers according to Nielsen Media Research. The Kardashians garnered a following; Lisa Berger, executive vice president of original programming and series development for E!, said "The buzz surrounding the series is huge, and viewers have clearly fallen for the Kardashians [...] Seacrest and Bunim-Murray's unique ability to capture this family's one-of-a-kind dynamics and hilarious antics has made the series a fantastic addition to our prime-time lineup." The second season continued the success and was viewed by 1.6 million viewers, a 23% increase from the first season. 
The fifth season averaged 3.11 million viewers. The fourth season's premiere, "The Wedding" was watched by 3.2 million viewers. The second episode of the season topped the 3.2 million of the premiere and had 4.1 million viewers. "The Hollywood Reporter" said "why, despite the eye-rolls of half of America, does the other half worship at the altar of a family that unabashedly embraces, celebrates and monetizes that post-millennium cliché of being famous only for being famous?"
