Daniel Michael "Danny" DeVito, Jr. (born November 17, 1944) is an American actor, comedian, director and producer. He first gained prominence for his portrayal of short statured dispatcher Louie De Palma on the ABC and NBC television series "Taxi" (1978–1983), for which he won a Golden Globe and an Emmy.
DeVito co-founded Jersey Films with Michael Shamberg. Soon afterwards, Stacey Sher became an equal partner. The production company is known for films such as "Pulp Fiction", "Garden State", and "Freedom Writers". DeVito also owns Jersey Television, which produced the Comedy Central series "Reno 911!". DeVito and Perlman also starred together in his 1996 film "Matilda", based on Roald Dahl's children's novel. He currently stars as Frank Reynolds on the FX sitcom "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia".
He also directs and produces graphic short horror films for his Internet venture "The Blood Factory." He has appeared in several of them, as have friends of his and members of his family.
Early life.
DeVito was born in Neptune Township, New Jersey, the son of Julia, a homemaker, and Daniel Michael DeVito, Sr., who owned several small businesses, including a dry cleaning store, a dairy outlet, a luncheonette, and a pool hall. DeVito grew up in a family of five, with his parents and two older sisters. DeVito is of Italian descent (his family is originally from San Fele, Basilicata) and grew up in Asbury Park. He boarded at Oratory Preparatory School, in Summit, New Jersey, and graduated in 1962. DeVito went to the boarding school at the age of 14, after he persuaded his father to send him there as it would keep him out of trouble. After leaving the boarding school he subsequently trained at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, from which he graduated in 1966. In his early theater days, he performed with the Colonnades Theater Lab, Eugene O'Neill Theater Center, and, along with his wife Rhea Perlman, appeared in plays produced by the Westbeth Playwrights Feminist Collective.
Film acting career.
DeVito played Martini in the 1975 film "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest", reprising his role from the 1971 off-Broadway play of the same name. He gained fame in 1978 playing Louie De Palma, the short but domineering dispatcher for the fictional Sunshine Cab Company, on the hit TV show "Taxi". After "Taxi" ended, DeVito began a successful film career, starting with roles in 1983's "Terms of Endearment", was also in the infidel 2010 , and as the comic rogue in the romantic adventure "Romancing the Stone", starring Michael Douglas and Kathleen Turner, and its 1985 sequel, "The Jewel of the Nile". In 1986, DeVito starred in "Ruthless People" with Bette Midler and Judge Reinhold, and in 1987, he made his feature-directing debut with the dark comedy "Throw Momma from the Train", in which he starred with Billy Crystal and Anne Ramsey. Two years later, DeVito reunited with Douglas and Turner in "The War of the Roses", which he directed and in which he co-starred.
DeVito's work during this time includes "Other People's Money" with Gregory Peck, director Barry Levinson's "Tin Men" as a competitive rival salesman to Richard Dreyfuss' character, two co-starring vehicles with Arnold Schwarzenegger (the comedies "Twins" and "Junior"), and playing The Penguin as a deformed sociopath in director Tim Burton's "Batman Returns" (1992).
Although generally a comic actor, DeVito expanded into dramatic roles with "The Rainmaker", "Hoffa" (1992), which he directed and in which he co-starred with Jack Nicholson, "Jack the Bear" (1993), "L.A. Confidential", "The Big Kahuna", and "Heist" (2001), as a gangster nemesis to Gene Hackman's character.
DeVito has an interest in documentaries: In 2006, he began a partnership with Morgan Freeman's company ClickStar, on which he hosts a documentary channel called Jersey Docs. He was also interviewed in the documentary "Revenge of the Electric Car", about his interest in and ownership of electric vehicles.
Theatre.
In April 2012, DeVito made his West End acting debut in a revival of the Neil Simon play "The Sunshine Boys" - alongside Olivier Award-winning actor Richard Griffiths. The play previewed at the Savoy Theatre from 27 April 2012, opened on 17 May and played a limited 12-week season until 28 July.
Producing.
DeVito has become a major film and television producer. Through Jersey Films, he has produced many films, including "Pulp Fiction", "Get Shorty", "Erin Brockovich" (for which he received an Academy Award nomination for Best Picture), "Gattaca", and "Garden State".
In 1999, DeVito produced and co-starred in "Man on the Moon", a film about the unusual life of his former "Taxi" co-star, Andy Kaufman, who was played in the film by Jim Carrey. DeVito also produced the Comedy Central series "Reno 911!", as well as the film spin off "".
Directing.
"The War of the Roses" was a commercial and critical success, as was "Matilda". However, "Death to Smoochy" and "Duplex" were not as successful. DeVito has also finished production on an untitled "apocalyptic thriller".
Television and voice-over work.
In 1977, DeVito played the role of John "the apple" in the "Starsky and Hutch" episode titled "The Collector." In 1986, DeVito directed and starred in an episode of Steven Spielberg's "Amazing Stories". In the black comedy episode from season two, titled "The Wedding Ring", DeVito acquires an engagement ring for his wife (played by his real-life wife, actress Rhea Perlman). When the ring is slipped on his wife's finger, she becomes possessed by the ring's former owner, a murderous black widow.
In addition to his "Taxi" work, DeVito voiced Herb Powell, Homer Simpson's half-brother, on two episodes of "The Simpsons". In 1997, he was the voice of the satyr Philoctetes in the film "Hercules" and most recently voicing the Lorax in the 2012 remake of Dr. Seuss' "The Lorax"
In 1999, DeVito hosted the last "Saturday Night Live" episode before the year 2000. He earned a 2004 Emmy nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series, for an episode of "Friends", following four Emmy nominations (including a 1981 win) for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy, for "Taxi". In 2006, DeVito joined the cast of the FX Networks television series "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia" as Frank Reynolds.
In 2011, DeVito received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in television.
In 2013, along with Rashida Jones, he was a voice guest star on The Changing of the Guardian episode of The Simpsons (aired on January 27, 2013. season 24 episode 11).
Personal life.
DeVito met actress Rhea Perlman on January 17, 1971, when she went to see a friend in the single performance of the play "The Shrinking Bride", which also featured DeVito. They moved in together two weeks after meeting. The couple married on January 28, 1982. They have three children: Lucy Chet DeVito (born March 11, 1983), Grace Fan DeVito (born March 1985), and Jacob Daniel DeVito (born October 1987). Throughout their relationship, Perlman and DeVito acted alongside each other several times, including in the TV show "Taxi" and the feature film "Matilda". DeVito and Perlman separated in October 2012 after 30 years of marriage and over 40 years together. Prior to this, the family lived in Beverly Hills, California, and also spent time at their vacation home in Interlaken, New Jersey.
DeVito is a Democrat, and a supporter of the OneVoice Movement, a nonprofit organization that strives to help moderate Israelis and Palestinians to take a more assertive role in resolving the Israeli–Palestinian conflict. He and Perlman are also members of the steering committee of the Friends of the Apollo, supporting a theater in Oberlin, Ohio, as is filmmaker Jonathan Demme.
DeVito co-owned a restaurant called DeVito South Beach in Miami Beach, Florida, which closed in 2011.
