The Wanted are an English-Irish boy band, formed in 2009 who made their debut release in July 2010. The group consists of members Max George, Nathan Sykes, Tom Parker, Jay McGuiness and Siva Kaneswaran and are currently signed to Island Records and in the US Mercury Records. They are managed by Scooter Braun.
Their debut album, "The Wanted", was released on 25 October 2010 and peaked at #4 in the UK. The album had three UK top twenty singles released from it, Their debut single, "All Time Low" which hit the UK #1 spot, "Heart Vacancy" which reached #2 and "Lose My Mind" which managed a peak of #19 in the UK. 
The group's second album "Battleground" saw release on 4 November 2011 and hit #5 in the UK and #4 in Ireland. The lead single from the album "Gold Forever" was released in aid of Comic Relief and reached number three on the UK Singles Chart. Their second #1 hit "Glad You Came" topped the singles chart in the United Kingdom for two weeks, and in Ireland for five weeks. Third and fourth singles "Lightning" and "Warzone" hit #2 and #21 in the UK.
In early 2012, the group began to see success in the US and Canada, with hit single "Glad You Came" selling three million copies there, hitting #3 on the Billboard Hot 100 whilst their follow up singles "Chasing The Sun" and "I Found You" reached the top spot on the "Billboard" Hot Dance Club Songs chart.
History.
Formation and initial success.
The group formed in 2009 through mass auditions which saw over 1000 people attend, held by Jayne Collins who also put together The Saturdays and Parade. The audition process took over 9 months and originally just George, Parker and Sykes were involved with Kaneswaran and McGuiness joining later through the process. The group revealed in their autobiography that after they were informed of the line-up, seven more people were re-auditioned before they were signed to Maximum Artist Management and Geffen Records.
The group were credited with co-writing five of the thirteen tracks on the album. Their debut single, "All Time Low", was co-written by Steve Mac, who also produced it, Wayne Hector and Ed Drewett. It hit Nº1 in the UK and spent 17 weeks in the UK top 40. The second single "Heart Vacancy" again written with Wayne Hector, was released on 17 October 2010. It peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart. The group's third single from the album was "Lose My Mind" which reached Nº19 in the UK Singles Chart following a performance on The X Factor. The group's debut album, a self-titled release, was released on 25 October 2010 which peaked at Nº4 in the UK and has since been certified as Platinum in the UK. Between 28 March and 15 April 2010, the group embarked on the fifteen date "Behind Bars" theatre tour which saw them play in twelve UK cities. The tour didn't visit Ireland or Northern Ireland. They were supported by Lawson, Twenty Twenty and Starboy Nathan
In January 2011, the group began work on their second studio album. The album featured writing credits from the group on ten of the fifteen tracks, as well as contributions from Steve Mac, Wayne Hector, Ed Drewett, Diane Warren and Guy Chambers. The album's lead single, "Gold Forever", was released in aid of Comic Relief and debuted at number 3 on the UK Singles Chart. In July 2011, the group released the album's second single, "Glad You Came", which became their second number-one single, staying there for two weeks, and in the top ten of the chart for six weeks. The single also reached number one in Ireland and remained there for five weeks. The song also charted in some European territories, and was very successful in Australia. The third single from the album, "Lightning", was released on 16 October 2011, peaking at number 2 in the UK and number 5 in Ireland. The fourth single, "Warzone", was released on 26 December 2011, with the music video and radio debut coming in early November 2011. On 7 November 2011, the group's second album "Battleground", was released. It debuted at number 5 in the UK and number 4 in Ireland. It has been certified platinum in the UK. In addition to shows in the United Kingdom including T4 on the Beach, V Festival and the iTunes Festival, the group supported Canadian singer, Justin Bieber in Brazil on 8 and 9 October 2011 and also supported Britney Spears on her Femme Fatale Tour at the Manchester Evening News Arena on 6 November 2011. Between 15 February – 9 March 2012, the group embarked on "The Code" tour, to promote the release of the album. The sixteen date arena tour saw the group play in thirteen cities in England, Wales, Scotland, Ireland and Northern Ireland. Known as #TheCodeTour, each concert featured an interactive element that linked to the group's official Facebook and Twitter pages. 
International breakthrough.
In a bid to break the United States, the group went on a short promotional, radio and club tour of the states, touring between 17 January – 8 February 2012 . The success of the 10 date tour saw the group release their debut single in the states, "Glad You Came". It peaked at number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100 and has sold over 3 million copies there. Their debut American EP, "The Wanted", was released in April 2012, debuting at number 7 in the US and number 8 in Canada. "Chasing The Sun" was been released as the band's second official single there, peaking at number 50 on the Hot 100 whilst reaching number 1 on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart. "Chasing The Sun" was released on 21 May 2012. On 22 May 2012, the band opened and performed at the first Q102's Springle Ball concert. On 14 June 2012 the band performed a concert at New York City's Beacon Theater, which was also broadcasted live on music television station FUSE. The group visited Australia and New Zealand, for the promotion of their extended play in August 2012. Following their promotional tour of Australia, the group headed to the United States for a number of promotional concerts.
2012-present: "Third Strike & The Wanted Life".
The group began working on their third studio album, Third Strike, in November 2011, shortly after the release of their second album, "Battleground", on 4 November. In May 2012, "Chasing The Sun" was released as the album's lead single, and the third single from the band's "The Wanted EP" in the United States. Around this time, the band also premiered a brand new track, "Satellite". In August 2012, the band filmed a music video in Los Angeles, reportedly for their brand new single, "I Found You". However, when the video for "I Found You" was released in October 2012, a different video was revealed. The band later revealed that the video filmed in Los Angeles would be for another single. "I Found You" was released on 5 November 2012 as the album's second single. 
The band confirmed in September 2012 that the album would contain a number of collaborations, including tracks with Pitbull, LMFAO, Chris Brown, Rita Ora and Dappy. In November 2012, the band revealed that the album had been pushed back from the original release of December 3, 2012, to February 2013, at their request; they claimed that the reason behind this was to perfect the album, and tweak out a few insecurities involving certain tracks.
In early February 2013, it was announced that The Wanted will star in their own reality series called "The Wanted Life" which will premiere in the United States in June 2013 on E! and around the world this fall. The show is produced by Ryan Seacrest.
Members.
Max George.
Maximillian "Max" Alberto George, born , grew up with his family in Manchester. Before music, he had been a football player with Preston North End and was on the verge of signing a two-year deal with them, whilst he has been a Manchester City supporter since a young age. Previously he was a member of Avenue, a five-piece boy band made up of Jonathan Lloyd, Scott Clarke, Ross Candy and Jamie Tinkler in addition to George. They entered the third series of "The X Factor" in 2006 and made it to Louis Walsh's bootcamp, but media reports exposed that Avenue had not strictly adhered to the rules, having been signed by an earlier music "X Factor" director to a deal. They were banned from participation for having professional representation rather than being specifically formed for the competition. Avenue admitted they had failed to duly report their engagements and George admitted it was "not "The X Factor"s fault" in the video showing their disqualification in Walsh's office. With Andrew (Andy) Brown joining as a member of Avenue replacing Jamie Tinkler, the band went on to have some success beyond their "X Factor" appearances with their debut single "Last Goodbye", reaching number 50 on the UK Singles Chart. They had a follow up release with "Can You Feel It?". Avenue disbanded in April 2009. In 2008, while still a member of Avenue, George appeared naked on cover of British gay magazine "AXM" "Naked Issue" in support of cancer research.
George was engaged to actress Michelle Keegan after meeting her at one of The Wanted's concerts,
but he recently revealed that the engagement has been broken off. Eventually, the couple admitted in July 2012 that they had split for good.
Nathan Sykes.
Nathan James Sykes, born , and known as the baby of the group, grew up in Abbeydale, Gloucester with his mother, who was a music teacher, and younger sister. He started singing and performing at the age of 6 and attended Sylvia Young's theatre school from the age of 11.
Sykes continued to perform as a child singer winning various competitions including "Britney Spears's Karaoke Kriminals" in 2003, where he got to kiss Britney Spears on live TV as part of his prize, and The Cheltenham Competitive Festival of Dramatic Art also in 2003. He appeared on ITV's "Ministry of Mayhem" in 2004, and won the Door Youth Project's "Undiscovered Youth Talent Contest" held in Derker performing "Mack the Knife". and performed for the "Live and Unsigned". Music Competition in Bristol in 2008.
Sykes attempted to represent UK in the Junior Eurovision Song Contest 2004 held in Lillehammer, Norway. In the British qualifying finals, he sang "Born to Dance" coming 3rd overall, after winner Cory Spedding and runner-up Andrew Merry.
He is in a relationship with singer Dionne Bromfield since 2012.
Siva Kaneswaran.
Siva Micheal Kaneswaran, born , grew up in Blanchardstown, Dublin with his Sri Lankan Tamil father, Irish mother, twin brother Kumar and six other siblings. Kaneswaran started modelling at 16 and appeared in various ads and landed a contract with Storm Model Management. Kaneswaran took part in "Rock Rivals", televised in eight episodes between 5 March and 23 April 2008. His brother took part as well. Kaneswaran played the role of Carson Coombs and his brother that of Caleb Coombs. The brothers also appeared briefly in one episode of "Uncle Max". The episode "Uncle Max Plays Tennis" aired on 11 July 2008. Kaneswaran was spotted through his modelling campaigns and recruited as a result for the band. He is the younger brother of former Dove member and former "" contestant Hazel Kaneswaren.
Jay McGuiness.
James "Jay" Kevin McGuiness, , grew up in Newark, Nottinghamshire. He attended All Saints RC School, Mansfield. At the age of 13, McGuiness went to Charlotte Hamilton School of Dance. He has a non-identical twin brother called Tom and three other siblings.
Tom Parker.
Thomas "Tom" Anthony Parker, born , grew up in Bolton. Parker learned to play the guitar at the age of sixteen after trying out his older brother's. He then went on to audition for "The X Factor" but did not get past the first round. He went to Manchester Metropolitan University and studied Geography, but dropped out in pursuit of a professional singing career. Parker joined a Take That tribute band known as Take That II and toured Northern England, before joining The Wanted in 2009.
Media.
Wanted Wednesday.
The group run a weekly online podcast, #WantedWednesday featuring backstage footage, social activities and exclusive performances.
Tours.
The Behind Bars Tour was the band's first theatre tour which sold out within weeks of going on sale. It began on 26 March 2011 and concluded on until 15 April. The tour featured 12 different cities with a total of sixteen dates.
It was announced on Friday 16 December 2011 that the group would embark on their first US tour, with 10 dates to be held over January and February 2012.
The Wanted announced that they would embark on their first arena tour across the UK and Ireland in February and March 2012. Known as The Code Tour and T.W.A.T., each concert features an interactive element that links to their official Facebook and Twitter pages.
