In vertebrates the gallbladder (cholecyst, gall bladder, biliary vesicle) is a small organ that aids mainly in fat digestion and concentrates bile produced by the liver. In humans, the loss of the gallbladder is, in most cases, easily tolerated. The surgical removal of the gallbladder is called a cholecystectomy.
Human anatomy.
The gallbladder is a hollow system that sits just beneath the liver. In adults, the gallbladder measures approximately in length and in diameter when fully distended. It is divided into three sections: fundus, body, and neck. The neck tapers and connects to the biliary tree via the cystic duct, which then joins the common hepatic duct to become the common bile duct. At the neck of the gallbladder is a mucosal fold called Hartmann's pouch, where gallstones commonly get stuck. The angle of the gallbladder is located between the costal margin and the lateral margin of the rectus abdominis muscle.
Microscopic anatomy.
Unlike elsewhere in the intestinal tract, the gallbladder does not have a muscularis mucosae.
Function.
When food containing fat enters the digestive tract, it stimulates the secretion of cholecystokinin (CCK). In response to CCK, the adult human gallbladder, which stores about of bile, releases its contents into the duodenum. The bile, originally produced in the liver, emulsifies fats in partly digested food. 
During storage in the gallbladder, bile becomes more concentrated which increases its potency and intensifies its effect on fats.
In 2009, it was proposed that the gallbladder can produce several pancreatic hormones, including insulin.
In other animals.
Most vertebrates have gallbladders, whereas invertebrates do not. However, its precise form and the arrangement of the bile ducts may vary considerably. In many species, for example, there are several separate ducts running to the intestine, rather than a single common bile duct, as in humans. Several species of mammals (including horses, deer, rats, and various lamoids) and several species of birds lack a gallbladder altogether, as do lampreys.
