Torque, moment or moment of force (see the terminology below), is the tendency of a force to rotate an object about an axis, fulcrum, or pivot. Just as a force is a push or a pull, a torque can be thought of as a twist to an object. Mathematically, torque is defined as the cross product of the lever-arm distance and force, which tends to produce rotation.
Loosely speaking, torque is a measure of the turning force on an object such as a bolt or a flywheel. For example, pushing or pulling the handle of a wrench connected to a nut or bolt produces a torque (turning force) that loosens or tightens the nut or bolt.
The symbol for torque is typically "τ", the Greek letter "tau". When it is called moment, it is commonly denoted "M".
where
The length of the lever arm is particularly important; choosing this length appropriately lies behind the operation of levers, pulleys, gears, and most other simple machines involving a mechanical advantage.
The SI unit for torque is the newton metre (N·m). For more on the units of torque, see below.
Terminology.
This article follows US physics terminology by using the word "torque". In the UK and in US mechanical engineering, this is called "moment of force" shortened usually to "moment". 
In US mechanical engineering, the term "torque" means 'the resultant moment of a Couple', and (unlike in US physics), the terms "torque" and "moment" are not interchangeable. "Torque" is defined mathematically as the rate of change of angular momentum of an object. The definition of torque states that one or both of the angular velocity or the moment of inertia of an object are changing. And "moment" is the general term used for the tendency of one or more applied forces to rotate an object about an axis, but not necessarily to change the angular momentum of the object (the concept which in physics is called torque).
For example, a rotational force applied to a shaft causing acceleration, such as a drill bit accelerating from rest, the resulting moment is called a "torque". By contrast, a lateral force on a beam produces a moment (called a bending moment), but since the angular momentum of the beam is not changing, this bending moment is not called a "torque". Similarly with any force couple on an object that has no change to its angular momentum, such moment is also not called a "torque".
This article follows the US physics terminology by calling all moments by the term "torque", whether or not they cause the angular momentum of an object to change.
History.
The concept of torque, also called moment or couple, originated with the studies of Archimedes on levers. The rotational analogues of force, mass, and acceleration are torque, moment of inertia and angular acceleration, respectively.
Definition and relation to angular momentum.
A force applied at a right angle to a lever multiplied by its distance from the lever's fulcrum (the length of the lever arm) is its torque. A force of three newtons applied two metres from the fulcrum, for example, exerts the same torque as a force of one newton applied six metres from the fulcrum. The direction of the torque can be determined by using the right hand grip rule: if the fingers of the right hand are curled from the direction of the lever arm to the direction of the force, then the thumb points in the direction of the torque.
where r is the particle's position vector relative to the fulcrum, and F is the force acting on the particle. The magnitude "τ" of the torque is given by
where "r" is the distance from the axis of rotation to the particle, "F" is the magnitude of the force applied, and "θ" is the angle between the position and force vectors. Alternatively,
where "F"⊥ is the amount of force directed perpendicularly to the position of the particle. Any force directed parallel to the particle's position vector does not produce a torque.
It follows from the properties of the cross product that the torque vector is perpendicular to both the position and force vectors. It points along the axis of the rotation that this torque would initiate, starting from rest, and its direction is determined by the right-hand rule.
The unbalanced torque on a body along axis of rotation determines the rate of change of the body's angular momentum,
For rotation about a fixed axis,
where "I" is the moment of inertia and ω is the angular velocity. It follows that
where α is the angular acceleration of the body, measured in rad/s2. This equation has the limitation that the torque equation is to be only written about instantaneous axis of rotation or center of mass for any type of motion - either motion is pure translation, pure rotation or mixed motion. "I" = Moment of inertia about point about which torque is written (either about instantaneous axis of rotation or center of mass only). If body is in translatory equilibrium then the torque equation is same about all points in the plane of motion.
Proof of the equivalence of definitions.
This result can easily be proven by splitting the vectors into components and applying the product rule. Now using the definition of linear momentum p = "m"v (if mass is constant) and the definition of velocity formula_12
The cross product of any vector with itself is zero, so the second term vanishes. Hence with the definition of force (Newton's 2nd law),
Then by definition, torque τ = r × F.
If multiple forces are applied, Newton's second law instead reads , and it follows that
The proof relies on the assumption that mass is constant; this is valid only in non-relativistic systems in which no mass is being ejected.
Units.
Torque has dimensions of force times distance. Official SI literature suggests using the unit "newton metre" (N·m) or the unit "joule per radian". The unit "newton metre" is properly denoted N·m or N m. This avoids ambiguity with mN, millinewtons.
The SI unit for energy or work is the joule. It is dimensionally equivalent to a force of one newton acting over a distance of one metre, but it is not used for torque. Energy and torque are entirely different concepts, so the practice of using different unit names (i.e., reserving newton metres for torque and using only joules for energy) helps avoid mistakes and misunderstandings. The dimensional equivalence of these units, of course, is not simply a coincidence: A torque of 1 N·m applied through a full revolution will require an energy of exactly 2π joules. Mathematically,
where "E" is the energy, "τ" is magnitude of the torque, and "θ" is the angle moved (in radians). This equation motivates the alternate unit name "joules per radian".
In Imperial units, "pound-force-feet" (lb·ft), "foot-pounds-force", "inch-pounds-force", "ounce-force-inches" (oz·in) are used, and other non-SI units of torque includes "metre-kilograms-force". For all these units, the word "force" is often left out, for example abbreviating "pound-force-foot" to simply "pound-foot" (in this case, it would be implicit that the "pound" is pound-force and not pound-mass). This is an example of the confusion caused by the use of traditional units that may be avoided with SI units because of the careful distinction in SI between force (in newtons) and mass (in kilograms).
Sometimes one may see torque given units that do not dimensionally make sense. For example: gram centimetre. In these units, "gram" should be understood as the force given by the weight of 1 gram at the surface of the earth, i.e., . The surface of the earth is understood to have a standard acceleration of gravity ().
Special cases and other facts.
Moment arm formula.
For example, if a person places a force of 10 N at the terminal end of a spanner (wrench) which is 0.5 m long (or a force of 10 N exactly 0.5 m from the twist point of a spanner of any length), the torque will be 5 N-m – assuming that the person moves the spanner by applying force in the plane of movement of and perpendicular to the spanner.
Static equilibrium.
For an object to be in static equilibrium, not only must the sum of the forces be zero, but also the sum of the torques (moments) about any point. For a two-dimensional situation with horizontal and vertical forces, the sum of the forces requirement is two equations: Σ"H" = 0 and Σ"V" = 0, and the torque a third equation: Σ"τ" = 0. That is, to solve statically determinate equilibrium problems in two-dimensions, we use three equations.
Net force versus torque.
When the net force on the system is zero, the torque measured from any point in space is the same. For example, the torque on a current-carrying loop in a uniform magnetic field is the same regardless of your point of reference. If the net force formula_19 is not zero, and formula_20 is the torque measured from formula_21, then the torque measured from formula_22 is ...
formula_23
Machine torque.
Torque is part of the basic specification of an engine: the power output of an engine is expressed as its torque multiplied by its rotational speed of the axis. Internal-combustion engines produce useful torque only over a limited range of rotational speeds (typically from around 1,000–6,000 rpm for a small car). The varying torque output over that range can be measured with a dynamometer, and shown as a torque curve.
Steam engines and electric motors tend to produce maximum torque close to zero rpm, with the torque diminishing as rotational speed rises (due to increasing friction and other constraints). Reciprocating steam engines can start heavy loads from zero RPM without a clutch.
Relationship between torque, power, and energy.
If a force is allowed to act through a distance, it is doing mechanical work. Similarly, if torque is allowed to act through a rotational distance, it is doing work. Mathematically, for rotation about a fixed axis through the center of mass,
where "W" is work, "τ" is torque, and "θ"1 and "θ"2 represent (respectively) the initial and final angular positions of the body. It follows from the work-energy theorem that "W" also represents the change in the rotational kinetic energy "E"r of the body, given by
where "I" is the moment of inertia of the body and "ω" is its angular speed.
Power is the work per unit time, given by
where "P" is power, τ is torque, ω is the angular velocity, and · represents the scalar product.
Mathematically, the equation may be rearranged to compute torque for a given power output. Note that the power injected by the torque depends only on the instantaneous angular speed – not on whether the angular speed increases, decreases, or remains constant while the torque is being applied (this is equivalent to the linear case where the power injected by a force depends only on the instantaneous speed – not on the resulting acceleration, if any).
In practice, this relationship can be observed in power stations which are connected to a large electrical power grid. In such an arrangement, the generator's angular speed is fixed by the grid's frequency, and the power output of the plant is determined by the torque applied to the generator's axis of rotation.
Consistent units must be used. For metric SI units power is watts, torque is newton metres and angular speed is radians per second (not rpm and not revolutions per second).
Also, the unit newton metre is dimensionally equivalent to the joule, which is the unit of energy. However, in the case of torque, the unit is assigned to a vector, whereas for energy, it is assigned to a scalar.
Conversion to other units.
A conversion factor may be necessary when using different units of power, torque, or angular speed. For example, if rotational speed (revolutions per time) is used in place of angular speed (radians per time), we multiply by a factor of 2π radians per revolution. In the following formulas, "P" is power, τ is torque and ω is rotational speed.
Dividing on the left by 60 seconds per minute gives us the following.
where rotational speed is in revolutions per minute (rpm).
The constant below (in foot pounds per minute) changes with the definition of the horsepower; for example, using metric horsepower, it becomes approximately 32,550.
Use of other units (e.g. BTU per hour for power) would require a different custom conversion factor.
Derivation.
For a rotating object, the "linear distance" covered at the circumference in a radian of rotation is the product of the radius with the angular speed. That is: linear speed = radius × angular speed. By definition, linear distance = linear speed × time=radius × angular speed × time.
because formula_34
Torque multiplier.
A torque multiplier is a gear box with reduction ratios greater than 1. The given torque at the input gets multiplied as per the reduction ratio and transmitted to the output, thereby achieving greater torque, but with reduced rotational speed.
