The first season of AMC's television series "The Walking Dead" premiered on October 31, 2010 and concluded on December 5, 2010. The series is based on the series of graphic novels of the same name by Robert Kirkman, Tony Moore and Charlie Adlard. It was developed for television by Frank Darabont, who wrote or co-wrote four of the season's six episodes and directed the pilot.
The first season was met with positive reviews from critics and gained 5.35 million viewers on its premiere. The finale garnered six million viewers and among adults ages 18–49 it became the most viewed basic cable drama series of all time.
Plot.
The first season centers on Sheriff's Deputy Rick Grimes, who was shot in an altercation with several criminals. His injuries result in his slipping into a coma for an indeterminate amount of time, after which he awakens into a post-apocalyptic world overrun by zombies, which the survivors colloquially call "walkers". Rick discovers that his wife and son are missing and, after meeting Morgan Jones and his son Duane, heavily arms himself from the police station's armory, and sets off on a perilous journey for Atlanta, Georgia, where the CDC is rumored to have set up a quarantined safe-zone in the city and where his family may be located. However, he soon discovers that the city has been overrun with walkers and it is no longer safe. After being rescued from a horde of walkers by Glenn Rhee, Rick and Glenn's associates, who were in Atlanta to scavenge, escape the city.
A few miles outside the city, Rick's wife Lori and his son Carl have been hiding away from the walkers with Shane Walsh, Rick's former colleague and best friend. They have established a camp with a small group of other survivors from around the country. After being rescued in Atlanta by members of the group and being reunited with Lori and Carl, Rick assumes a command position with Shane and must take responsibility, not only for his wife and son, but for the survival of the group as well. Part of the group goes back into Atlanta to recover a bag of weapons Rick left there (and to rescue Merle Dixon, who was left handcuffed atop a department store roof), but on their return find that the camp has been nearly overrun by walkers. In hopes of finding medical treatment for an injured member, some of the group decides to return to Atlanta and seek aid from the CDC.
In the CDC, all but one staff member (Dr. Edwin Jenner) have fled or killed themselves. Dr. Jenner explains his research into the cause of the "zombie apocalypse". But the CDC building is not the haven the group believed it was. The next day, lack of fuel for the generators causes safety protocols to begin, which will result in the destruction of the CDC. Although they are nearly trapped in the building, Carol reveals a grenade she took from Rick's clothing, and the group is able to use it to blow out a window. Dr. Jenner explains that the French may have found a cure, as they were the only nation whose scientists stayed in their labs. Nonetheless, Dr. Jenner elects to stay in the CDC despite the impending explosion. Before the group leaves the building, Dr. Jenner whispers something unknown into Rick's ear. Andrea and Jacqui decide to stay with Jenner as they have lost hope. Dale refuses to leave Andrea behind and elects to stay as well, so Andrea changes her mind. She and Dale escape just before Jenner and Jacqui are killed by the building's self-destruct explosion.
Cast.
Main cast.
The first season has seven major roles receive star billing. 
Recurring cast.
Aside from the aforementioned main cast, several recurring characters appear. 
The series features several actors "Walking Dead" developer Frank Darabont has worked with previously, including Laurie Holden, Jeffrey DeMunn, Melissa McBride, and Juan Pareja. All four appeared in his 2007 film "The Mist", along with Thomas Jane, who originally was set to star in the series when it was pitched to HBO. He is also in talks with Darabont to possibly guest star on the series. Laurie Holden also appeared in the 2001 film "The Majestic" (she played Adele Stanton, Jim Carrey's love interest), which Darabont directed. DeMunn has also appeared in several of Darabont's films, in addition to "The Mist" and "The Majestic": "The Shawshank Redemption" (1994) and "The Green Mile" (1999).
Production.
Conception.
Robert Kirkman, who created the comic book series in 2003, says he had considered the idea of a "Walking Dead" television series, but never actively pursued it. "I certainly wanted it to happen, just because I knew it would be good for the book... I'm certainly not against adaptations, like some creators." When Frank Darabont became interested in adapting the comic books for television, Kirkman said it was "extremely flattering" and went on to say that, "He definitely cares about the original source material, and you can tell that in the way he's adapting it. It's an extreme validation of the work... Never in a million years could I have thought that if "Walking Dead" were to ever be adapted that everything would be going this well. I think that that's all because of Frank."
Darabont himself had been a fan of the zombie genre since seeing George A. Romero's 1968 film "Night of the Living Dead" when he was fourteen years old. ""Night of the Living Dead" had this weird vibe that was almost - it was like pornography... It had this marvelously attractive, disreputable draw... I loved it immediately." Darabont recalls walking into a comic book store in Burbank, California and seeing "The Walking Dead" on the shelf in 2005. "Being that I've always had "the love of zombies genre," I of course grabbed it, took it home and read it, and immediately started pursuing the rights to it. I thought it would make a great TV show... I loved the idea of an extended, ongoing, serialized dramatic presentation set in the zombie apocalypse." He described the process of developing the series and getting it set up at a network as "four years of frustration," and credits executive producer Gale Anne Hurd with finally getting the series on AMC. "I can't remember what the hell prompted her to read it script, but she said, "Wow, I really love this pilot you wrote. What are you doing with it?" I said I'd been trying to set it up forever... She said "I think AMC might be the place to take this." She did, and then bam! They were immediately interested. I had to credit Gale, her insight into marrying the material and the buyer."
Writing.
Darabont's original pilot script was split in half and embellished, making the first two episodes instead of one, "...just to slow the narrative down and dig into the characters more deeply, so it's not just plot-driven, event-driven stuff. You really want to drag these characters into the equation." To write the remaining episodes of the season, Darabont recruited Charles H. Eglee, Adam Fierro and Glen Mazzara, all of whom he had worked with while directing an episode of "The Shield". Jack LoGiudice also joined the writing team, along with Robert Kirkman, also an executive producer. "I have the best of both worlds," says Kirkman. "It was a lot of fun writing Episode 104, and I'm hoping if it continues into Season 2, I'll be able to write more episodes."
Filming.
Principal photography for the pilot episode, "Days Gone Bye", began on May 15, 2010 with the subsequent five episodes beginning filming a few weeks later on June 2. The first season was filmed in and around Atlanta, Georgia where the episodes were primarily set.
Promotion.
The show's official website released a motion comic based on the first issue of the original comic and voiced by Phil LaMarr. The site also posted a making-of documentary primarily about the first episode, as well as a number of other behind-the-scenes videos and interviews. In the documentary, comic series creator and show executive producer Robert Kirkman as well as artist Charlie Adlard expressed that they were pleased with how faithful the show is to the comic and remark on the similarities between the actors and the comic's original character drawings. Several scenes from "Days Gone Bye" were screened July 23, 2010 as part of the 2010 San Diego Comic-Con International. Hurd asserted that " really are doing six one-hour movie", and Darabont insisted that the series would closely reflect the development in the comics. "The path is a very strong template. But we're going to take every interesting detour we feel like taking. As long as were staying on the path of what Robert has done, I don't see any reason not to. If they have patience we'll eventually catch up to what Robert is doing."
"The Walking Dead" debuted during the same week in 120 countries. "Days Gone Bye" premiered in Hong Kong on TVB Pearl on August 30, 2011, while it expanded in international markets during the first week of November. Two weeks prior to its official premiere in the United States, the contents of the episode leaked online. As part of an expansive campaign to advertise and heighten anticipation for the premiere, international broadcasting affiliates of AMC and Fox coordinated a worldwide zombie invasion event proceeding days prior to premiere of the episode in the United States. The event occurred in twenty six cities worldwide, and were hosted in select locations including the Brooklyn Bridge in New York City, Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., Palace of Westminster in London, Bosphorus Bridge in Istanbul, Acropolis of Athens in Athens, and the Museo del Prado in Madrid. The campaign events commenced in Hong Kong and Taipei, and culminated in Los Angeles.
"The Walking Dead" was included on the cover of the December 2010 edition of "Entertainment Weekly", which featured Rick Grimes pointing a gun at a horde of walkers. According to the journalist of the magazine, it "examines the past, present, and future" of the television franchise; "from the comic book’s humble beginnings, to unlikely path to the small screen, to even more unlikely path as a bona fide hit." Kirkman was ecstatic upon hearing of the news. "I've got to say—not to kiss your magazine's a– or anything—but when they called me and said Frank wanted to do the show, I was like, 'Yeah, I'll believe it when I see it.' And then when AMC was like, 'We're picking up the show,' I was like, 'Yeah, alright, whatever.' When they actually started shooting the pilot I was like, 'Well, this is kind of real, this is neat.' But when they called me and said, 'Your show’s on the cover of "Entertainment Weekly",' I think that was the first time I was like, 'Oh my god, I can’t believe this is happening to me!'"
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Reception.
Critical reviews.
The first season of "The Walking Dead" was well-received by critics, garnering a score of 82 out of 100 on Metacritic "TV Guide's" Matt Roush called the show "a stark and harrowing survival parable... visually stunning and daring in its artful use of silence." Simon Abrams from "Slant Magazine" awarded the season three and a half stars out of a possible four; "To say that Darabont has kicked his series off with a bang would be a serious understatement... has fashioned a fully realized alternate reality and it's a thrilling thing to experience." Heather Havrilesky of "Salon" gave the series a grade of A, saying "A film-quality drama series about zombies? Somebody pinch me!"
Awards and nominations.
"The Walking Dead" was nominated for Best New Series for the 2011 Writers Guild of America Awards. It was nominated for Best Television Series Drama at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. It was also named during the American Film Institute Awards 2010 as one of the top 10 television programs of 2010. For the 2011 Saturn Awards, the series received six nominations—for Best Television Presentation, Andrew Lincoln for Best Actor in Television, Sarah Wayne Callies for Best Actress on Television, Steven Yeun for Best Supporting Actor in Television, Laurie Holden for Best Supporting Actress in Television, and Noah Emmerich for Best Guest Starring Role in Television. The series was nominated for Best Drama Series at the 1st Critics' Choice Television Awards. The pilot episode "Days Gone Bye" received three nominations for the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards—it was nominated for Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series and Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Series. It won for Outstanding Prosthetic Make-up for a Series, Miniseries, Movie, or Special.
Ratings.
The pilot received 5.3 million viewers, making it the most-watched series premiere episode of any AMC television series. The first season finale received 6 million viewers, a season high; with 4 million viewers in the 18–49 demographic, making it the most watched basic cable series for the demographic. The first season had an average of 5.24 million viewers and a rating of 2.7 in the 18–49 demographic. In the United Kingdom, it premiered one week after it did in the United States, on November 5, 2010 on digital channel, FX. The premiere had 579,000 viewers, almost double for any other show on FX that week. The viewership dipped during the season then rose to 522,000 viewers for the final episode. The terrestrial premiere on Channel 5 on April 10, 2011, averaged 1.46 million viewers.
Home media releases.
The first season was released on DVD and Blu-ray in region 1 on March 8, 2011 and in region 2 on May 16, 2011. Special features on the sets include six featurettes—"The Making of "The Walking Dead"", "Inside "The Walking Dead": Episode 1–6", "A Sneak Peek with Robert Kirkman", "Behind the Scenes Zombie Make-Up Tips", "Convention Panel with Producers" and ""The Walking Dead" Trailer". Also included are other behind the scenes featurettes—"Zombie School", "Bicycle Girl", "On Set with Robert Kirkman", "Hanging with Steven Yeun", "Inside Dale's RV" and "On Set with Andrew Lincoln".
A three-disc special edition of the first season was released on DVD and Blu-ray on October 4, 2011. The sets include all the previous special features, plus brand new extras. The new extras include audio commentary on all six episodes, the black and white version of the pilot, and six new featurettes—"We Are "The Walking Dead"", "Bring Out the Dead: KNB and the Art of Making Zombies", "Digital Decay: The VFX of "The Walking Dead"", "No More Room in Hell: "The Walking Dead" Phenomenon", "Adapting the Dead" and "Killer Conversations: Frank Darabont & Greg Nicotero". In addition to the DVD and Blu-ray release, a limited edition Blu-ray collector's tin contains an exclusive wearable zombie mask from the National Entertainment Collectibles Association designed by the series own make-up artist, Greg Nicotero.
