Christopher Robert "Chris" Evans (born June 13, 1981) is an American actor known for his superhero roles as Johnny Storm / Human Torch in "Fantastic Four" (2005) and ' (2007), and Steve Rogers / Captain America in ' (2011) and "Marvel's The Avengers" (2012). He will reprise this role in 2014 in "". Evans began his career on the television series "Opposite Sex" (2000) and later transitioned to film, appearing in "Not Another Teen Movie" (2001), "Fierce People" (2005), "Push" (2009), "The Losers" (2010), "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World" (2010), and "What's Your Number?" (2011).
Early life.
Chris Evans was born in Massachusetts and raised in the town of Sudbury. His mother, Lisa Marie (née Capuano), is an artistic director at the Concord Youth Theater, and his father, G. Robert "Bob" Evans III, is a dentist. He has two sisters, Carly, a graduate of New York University's Tisch School of the Arts and a high school drama and English teacher, Shanna, and a younger brother, Scott, who was featured on the ABC soap opera "One Life to Live". Their maternal uncle, Mike Capuano, represents the same Massachusetts Congressional district formerly held by Tip O'Neill. His mother is of half Italian and half Irish ancestry.
Evans graduated from Lincoln-Sudbury Regional High School. He and his siblings were raised Catholic.
Career.
After filming wrapped on "Not Another Teen Movie", Evans landed lead roles in "The Perfect Score" and "Cellular", and then starred in two independent films in Chicago: Dirk Wittenborn's "Fierce People", playing the sinister Bryce, and "London", playing a strung-out drug user with relationship problems. He then played the superhero known as the Human Torch in the 2005 comic book adaptation "Fantastic Four". Evans reprised the role of the Human Torch in the 2007 sequel "". That year, he starred as engineer-turned-astronaut Mace in Danny Boyle's science-fiction film "Sunshine".
In 2008, Evans appeared in "Street Kings", co-starring Keanu Reeves, and the Tennessee Williams screenplay adaptation "The Loss of a Teardrop Diamond", co-starring Bryce Dallas Howard and Ellen Burstyn. The following year he appeared in the science-fiction thriller "Push", with Dakota Fanning and Camilla Belle. Evans performed his own fight scenes, which took weeks to film, and was bruised during filming. Also that year, Evans was ranked 474th in Forbes' "Star Currency" rankings, based on films' global box-office performance.
In 2010, he completed filming on co-directors Mark Kassen and Adam Kassen's "Puncture" in Houston, Texas. The film was selected to debut at the 2011 Tribeca Film Festival as one of the Spotlight projects for the 10th anniversary of the festival. Also that year, Evans appeared in Sylvain White's "The Losers", an adaptation of the comic-book series from the DC Comics imprint Vertigo. Evans then appeared in another comic-book adaptation, Edgar Wright's "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World", where he portrayed Lucas Lee, one of Ramona Flowers' seven exes. Evans played the Marvel Comics character Captain America in ', reprised the role in the film "The Avengers", and has been signed to at least two sequels to "Captain America". The first sequel to "Captain America", ', is currently in development and set for release on April 4, 2014.
Evans starred in the film "What's Your Number?", a romantic comedy co-starring Anna Faris.
With actress Evan Rachel Wood, he is part of the advertising campaign for the perfume Gucci Guilty, and the cologne Guilty pour Homme. Evans is a supporter of gay rights.
Personal life.
From 2004 to 2006, Evans dated actress Jessica Biel and began dating Minka Kelly in August 2012 after briefly dating her in 2007. 
