Chicago Fire is an American television drama that airs on NBC on Wednesdays at 10:00 pm Eastern/9:00 pm Central after "" during the 2012–13 television season. Created by Michael Brandt and Derek Haas and produced by "Law & Order" creator Dick Wolf, the show follows the lives of the firefighters and paramedics working at the Chicago Fire Department at the firehouse of Engine 51, Truck 81, Squad 3, Ambulance 61 and Battalion 25. The firehouse shown is Engine 18's Quarters located at 13th Street and Blue Island Avenue.
The series premiered on October 10, 2012. The pilot episode had an early release on NBC.com, before the series' premiere on television.
Plot.
The show tells the lives of the firefighters, rescue squad and paramedics of Chicago Firehouse 51, both professional and personal. Following the death of Fireman Andrew Darden, the loyalties fracture and divide as the leader of Truck 81, Lt. Matthew Casey and the leader of the elite rescue squad, Lt. Kelly Severide both blame each other. Despite their differences, the firehouse comes together after the near death of Firefighter Christopher Herrmann. 
New to the station is Candidate Peter Mills, who is following in the footsteps of his father and trying to find his place, over the objections of his mother. With paramedics Gabriela Dawson and Leslie Shay and under leadership of Battalion Chief Wallace Boden, the team faces life or death decisions every day, but look to each other like family, making sure to look out for each other, no matter what happens.
Chicago Fire's tag line is, 'Life in the heat of it'.
Production.
The series pilot, co-written by creators Derek Haas and Michael Brandt, was filmed in Chicago and, according to an National Broadcasting Company (NBC) representative, the series will continue to be filmed there. Mayor of Chicago Rahm Emanuel made an appearance in the series' pilot episode. Emanuel stated: "It's easier being mayor than playing mayor. I told them I'd do it under one condition: the TV show is making an investment to the Firefighters' Widows and Orphans Fund."
The network placed an order for the series in May 2012. After receiving an additional script order in October, "Chicago Fire" was picked up for a full season on November 8, 2012. On January 29, 2013, "Chicago Fire" had its episode total increased from 22 to 23. One week later, on February 6, 2013, "Chicago Fire" received one more episode, giving it a total of 24 episodes for season one.
The firehouse shown is Engine 18's Quarters located at 13th Street and Blue Island Avenue. Housed here is ALS Engine 18, 2-2-1 (Deputy District Chief - 1st District), 4-5-7 (Field Chief - EMS District 7), 6-4-16 (High Rise Response Unit) & BLS Ambulance 84.
International broadcasts.
The series has been picked up in Canada by Global. The series will air in both Ireland and the United Kingdom on Sky Living from October 24, 2012. In South Africa, the series airs on Mnet. In Latin America, the series airs on Universal Channel. The series will air in Hungary on TV2 (Hungary) from 26 November 2012. The series will air in Australia starting January 10, 2013 on FOX8. This series will also premiere in the Philippines through Jack City in the year 2013.
