Ewan Gordon McGregor, (; born 31 March 1971) is a Scottish actor who has had success in mainstream, indie, and art house films. He is perhaps best known for his roles as heroin addict Mark Renton in the drama "Trainspotting" (1996), Jedi Obi-Wan Kenobi in the "Star Wars" prequel trilogy (1999–2005), poet Christian in the musical film "Moulin Rouge!" (2001), and storyteller Edward Bloom in Tim Burton's "Big Fish" (2003). He has also received critical acclaim for his starring roles in theatre productions of "Guys and Dolls" (2005–07) and "Othello" (2007–08). McGregor was ranked No. 36 on "Empire" magazine's "The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time" list in 1997.
Early life.
Born in the Royal Infirmary in Perth, Scotland, McGregor was brought up in the nearby small town of Crieff, where he attended the independent Morrison's Academy. His mother, Carole Diane (née Lawson), is a teacher and school administrator, and his father, James Charles Stewart "Jim" McGregor, is a physical education teacher. He has an older brother, Colin, who is a former Tornado GR4 pilot in the Royal Air Force. He is the nephew of actor Denis Lawson and the late actress Sheila Gish, and the step-cousin of the late actress Lou Gish. McGregor studied drama at the Guildhall School of Music and Drama.
Career.
Film and television.
In 1993, six months prior to his graduation from Guildhall, McGregor won a leading role in Dennis Potter's six-part Channel 4 series "Lipstick on Your Collar". That same year, he starred in the BBC adaptation of "Scarlet and Black" with a young Rachel Weisz, and made his film debut in Bill Forsyth's "Being Human". In 1994, McGregor earned critical praise for his performance in the thriller "Shallow Grave", for which he won an Empire Award, and which marked his first collaboration with director Danny Boyle. His international breakthrough followed in 1996 with the role of heroin addict Mark Renton in Boyle's "Trainspotting", an adaptation of Irvine Welsh's novel of the same name. The film was the first of several times that McGregor would appear nude on screen; he told "The Scotsman" in 2003 that audiences in the United States are "a bit worried about seeing my old chap", referring to his foreskin and the cultural influence of infant circumcision in the U.S.
McGregor played the male romantic lead in the 1998 British film "Little Voice". In 1999, McGregor starred in the blockbuster ' as the young Obi-Wan Kenobi, a role originally made famous by Sir Alec Guinness in the original "Star Wars" trilogy. By appearing in "Star Wars", he continued a family tradition of sorts: his uncle, Denis Lawson, had played Wedge Antilles in the original trilogy. In 2001, he starred in "Moulin Rouge!" as the young poet Christian, who falls in love with the terminally-ill courtesan Satine, played by Nicole Kidman. McGregor reprised his role of Obi-Wan Kenobi for the subsequent prequel ' in 2002. In 2003, he starred alongside Renée Zellweger in "Down With Love". He also portrayed the younger Edward Bloom in the critically acclaimed film "Big Fish" alongside Albert Finney, Jessica Lange, Alison Lohman and Billy Crudup. During that year, he also received critical acclaim for his portrayal of an amoral drifter mixed up with murder in the drama "Young Adam", which co-starred Tilda Swinton.
In 2005, McGregor appeared for the final time as Obi-Wan Kenobi in "". He took very special care—especially in "Revenge of the Sith"—to ensure that his portrayal of Obi-Wan's mannerisms, speech timings, and accents closely resembled Alec Guinness' version. That same year, McGregor lent his voice to two successful animated features; he played the robot Rodney Copperbottom in "Robots", which also featured the voices of Halle Berry and Robin Williams, and he voiced the lead character in Gary Chapman's "Valiant", alongside Jim Broadbent, John Cleese and Ricky Gervais. Also in 2005, McGregor played two roles—one a clone of the other—opposite Scarlett Johansson in Michael Bay's "The Island", and he appeared in Marc Forster's "Stay", a psychological thriller co-starring Naomi Watts and Ryan Gosling.
McGregor was reportedly offered the role of James Bond in the 2006 reboot "Casino Royale", but he turned it down because he feared becoming typecast. In 2006, he narrated the Fulldome production "Astronaut", created for the National Space Centre. That same year, he also narrated the STV show "JetSet", a six-part series following the lives of student pilots and navigators at RAF Lossiemouth as they undergo a gruelling six-month course learning to fly the Tornado GR4, the RAF's primary attack aircraft. In 2007, McGregor starred opposite Colin Farrell in the Woody Allen film "Cassandra's Dream". In 2009, he co-starred with Jim Carrey in "I Love You Phillip Morris" and appeared in "Amelia" alongside Hilary Swank. Also in 2009, he portrayed Camerlengo Patrick McKenna in "Angels & Demons", the film adaptation of Dan Brown's novel of the same name. McGregor is scheduled to co-star with Daniel Craig in Dan Harris' upcoming film adaptation of Glen Duncan's novel "I, Lucifer". At the 2011 Seattle International Film Festival, he was awarded with the SIFF Golden Space Needle Award for Outstanding Achievement in Acting.
In 2012, he was named as a member of the Jury for the Main Competition at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival. At the San Sebastián International Film Festival, he was awarded the Donostia Lifetime Achievement Award and became the youngest recipient of the award.
Theatre.
From November 1998 to March 1999, McGregor starred as Malcolm Scrawdyke in a production of David Halliwell's "Little Malcolm and His Struggles Against the Eunuchs", directed by his uncle, Denis Lawson. The play was first staged at the Hampstead Theatre before transferring to the Comedy Theatre in London's West End. In November 2001, McGregor made a cameo appearance in "The Play What I Wrote".
From June 2005 to April 2007, McGregor starred alongside Jane Krakowski, Douglas Hodge, and Jenna Russell in the original Donmar Warehouse production of "Guys and Dolls" at the Piccadilly Theatre in London. He played the leading role of Sky Masterson, made famous by Marlon Brando in the film of the same name. McGregor received the LastMinute.com award for Best Actor for his performance in 2005, and he was nominated for a Laurence Olivier Award for Best Actor in a Musical in 2007.
From December 2007 to February 2008, McGregor starred as Iago in "Othello" at the Donmar Warehouse alongside Chiwetel Ejiofor as Othello and Kelly Reilly as Desdemona. He reprised the role on BBC Radio 3 in May 2008.
Motorcycle journeys.
A keen motorcyclist since his youth, McGregor undertook a marathon international motorcycle trip with his best friend Charley Boorman and cameraman Claudio von Planta in 2004. From mid-April to the end of July, they travelled from London to New York via central Europe, Ukraine, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Siberian Russia, Canada and USA on BMW R1150GS Adventure motorcycles, for a cumulative distance of 22,345 miles (35,960 km). The trip included visits to several UNICEF programs along the route, and formed the basis of a television series and a best-selling book, both called "Long Way Round".
The "Long Way Round" team reunited in 2007 for another motorcycle trip from John o' Groats in Scotland to Cape Town in South Africa. The journey, entitled "Long Way Down", lasted from 12 May until 5 August 2007. McGregor's brother Colin joined the motorcycle team during the early stages of the "Long Way Down" journey, and his father Jim also rode on sections of both "Long Way Round" and "Long Way Down".
In September 2010, Boorman stated that a third installment of the "Long Way" series was planned for 2011, riding from Tierra del Fuego to Alaska; this has not taken place, however. 
McGregor appeared in a two-part BBC documentary in April 2012 entitled "Ewan McGregor: Cold Chain Mission" in which he travels by motorbike, boat, plane and foot to deliver vaccines to children in remote parts of India, Nepal and the Republic of Congo. The trip was part of his work as a UNICEF Ambassador.
Personal life.
McGregor is married to Eve Mavrakis, a French production designer. They have four daughters, Clara Mathilde McGregor (born February 1996), Esther Rose McGregor (born 7 November 2001), Jamiyan McGregor (born June 2001 in Mongolia; adopted April 2006), and Anouk McGregor (born January 2011). McGregor has a heart and dagger tattoo of the names of his wife and daughters on his right arm. The family currently resides in Los Angeles, California, after moving from London.
McGregor is involved in charity work, including with UNICEF and GO Campaign. During the "Long Way Round" journey in 2004, McGregor and his travelling companions took time out to see some of UNICEF's work in Ukraine, Kazakhstan, and Mongolia, and during the "Long Way Down" trip in 2007, he and Charley Boorman did work for UNICEF in Africa. McGregor hosted the annual Hollywood gala for GO Campaign in 2009 and 2010. He has also worked with the Children's Hospice Association Scotland, as featured in "Long Way Down". In 2012 McGregor travelled with UNICEF immunisation workers to remote parts of India, Nepal and the Republic of Congo for a BBC2 documentary entitled "Ewan McGregor: Cold Chain Mission". 
In 2007, on an episode of "Parkinson", McGregor stated that he had given up alcohol after a period where he was arguably a functioning alcoholic, and that he had not had a drink in seven years. In 2008, he had a cancerous mole removed from underneath his right eye.
McGregor was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2013 New Year Honours for services to drama and charity.
