King of the Nerds is an American reality competition series that airs on TBS. It is hosted by Robert Carradine and Curtis Armstrong, both actors from the "Revenge of the Nerds" films. The series premiered on January 17, 2013 at 10/9 CST.
Premise.
The series follows eleven contestants as they complete various tasks in order to win the grand prize of $100,000 and to be "crowned the greatest nerd" of them all, worthy to sit on "the Throne of Games" (a pun on "The Game of Thrones").
The show uses a progressive elimination of the contestants. Following the first week, the contestants were separated into two teams chosen via schoolyard pick. The teams compete in a Nerd War, an event that requires them to work together to prepare for the main demonstration. Judges select which team is the better team; members on this team are safe from elimination. On the losing team, two players are selected for a Nerd Off; one is selected by a secret vote on the losing team, and the other from a similar vote from the winning team. The two selected players are told what the concept is behind the nerd-off, giving them a few hours to prepare by talking to anyone else still remaining in the game. At the event, the losing player is eliminated from the game.
Typical "King of the Nerds" episodes consist of two challenges. The Nerd War is a team competition, often decided by a judge, with the entire team granted immunity from being sent home. The Nerd-Off is a head-to-head elimination challenge between two members of the losing Nerd War team, with each team voting in one competitor.
Production.
After finding ratings success with its syndicated reruns, "The Big Bang Theory", TBS ordered eight episodes of "King of the Nerds" in March 2012, its first unscripted competition series in seven years. Guest judges include George Takei, Kevin Smith and cosplay artist Yaya Han. To promote the show, contestant Celeste Anderson appeared on the February 12, 2013 episode of "Conan".
Episodes.
Episode 1: "Welcome to Nerdvana".
The eleven contestants are greeted by hosts Robert "Bobby" Carradine and Curtis Armstrong as they arrive at their new home, Nerdvana.
Episode 2: "Imaginary Realms".
Signs of rising tension in the Blue Team began to emerge, particularly against Alana for picking the Orange Team as the winner of the previous Nerd War and causing Hendrik to lose the Nerd-Off.
Episode 4: "Supernerds".
Nerd War: The contestants were tasked to participate in a debate with superheroes being the primary topics. The debates would be judged by USC debate director Gordon Stables and actors/comic book experts Kevin Smith and Jason Mewes. Prior to the debates, on Team Blextrophy, Celeste openly viewed this as her being at her weakest, having little knowledge of superheroes, no experience debating, and being susceptible to stage fright. Alana, who had previously gotten along with Genevieve, started to become irritated with her when she became critical with Alana's first draft. Meanwhile, on the Servants of the Forsaken Orb's side, tension between Danielle and Joshua continued to escalate when Joshua, the self-proclaimed debate master of the team, gave himself what she considered the easiest topic.
Alana argued that genetically altered heroes are preferable, bringing up characters such as Spider-Man, who learned early on about the responsibilities of his powers, and Captain America, who would take a bullet for his fellow man, and concludes that the best heroes are the ones who previously felt weak or knows what it's like to lose everything. While the judges found her performance heartfelt, they pointed out that she didn't put any focus on super-villains to strengthen her point. Ivan argued that heroes born into their powers can hone them better, adding that genetic powers can be erratic and has created more villains than it has heroes. While the judges found the debate close, Smith and Mewes favored Ivan for his stronger presentation and slightly better content.
Joshua argued that claiming superheroes attracted super-villains is ignorant, saying evil will exist regardless of whether superheroes are present. He brought up Gotham City's skyrocketing crime rates after Batman's retirement in "" as an example, but miscredited it to Mark Miller as opposed to Frank Miller, which Genevieve was quick to correct. For her point, Genevieve brought up Mr. Mxyzptlk as an example, who came to Earth for the sole reason to pester Superman. While Smith gave credit to Genevieve for correcting Joshua's Miller misstep, he and Mewes awarded the debate to Joshua for a stronger argument.
Celeste argued that having extraordinary gifts should not allow superheroes to be treated any differently from anyone else and should be accountable for their actions, but towards the end of her presentation, she lost track of where she was and struggled to get her conclusion out. Danielle called preventing a superhero from intervening by threatening prosecution irresponsible, and used military soldiers being protected from being charged with murder to strengthen her point. The judges found Danielle's content and, by far, presentation stronger than Celeste, and unanimously voted in her favor.
As the Servants of the Forsaken Orb had already won the last three debates, this debate did not take place.
Nerd-Off: After the Nerd War, Alana immediately began conspiring with the Servants (particularly Moogega) to send Genevieve to the Nerd-Off. After their indoor skydiving sessions, the Servants talked about sending Virgil to the Nerd-Off, seeing him as Team Blextrophy's strongest player for his ability to learn quickly. Later in the night, Joshua and Danielle reconciled their differences when Joshua allowed Danielle to slap him in the face one time. Meanwhile, on Team Blextrophy, Alana had already deducted that she would be sent to the Nerd-Off by her team, as the remainder of team Blextrophy had already formed a strong bond without her. The remaining three felt that the Servants would send either Virgil or Genevieve to the Nerd-Off, and decided to lobby with the Servants the next day against the idea of sending in Virgil, as he felt he had a weaker chance at beating Alana in what was sure to be a superhero themed challenge. This proved effective, as Genevieve was selected by the Servants to enter the Nerd-Off. Team Blextrophy again elected Alana, who, fed up with her team, said she was entering the challenge for the Servants. The challenge tested Genevieve's and Alana's superhero knowledge with a trivia game. Each question they answered correctly allowed them to burst through a barrier superhero style. The first to break through four barriers, thus correctly answering four questions, wins. Genevieve took the time before the Nerd-Off to research as much information as she could, while Alana chose not to research and rely on the information she already knows. This proved to be her undoing, as Genevieve dominated the competition 4-1, sending Alana home.
Episode 6: "Nerdy Dancing".
Following the Nerd-Off, Curtis announced the dissolution of the teams, leaving the five remaining nerds to fend for themselves.
International syndication.
It was announced on January 14, 2013, that the Canadian network, Slice, has acquired the series from Electus International. The series premiered on January 23, 2013.
