The colon, also known as a dot-point, is a punctuation mark consisting of two equally sized dots centered on the same vertical line. In Unicode, it is encoded at .
Usage.
The most common use of the colon is to inform the reader that what follows the colon proves, explains, or lists elements of what preceded it.
The Bedford Handbook describes several uses of a colon. For example, one can use a colon after an independent clause to direct attention to a list, an appositive, or a quotation. Also, it can be used between independent clauses if the second summarizes or explains the first. Furthermore, one may use a colon after the salutation in a formal letter, to indicate hours and minutes, to show proportions, between a title and subtitle, and between city and publisher in bibliographic entries. 
Luca Serianni, an Italian scholar who helped to define and develop the colon as a punctuation mark, identified four punctuational modes for it: "syntactical-deductive", "syntactical-descriptive", "appositive", and "segmental". Although Serianni wrote this guide for the Italian language, his definitions apply also to English and many other languages.
Syntactical-deductive.
The colon introduces the logical consequence, or effect, of a fact stated before.
Syntactical-descriptive.
In this sense the colon introduces a description; in particular, it makes explicit the elements of a set.
Similarly, the syntactical-descriptive colon separates chapter and verse numbers in citations of passages in widely-studied texts, such as epic poetry, religious texts, and the plays of William Shakespeare.
Syntactical-descriptive colons may separate the numbers indicating hours, minutes, and seconds in abbreviated measures of time.
Appositive.
The colon introduces an appositive independent clause. In other words, the sentence after the colon is in apposition to the one before the colon.
An appositive colon also separates the subtitle of a work from its principal title.
Segmental.
This form is still used in written dialogues, such as in a play. The colon indicates that the words following an individual's name are spoken by that individual.
In many European languages the colon is usually followed by a lower-case letter (unless the upper case is required for other reasons, such as for a proper noun). However, usage differs from this in German, where an upper-case letter may be used only if the sentence "after the colon" could stand alone without the preceding sentence (otherwise one may judge freely according to the relative independence of the two assertions), and in Dutch, where an upper-case letter must be used if the colon is followed by a quotation or an enumeration of complete sentences, although in all other cases a lower-case letter should be used.
Spacing.
In print, a thin space is traditionally placed before a colon and a thick space after it. In English-language modern high-volume commercial printing, no space is placed before a colon and a single space is placed after it. In French-language typing and printing, the traditional rules are preserved. 
One or two spaces may be and have been used after a colon. The older convention (designed to be used by monospaced fonts) was to use "two" spaces after a colon. See also Double spacing at the end of sentences.
History.
English "colon" is from Latin ' (plural '), itself from Greek "limb, member, portion", in rhetoric or prosody especially a part or section of a sentence or a rhythmical period of an utterance. In palaeography, a "colon" is a clause or group of clauses written as a line.
"The Greek grammarians […] called a complete sentence a "period", a limb was a "colon", and a clause a "comma"."
Use of the ":" symbol to mark the discontinuity of a grammatical construction, or a pause of a length intermediate between that of a semicolon and that of a period, was introduced in English orthography around 1600.
John Bullokar's "An English expositor" (1616) glosses "Colon" as "A marke of a sentence not fully ended which is made with two prickes." 
John Mason in "An essay on elocution" (1748) prescribes "A Comma Stops the Voice while we may privately tell one, a Semi Colon two; a Colon three: and a Period four."
Diacritical usage.
A special triangular colon symbol is used in IPA to indicate that the preceding sound is long. Its form is that of two triangles, each a little larger than a point (dot) of a standard colon, pointing toward each other. It is available in Unicode as "modifier letter triangular colon", Unicode U+02D0 (). A regular colon is often used as a fallback when this character is not available, and in the practical orthography of some languages which have a phonemic long/short distinction in vowels.
If the upper triangle is used without the lower one, it designates a "half-long" vowel.
Word-medial separator.
In Finnish and Swedish, the colon can appear inside words in a manner similar to the apostrophe in the English possessive case, connecting a grammatical suffix to an abbreviation or initialism, a special symbol, or a digit (e.g., Finnish "USA:n" and Swedish "USA:s" for the genitive case of "USA", Finnish "%:ssa" for the inessive case of "%", or Finnish "20:een" for the illative case of "20").
Abbreviation.
In Swedish, the colon is used in contractions, such as "S:t" for "Sankt" (Swedish for "Saint"), e.g. in the Stockholm metro station "S:t Eriksplan". This can even occur in people's names, for example ("" for "Axelson"). The colon was also used to mark abbreviations in early modern English.
Letter.
The colon is also used as a grammatical tone letter in Budu in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in Sabaot in Kenya, in some Grebo in Liberia, and in Papua New Guinea: Erima, Gizra, Go꞉bosi, Gwahatike, Kaluli, Kamula, Kasua, Kuni-Boazi, and Zimakani. The Unicode character used for the tone letter is different from the punctuation (U+003A), as well from IPA's triangular colon U+02D0.
Mathematics and logic.
The colon is used in mathematics, cartography, model building and other fields to denote a ratio or a scale, as in 3:1 (pronounced “three to one”). When a ratio is reduced to a simpler form, such as 10:15 to 2:3, this may be expressed with a double colon as 10:15::2:3; this would be read "10 is to 15 as 2 is to 3". Unicode provides a distinct character for mathematical usage.
The notation |:| may also denote the index of a subgroup.
The notation indicates that ƒ is a function with domain and codomain .
The combination with an equal sign, , is used for definitions.
formula_4
Some languages like Haskell use a double colon (::) to indicate type instead.
A colon is also sometimes used to indicate a tensor contraction involving two indices, and a double colon (::) for a contraction over four indices.
Computing.
In computing, the colon character is represented by ASCII code 58, (HTML &#58;) and is located at Unicode code-point U+003A (colon). Scripts comprising wide characters, such as kanji, use a full-width equivalent, located at Unicode code point .
The colon is quite often used as a special control character in URLs, computer programming languages, in the path representation of several file systems (such as HFS), and in many operating systems commands. It is often used as a single post-fix delimiter, signifying a token keyword had immediately preceded it or the transition from one mode of character string interpretation to another related mode. Some applications, such as the widely used MediaWiki, utilize the colon as both a pre-fix and post-fix delimiter.
Several programming languages use the colon for various purposes. In particular, MATLAB uses the colon as a binary operator that generates vectors, as well as to select particular portions of existing matrices. A lot of programming languages, most notably Pascal, and Ada use colon immediately followed by an equality sign, codice_1 in which case the colon and the equality sign are considering to compose to an independent "assignment sign", in Unicode preferably encoded as . In BASIC it's used as a separator between the statements or instructions in a single line. In Forth, colon "precedes" definition of a new word. For the double colon used in computer programming, see the scope resolution operator, and class member access of C++. The colon is also used as part of the conditional operator in C and other languages. In Python, which uses indentation to indicate blocks, the colon is used in statements to indicate that the next line is the start of an indented block.
"child" : ["woman", "man"] -- returns ["child","woman","man"]</source>
("text", False) :: (, Bool)</source>
The ML languages (including Standard ML and OCaml) have the above reversed, where the double colon (codice_2) is used to add an element to the front of a list; and the single colon (codice_4) is used for type guards.
APL uses the colon
Goto labels are formed in a DOS batch file by preceding a label name with a colon.
In an IPv6 address colons (and one optional double colon) separate up to 8 groups of 16 bits in hexadecimal representation.
In a URL a colon follows the initial scheme name (like http), and separates a port number from the hostname or IP address.
In JavaScript, colons are used to define values in an object.
var obj = {
</source>
In INTERCAL, the colon is called "two-spot" and is used to identify a 32-bit variable - distinct from a spot (.) which identifies a 16-bit variable.
Internet usage.
Colons may also be used for sounds, e.g. ::Click::, though sounds can also be denoted by an asterisk or other punctuation marks.
Colons can also be used to represent eyes in emoticons.
