Lucy Kate Hale (born June 14, 1989) is an American actress and singer. She won the reality show "American Juniors". She is known for her roles as Becca Sommers in "Bionic Woman", Rose Baker in "Privileged", Sherrie in the horror film "Scream 4", and Aria Montgomery on the ABC Family series "Pretty Little Liars".
Career.
Acting.
Lucy Hale is a native of Memphis, Tennessee. She first appeared on television in the reality show "American Juniors" in 2003. She was part of the vocal quintet formed with the top 5 finishers.
After "American Juniors", Hale appeared as guest roles on shows such as "Drake & Josh", "Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide", "The O.C.", and "How I Met Your Mother". She appeared in two episodes of the Disney Channel show "Wizards of Waverly Place", which led to her dating co-star David Henrie for a short time.
Hale appeared in "NBC's" short-lived re-imagining of the "Bionic Woman" as Becca Sommers, younger sister to title character Jaime Sommers (played by Michelle Ryan). She made her big screen debut in "The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants 2" portraying Effie, the younger sister of Lena Kaligaris (played by Alexis Bledel).
Hale then co-starred in the "CW" TV show "Privileged" as Rose Baker, with Ashley Newbrough and Joanna Garcia. She starred in the "Lifetime" TV movie "Sorority Wars".
In December 2009, Hale was cast as Aria Montgomery in the TV series "Pretty Little Liars", based on the book series by Sara Shepard. Hale won a 2010 Teen Choice Award ("Choice Summer TV Star: Female") for her portrayal of Aria on the show.
In January 2010, Hale guest-starred on the "" episode "Show Stopper". In August 2010, she was cast in a cameo in "Scream 4".
Hale was cast as the lead for "". Filming began in February 2011 and the film aired in January 2012.
Hale hosted the April 25 episode of "Punk'd" where she successfully pranked Ian Harding, Vanessa Hudgens and Josh Hutcherson.
Hale formerly dated actor Chris Zylka. 
Music.
Hale described music as her "first love". Her early musical influences were Shania Twain and Faith Hill but what ignited her interest in pursuing music was Britney Spears' "Baby One More Time". She recorded songs for "A Cinderella Story: Once Upon a Song".
On June 12, 2012, it was announced that she had signed a deal with Hollywood Records. A country-music single and an album are expected in 2013.
