Samsung Group (; ) is a South Korean multinational conglomerate company headquartered in Samsung Town, Seoul. It comprises numerous subsidiaries and affiliated businesses, most of them united under the "Samsung" brand, and is the largest South Korean "chaebol".
Samsung was founded by Lee Byung-chull in 1938 as a trading company. Over the next three decades the group diversified into areas including food processing, textiles, insurance, securities and retail. Samsung entered the electronics industry in the late 1960s and the construction and shipbuilding industries in the mid-1970s; these areas would drive its subsequent growth. Following Lee's death in 1987, Samsung was separated into four business groups - Samsung Group, Shinsegae Group, CJ Group and Hansol Group. Since the 1990s Samsung has increasingly globalised its activities, and electronics, particularly mobile phones and semiconductors, has become its most important source of income.
Notable Samsung industrial subsidiaries include Samsung Electronics (the world's largest information technology company measured by 2012 revenues), Samsung Heavy Industries (the world's second-largest shipbuilder measured by 2010 revenues), and Samsung Engineering and Samsung C&T (respectively the world's 35th- and 72nd-largest construction companies). Other notable subsidiaries include Samsung Life Insurance (the world's 14th-largest life insurance company), Samsung Everland (operator of Everland Resort, the oldest theme park in South Korea), Samsung Techwin (a surveillance, aeronautics, optoelectronics, automations and weapons technology company) and Cheil Worldwide (the world's 19th-largest advertising agency measured by 2010 revenues).
Samsung has a powerful influence on South Korea's economic development, politics, media and culture, and has been a major driving force behind the "Miracle on the Han River". Its affiliate companies produce around a fifth of South Korea's total exports.
Name.
According to the founder of Samsung Group, the meaning of the Korean hanja word "Samsung" () is "tristar" or "three stars". The word "three" represents something "big, numerous and powerful"; the "stars" mean eternity.
History.
1938 to 1970.
In 1938, Lee Byung-chull (1910–1987) of a large landowning family in the Uiryeong county came to the nearby Daegu city and founded "Samsung Sanghoe" (삼성상회, 三星商會), a small trading company with forty employees located in Su-dong (now Ingyo-dong). It dealt in groceries produced in and around the city and produced its own noodles. The company prospered and Lee moved its head office to Seoul in 1947. When the Korean War broke out, however, he was forced to leave Seoul and started a sugar refinery in Busan named "Cheil Jedang". After the war, in 1954, Lee founded "Cheil Mojik" and built the plant in Chimsan-dong, Daegu. It was the largest woollen mill ever in the country and the company took on the aspect of a major company.
Samsung diversified into many areas and Lee sought to help establish Samsung as an industry leader in a wide range of enterprises, moving into businesses such as insurance, securities, and retail. Lee placed great importance on industrialization, and focused his economic development strategy on a handful of large domestic conglomerates, protecting them from competition and assisting them financially. 
In 1948, Cho Hong-jai (the Hyosung group’s founder) jointly invested in a new company called Samsung Mulsan Gongsa (삼성물산공사), or the Samsung Trading Corporation, with the Samsung Group founder Lee Byung-chull. The trading firm grew to become the present-day Samsung C&T Corporation. But after some years Cho and Lee separated due to differences in management between them. He wanted to get up to a 30% group share. After settlement, Samsung Group was separated into Samsung Group and Hyosung Group, Hankook Tire, and others.
In the late 1960s, Samsung Group entered into the electronics industry. It formed several electronics-related divisions, such as Samsung Electronics Devices Co., Samsung Electro-Mechanics Co., Samsung Corning Co., and Samsung Semiconductor & Telecommunications Co., and made the facility in Suwon. Its first product was a black-and-white television set.
1970 to 1990.
In 1980, Samsung acquired the Gumi-based "Hanguk Jeonja Tongsin" and entered the telecommunications hardware industry. Its early products were switchboards. The facility were developed into the telephone and fax manufacturing systems and became the centre of Samsung's mobile phone manufacturing. They have produced over 800 million mobile phones to date. The company grouped them together under Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. in the 1980s.
After the founder's death in 1987, Samsung Group was separated into four business groups - Samsung Group, Shinsegae Group, CJ Group and Hansol Group. Shinsegae (discount store, department store) was originally part of Samsung Group, separated in the 1990s from the Samsung Group along with CJ Group (Food/Chemicals/Entertainment/logistics) and the Hansol Group (Paper/Telecom). Today these separated groups are independent and they are not part of or connected to the Samsung Group. One Hansol Group representative said, "Only people ignorant of the laws governing the business world could believe something so absurd," adding, "When Hansol separated from the Samsung Group in 1991, it severed all payment guarantees and share-holding ties with Samsung affiliates." One Hansol Group source asserted, "Hansol, Shinsegae, and CJ have been under independent management since their respective separations from the Samsung Group." One Shinsegae Department Store executive director said, "Shinsegae has no payment guarantees associated with the Samsung Group."
In the 1980s, Samsung Electronics began to invest heavily in research and development, investments that were pivotal in pushing the company to the forefront of the global electronics industry. In 1982, it built a television assembly plant in Portugal; in 1984, a plant in New York; in 1985, a plant in Tokyo; in 1987, a facility in England; and another facility in Austin in 1996. As of 2012, Samsung has invested more than in the Austin facility, which operates under the name Samsung Austin Semiconductor LLC. This makes the Austin location the largest foreign investment in Texas and one of the largest single foreign investments in the United States.
1990 to 2000.
Samsung started to rise as an international corporation in the 1990s. Samsung's construction branch was awarded a contract to build one of the two Petronas Towers in Malaysia, Taipei 101 in Taiwan and the Burj Khalifa in United Arab Emirates. In 1993, Lee Kun-hee sold off ten of Samsung Group's subsidiaries, downsized the company, and merged other operations to concentrate on three industries: electronics, engineering, and chemicals. In 1996, the Samsung Group reacquired the Sungkyunkwan University foundation.
Samsung became the largest producer of memory chips in the world in 1992, and is the world's second-largest chipmaker after Intel (see Worldwide Top 20 Semiconductor Market Share Ranking Year by Year).
In 1995, it created its first liquid-crystal display screen. Ten years later, Samsung grew to be the world's largest manufacturer of liquid-crystal display panels. Sony, which had not invested in large-size TFT-LCDs, contacted Samsung to cooperate, and, in 2006, S-LCD was established as a joint venture between Samsung and Sony in order to provide a stable supply of LCD panels for both manufacturers. S-LCD was owned by Samsung (50% plus 1 share) and Sony (50% minus 1 share) and operates its factories and facilities in Tangjung, South Korea. As on 26 December 2011 it was announced that Samsung had acquired the stake of Sony in this joint venture.
Compared to other major Korean companies, Samsung survived the 1997 Asian financial crisis relatively unharmed. However, Samsung Motor was sold to Renault at a significant loss. , Renault Samsung is 80.1 percent owned by Renault and 19.9 percent owned by Samsung. Additionally, Samsung manufactured a range of aircraft from the 1980s to 1990s. The company was founded in 1999 as Korea Aerospace Industries (KAI), the result of merger between then three domestic major aerospace divisions of Samsung Aerospace, Daewoo Heavy Industries, and Hyundai Space and Aircraft Company. However, Samsung still manufactures aircraft engines and gas turbines.
2000 to 2012.
In 2001 Samsung Techwin became the sole supplier of a combustor module for the Rolls-Royce Trent 900 used by the Airbus A380, the world's largest passenger airliner. Samsung Techwin is also a revenue-sharing participant in the Boeing's 787 Dreamliner GEnx engine program.
In 2010, Samsung announced a 10-year growth strategy centred around five businesses. One of these businesses was to be focused on biopharmaceuticals, to which the Company has committed .
In December 2011, Samsung Electronics sold its hard disk drive (HDD) business to Seagate.
In the first quarter of 2012, Samsung Electronics became the world's largest mobile phone maker by unit sales, overtaking Nokia, which had been the market leader since 1998.
In the August 21st edition of the "Austin American-Statesman", Samsung confirmed plans to spend 3 to 4 billion dollars converting half of its Austin chip manufacturing plant to a more profitable chip. The conversion should start in early 2013 with production on line by the end of 2013.
On August 24, 2012, 9 U.S jurors ruled that Samsung had to pay Apple Incorporated US$1.05 billion dollars in damages for violating six of its patents on smartphone technology. The award was still less than the US$2.5 billion dollars requested by Apple. The decision also ruled that Apple didn't violate 5 Samsung patents that were in the case Samsung decried the decision saying that the move could harm innovation in the sector. It also followed a South Korean ruling that said both companies were guilty of infringing on each other's intellectual property. In the first trading after the ruling, Samsung shares on the Kospi index fell 7.7%, the largest fall since October 24, 2008, to 1,177,000 Korean won. Apple then sought to ban the sales of eight Samsung phones (Galaxy S 4G, Galaxy S2 AT&T, Galaxy S2 Skyrocket, Galaxy S2 T-Mobile, Galaxy S2 Epic 4G, Galaxy S Showcase, Droid Charge and Galaxy Prevail) in the United States which has been denied by Judge Koh.
On September 4, 2012, Samsung announced it plans to examine all of its Chinese suppliers for possible violations of labor policies. The company said it will carry out audits of 250 Chinese companies that are its exclusive suppliers to see if children under the age of 16 are being used in their factories.
Acquisitions and attempted acquisitions.
For a company of its size Samsung has made relatively few acquisitions.
Operations.
Samsung comprises around 80 companies. It is highly diversified, with activities in areas including construction, electronics, financial services, shipbuilding and medical services.
In FY 2009, Samsung reported consolidated revenues of 220 trillion KRW ($172.5 billion). In FY 2010, Samsung reported consolidated revenues of 280 trillion KRW ($258 billion), and profits of 30 trillion KRW ($27.6 billion) (based upon a KRW-USD exchange rate of 1,084.5 KRW per USD, the spot rate ). However, it should be noted that these amounts do not include the revenues from all of Samsung's subsidiaries based outside South Korea.
Subsidiaries and affiliates.
As of April 2011 the Samsung Group comprised 59 unlisted companies and 19 listed companies, all of which had their primary listing on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange.
Ace Digitech.
Ace Digitech is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 036550).
Cheil Industries.
Cheil Industries is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 001300).
Cheil Worldwide.
Cheil Worldwide is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 030000).
Credu.
Credu is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 067280).
Imarket Korea.
Imarket Korea is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 122900).
Samsung Card.
Samsung Card is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 029780).
Samsung C&T Corporation.
Samsung C&T Corporation is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (000830).
Samsung Electro-Mechanics.
Samsung Electro-Mechanics, established in 1973 as a manufacturer of key electronic components, is headquartered in Suwon, Kyeonggi-Do, South Korea. It is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 009150).
Samsung Electronics.
Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd. is a multinational electronics and information technology company headquartered in Suwon and the flagship company of the Samsung Group. Its products include air conditioners, computers, digital televisions, liquid crystal displays (including thin film transistors (TFTs) and active-matrix organic light-emitting diodes (AMOLEDs)), mobile phones, monitors, printers, refrigerators, semiconductors and telecoms networking equipment. It is the world's largest mobile phone maker by unit sales in the first quarter of 2012, with a global market share of 25.4%. It is also the world's second-largest semiconductor maker by 2011 revenues (after Intel).
Samsung Electronics is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 005930).
Samsung Engineering.
Samsung Engineering Co., Ltd. is a multinational construction company headquartered in Seoul. It was founded in January 1970. Its principal activity is the construction of oil refining plants; upstream oil and gas facilities; petrochemical plants and gas plants; steel making plants; power generation plants; water treatment facilities; and other infrastructure. It achieved total revenues of 9,298.2 billion won (US$8.06 billion) in 2011.
Samsung Engineering is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 028050).
Samsung Fine Chemicals.
Samsung Fine Chemicals is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 004000).
Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance.
Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance Co., Ltd. is a multinational general insurance company headquartered in Seoul. It was founded in January 1952 as Korea Anbo Fire and Marine Insurance Co., Ltd. and was renamed Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance in December 1993. Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance offers services including accident insurance, automobile insurance, casualty insurance, fire insurance, liability insurance, marine insurance, personal pensions and loans. As of March 2011 it had operations in 10 countries and 6.5 million customers. Samsung Fire & Marine Insurance had a total premium income of US$11.7 billion in 2011 and total assets of US$28.81 billion at 31 March 2011. It is the largest provider of general insurance in South Korea.
Samsung Fire has been listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange since 1975 (number 000810).
Samsung Heavy Industries.
Samsung Heavy Industries Co., Ltd. is a shipbuilding and engineering company headquartered in Seoul. It was founded in August 1974. Its principal products are bulk carriers, container vessels, crude oil tankers, cruisers, passenger ferries, material handling equipment steel and bridge structures. It achieved total revenues of 13,358.6 billion won in 2011 and is the world's second-largest shipbuilder by revenues (after Hyundai Heavy Industries).
Samsung Heavy Industries is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 010140).
Samsung Life Insurance.
Samsung Life Insurance Co., Ltd. is a multinational life insurance company headquartered in Seoul. It was founded in March 1957 as Dongbang Life Insurance and became an affiliate of the Samsung Group in July 1963. Samsung Life's principal activity is the provision of individual life insurance and annuity products and services. As of December 2011 it had operations in seven countries, 8.08 million customers and 5,975 employees. Samsung Life had total sales of 22,717 billion won in 2011 and total assets of 161,072 billion won at 31 December 2011. It is the largest provider of life insurance in South Korea.
Samsung Life Insurance is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 032830).
Samsung Machine Tools.
Samsung Machine Tools of America is a national distributor of machines in the United States.
Samsung SDI.
Samsung SDI is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 006400). On December 5, 2012 the antitrust regulators of European Union fined Samsung SDI and several other major companies for fixing prices of TV cathode-ray tubes in two cartels lasting nearly a decade.
Samsung Securities.
Samsung Securities is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 016360).
Samsung Techwin.
Samsung Techwin is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 012450).
Shilla Hotels and Resorts.
Shilla Hotels and Resorts is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 008770).
SI Corporation.
SI Corporation is listed on the Korea Exchange stock-exchange (number 012750).
Joint ventures.
Current.
aT Grain.
State-run Korea Agro-Fisheries Trade Corp. set up the venture, aT Grain Co., in Chicago, with three other South Korean companies, Korea Agro-Fisheries owns 55 percent of aT Grain, while Samsung C&T Corp, Hanjin Transportation Co. and STX Corporation. each hold 15 percent.
Brooks Automation Asia.
Brooks Automation Asia Co., Ltd. is a joint venture between Brooks Automation (70%) and Samsung (30%) which was established in 1999. The venture locally manufactures and configure vacuum wafer handling platforms and 300mm Front-Opening Unified Pod (FOUP) load port modules, and designs, manufactures and configures atmospheric loading systems for flat panel displays.
POSCO-Samsung Slovakia Steel Processing Center.
Company POSS - SLPC s.r.o. was founded in 2007 as a subsidiary of Samsung C & T Corporation, Samsung C & T Deutschland and the company POSCO.
Samsung Air China Life Insurance.
Samsung Air China Life Insurance Co., Ltd. is a 50:50 joint venture between Samsung Life Insurance and China National Aviation Corporation. It was established in Beijing in July 2005.
Samsung Bioepis.
Samsung Bioepis is a joint venture between Samsung Biologics (85%) and the United States-based Biogen Idec (15%).
Samsung Biologics.
Samsung Electronics Co. and Samsung Everland Inc. will each own a 40 percent stake in the venture, with Samsung C&T Corp. and Durham, North Carolina-based Quintiles each holding 10 percent. It will contract-make medicines made from living cells, and Samsung Group plans to expand into producing copies of biologics including Rituxan, the leukemia and lymphoma treatment sold by Roche Holding AG and Biogen Idec Inc.
Samsung BP Chemicals.
Samsung BP Chemicals Co., Ltd is a 50:50 joint venture between Samsung and the United Kingdom-based BP, which was established in 1989 to produce and supply high-value-added chemical products.
Samsung Corning Precision Glass.
Samsung Corning Precision Glass is a joint venture between Samsung and Corning, which was established in 1973 to manufacture and market cathode ray tube glass for black and white televisions. The company’s first LCD glass substrate manufacturing facility opened in Gumi, Korea in 1996.
Samsung Sumitomo LED Materials.
Samsung Sumitomo LED Materials is a Korea-based joint venture between Samsung LED Co., Ltd., an LED maker based in Suwon, Korea-based and the Japan-based Sumitomo Chemical. The JV will carry out research and development, manufacturing, and sales of sapphire substrates for LEDs.
Samsung Thales.
Samsung Thales Co., Ltd. (until 2001 known as Samsung Thomson-CSF Co., Ltd.) is a joint venture between Samsung Techwin and the France-based aerospace and defence company Thales. It was established in 1978 and is based in Seoul.
Samsung Total.
Samsung Total is a 50:50 joint venture between Samsung and the France-based oil group Total S.A. (more specifically Samsung General Chemicals and Total Petrochemicals).
SB LiMotive.
SB LiMotive is a 50:50 joint company of Robert Bosch GmbH(commonly known as Bosch) and Samsung SDI founded in June 2008. The joint venture develops and manufactures lithium-ion batteries for use in hybrid-, plug-in hybrid vehicles and electric vehicles.
SD Flex.
SD Flex Co., Ltd. was founded on October 2004 as a joint venture corporation by Samsung and DuPont, one of the world's largest chemical company.
Sermatech Korea.
Sermatech owns 51% of its stock, while Samsung owns the remaining 49%. The U.S. firm Sermatech International, for a business focusing on highly specialized aircraft construction processes such as special welding and brazing.
Siam Samsung Life Insurance.
Samsung Life Insurance, holds a 37% stake while Saha Group also has a 37.5% stake in the joint venture, with the remaining 25% owned by Thanachart Bank.
Siltronic Samsung Wafer.
Siltronic Samsung Wafer Pte. Ltd, the joint venture by Samsung and wholly owned Wacker Chemie subsidiary Siltronic, was officially opened in Singapore in June 2008.
SMP.
SMP Ltd. is a joint venture between Samsung Fine Chemicals and MEMC.
MEMC Electronic Materials Inc. and an affiliate of Korean conglomerate Samsung are forming a joint venture to build a polysilicon plant.
Steco.
Steco Co., Ltd. is established as the joint - venture company with Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd and Japan TORAY in 1995.
Stemco.
Stemco is a joint venture between Samsung Electro-Mechanics and the Japan-based Toray Industries which was established in 1995.
Toshiba Samsung Storage Technology.
Toshiba Samsung Storage Technology Corporation (TSST) is joint venture between Samsung Electronics and Toshiba of Japan which specialises in optical disc drive manufacturing. TSST was formed in 2004, and Toshiba owns 51% of its stock, with Samsung owns the remaining 49%.
Defunct.
Alpha Processor.
In 1998, Samsung created a U.S. joint venture with Compaq—called Alpha Processor Inc. (API)--to help it enter the high-end processor market. The venture was also aimed at expanding Samsung's non-memory chip business by fabricating Alpha processors. At the time, Samsung and Compaq invested $500 million in Alpha Processor.
GE-Samsung Lighting.
GE Samsung Lighting was a joint venture between Samsung and the GE Lighting subsidiary of General Electric. The venture was established in 1998 and was broken up 2009.
Global Steel Exchange.
Global Steel Exchange was a joint venture formed in 2000 between Samsung, the United States-based Cargill, the Switzerland-based Duferco Group, and the Luxembourg-based Tradearbed (now part of the ArcelorMittal), to handle their online buying and selling of steel.
S-LCD.
S-LCD Corporation was a joint venture between Samsung Electronics (50% plus one share) and the Japan-based Sony Corporation (50% minus one share) which was established in April 2004. On December 26, 2011, Samsung Electronics announced that it would acquire all of Sony's shares in the venture.
Partially owned companies.
Atlantico Sul.
Samsung Heavy Industries currently owns 10 percent of the Brazilian shipbuilder Atlantico Sul, which operates the largest shipyard in South America. Joao Candido, the largest ship built to date in Brazil, was built by Atlantico Sul with technology supplied by Samsung Heavy Industries.
DGB Financial Group.
Samsung Life Insurance currently holds a 7.4% stake in the South Korean banking company DGB Financial Group, making it the largest shareholder.
Doosan Engine.
Samsung Heavy Industries currently holds a 14.1 percent stake in Doosan Engine, making it the second-biggest shareholder.
Korea Aerospace Industries.
Samsung Techwin currently holds a 10 percent stake in Korea Aerospace Industries (KAI). Other major shareholders include the state-owned Korea Finance Corporation (26.75 percent), Hyundai Motor (10 percent) and Doosan (10 percent).
MEMC KOREA.
MEMC's joint venture with Samsung Electronics Company, Ltd. In 1990, MEMC entered into a joint venture agreement to construct a silicon plant in Korea.
Rambus Incorporated.
Samsung currently owns 4.19 percent of Rambus Incorporated.
Renault Samsung Motors.
Samsung currently owns 19.9 percent of the automobile manufacturer Renault Samsung Motors.
Seagate Technology.
Samsung currently owns 9.6 percent of Seagate Technology, making it the second-largest shareholder. Under a shareholder agreement, Samsung has the right to nominate an executive to Seagate’s Board of Directors.
SungJin Geotec.
Samsung Engineering holds a 10 percent stake in Sungjin Geotec, an offshore oil drilling company that is a subsidiary of POSCO.
Taylor Energy.
Taylor Energy is an independent American oil company that drills in the Gulf of Mexico based in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Samsung Oil & Gas USA Corp., subsidiaries of Samsung, currently owns 20% of Taylor Energy.
Logo.
The current Samsung logo design is intended to emphasize flexibility and simplicity while conveying a dynamic and innovative image through the ellipse, the symbol of the universe and the world stage. The openings on both ends of the ellipse where the letters "S" and "G" are located are intended to illustrate the company's open-mindedness and the desire to communicate with the world. The English rendering is a visual expression of its core corporate vision, excellence in customer service through technology.
The basic color in the logo is blue, the color that the company has had used in its logos for years. The blue color symbolizes stability and reliability, which are precisely what the company wishes to accomplish with its customers. It also stands for social responsibility as a corporate citizen, a company official explained.
Audio logo.
Samsung has an audio logo, which consists of the notes E♭, A♭, D♭, E♭. The audio logo was produced by Musikvergnuegen and written by Walter Werzowa.
Samsung Medical Center.
Samsung donates around US$100 million per annum to the Samsung Medical Center, a non-profit healthcare provider founded by the group in 1994. Samsung Medical Center incorporates Samsung Seoul Hospital, Kangbook Samsung Hospital, Samsung Changwon Hospital, Samsung Cancer Center and Samsung Life Sciences Research Center. Samsung Cancer Center, located in Seoul, is the largest cancer center in Asia. Samsung Medical Center and the multinational pharmaceuticals company Pfizer have agreed to collaborate on research to identify the genomic mechanisms responsible for clinical outcomes in hepatocellular carcinoma.
Sponsorships.
Samsung sponsors Bundesliga club Bayern Munich. Samsung are the current sponsors of the English Premier League football club Chelsea Football Club. They also sponsor English Football League One clubs Swindon Town and Leyton Orient.
Samsung, which started as a domestic sponsor of the Olympics in Seoul 1988, has been a worldwide Olympic partner since the 1998 Winter Olympics.
Samsung operating many sports clubs, football club Suwon Samsung Bluewings, baseball club Samsung Lions, basketball club Seoul Samsung Thunders, volleyball club Daejeon Samsung Fire Bluefangs and etc.
Samsung also sponsors a former Starcraft Brood War and current Starcraft II Professional Gaming Team named Samsung Khan. Samsung has sponsored the team since 2000.
Price fixing.
DRAM price cartel.
Samsung was fined EUR 145,727,000 for being part of a price cartel of ten companies for DRAMs which lasted from 1 July 1998 to 15 June 2002. The company received, like most of the other members of the cartel, a 10-% reduction for acknowledging the facts to investigators. Samsung had to pay 90% of their share of the settlement, but Micron avoided payment as a result of having initially revealed the case to investigators.
CRT glass price cartel.
Samsung Corning Precision Materials participated in a price cartel of four companies for CRT glass which lasted from 23 February 1999 to 27 December 2004. Samsung Corning Precision Materials received full immunity and was therefore not fined as it revealed the existence of the cartel to the European Commission.
