Sweety Shetty (born on 7 November 1981), better known by her stage name Anushka Shetty is an Indian film actress, who works for the South Indian film industry. She debuted in the 2005 Telugu film "Super" and rose to fame following her performance in "Vikramarkudu" (2006). She received high critical acclaim for her portrayal of the titular character in "Arundhati" and as Saroja in "Vedam" which fetched her two Filmfare, one Nandi and two CineMAA Awards. After starring in blockbuster "Singam" (2010), her biggest commercial success, she became one of South India's most leading actresses. Especially in Tollywood and Kollywood
Early life.
Anushka Shetty was born as Sweety Shetty on 7 November 1981 in Mangalore. Shetty is an ethnic Bunt hailing from the landed "Bellipady Uramalu Guthu" family. Her parents are Prafulla and A.N. Vittal Shetty. She has two brothers Gunaranjan Shetty and Sai Ramesh Shetty who is a cosmetic surgeon. She attended her schooling in Bangalore. She did her Bachelor of Computer Applications at Mount Carmel College, Bangalore. She was also a Yoga Instructor and has trained under yoga guru Bharat Thakur.
Film career.
Early career (2005–2008).
Shetty made her acting debut in Puri Jagannath's 2005 Telugu film "Super" alongside Akkineni Nagarjuna. The same year, she acted in another film "Mahanandi", which was a moderate success at box office. In 2006, she had four releases, the first being S. S. Rajamouli's "Vikramarkudu" pairing Raviteja for the first time in her career, in which she portrayed the character Neeraja Goswami. The film went on to become very successful and got her much recognition, that eventually made her very popular in Andhra Pradesh and as a leading actress in Telugu. She next had starred in the film "Astram", a remake of the 1999 Hindi film "Sarfarosh", following which she debuted in the Tamil film industry, acting in the Sundar C.-directed action flick "Rendu", sharing screen space with R. Madhavan. Later that year, she made a special appearance in A. R. Murugadoss' directorial debut in Telugu, "Stalin".
Her first release in 2007 was "Lakshyam", after which she starred in Raghava Lawrence's "Don" opposite Nagarjuna again. The former, in particular, succeeded at the box office. In 2008 she had appeared in six films. "Okka Magaadu" was the first release, in which she played one of three female leads. Her subsequent releases "Swagatam" alongside Jagapati Babu and Bhumika Chawla and "Baladur" opposite Ravi Teja garnered poor reviews and box office returns. She next appeared in the film "Souryam" with Gopichand which became a box office hit.
Critical acclaim and stardom in Tollywood (2009–2010).
In 2009, Shetty first starred in the blockbuster hit, the fantasy film "Arundhati". In this heroine-centric film, she essayed two roles for the first time. It was a critical as well as commercial success. Critics heaped praise on Anushka for her performance. "Idlebrain"'s Jeevi wrote that she was "simply amazing in two roles" and that she did "exceptionally well with subtle yet impact creating performance", while "Rediff" claimed that she was "brilliant and breathtaking in parts", labelling "Arundhati" as "totally Anushka's film". "Sify" noted that she was "at her best with great performance". She went on to win the Nandi Special Jury Award and the Filmfare Best Actress Award among other accolades.
Her next film, the action flick "Billa", a remake of the 2007 Tamil namesake, itself a remake of the 1978 Hindi film "Don", featured Shetty in a role contrary to that in "Arundati". Idle brain noted, Anushka is good in slim figure and she is extremely glamorous in revealing dresses. Her final release in 2009 was her second Tamil feature film, the action masala flick "Vettaikkaran" with leading Tamil actor Vijay and it was a super hit at box-office.
She had an array of releases in 2010, with her Tamil release, the police story "Singam" co-starring Suriya emerging a huge blockbuster and remains her highest-grosser till date, while most of her her Telugu films performed poorly.
Then she portrayed a prostitute in Krish's critically acclaimed anthology film "Vedam", her first Telugu film of the year, winning accolades for her performance, including her second consecutive Filmfare Award and other awards as well, following which she was selected to reprise the character in its Tamil remake, "Vaanam" as well. Her next Telugu film, "Panchakshari", was another heroine-centric film where she again performed double roles, however the movie failed at the box office. This was followed by the action comedy "Khaleja", where she starred opposite Mahesh Babu for the first time in her career . "Nagavalli", the Telugu remake of the Kannada film "Aptharakshaka" which she portrayed as famaous role as Chandramukhi which she paired again with Venkatesh and "Ragada" paired opposite Akkineni Nagarjuna followed, which all failed to make an impact at the box office. She also made special appearances in the movies "Kedi" and "Thakita Thakita".
Success and stardom in Kollywood (2011-present).
"Vaanam" became her first 2011 release, which received positive critical response. A critic from Sify wrote that "Anushka is outstanding as the commercial sex worker as she is able to bring out a life-like performance." and other critics too highly praised her performance as Saroja. She next starred in A. L. Vijay's "Deiva Thirumagal" with Vikram for the first time in her career. The drama centers on the characters of Krishna, a mentally retarded father and his daughter Nila. The film became a critical and commercial success, fetching her laurels for her portrayal as Anuradha, an advocate.
In 2012,Anushka again co-starred in A. L. Vijay's action drama "Thaandavam" alongside Vikram and Amy Jackson. In The Hindu review film critic Malathi Rangarajan described her as "perfect ten for the choice of cast" and further stated that "the romance between Vikram and Anushka is a beautiful feature of Thaandavam." The movie did a great business.
After two years long gap in Telugu films, she made a grand comeback in 2012. She appeared alongside Akkineni Nagarjuna in "Dhamarukam", a fantasy film. A critic from The Times of India said that Anushka "has little to do as far as performance goes and does a good job of upping the glam quotient".
Her first release in 2013 is Alex Pandianan action-masala film ', directed by Suraj, co-starring Karthi. Critics noted that Anuskha is colourful and glamourous in the movie. Her second release was Koratala Siva's "Mirchi" opposite Prabhas. Most of the critics praised her performance, also stated she looks glamoros and highligth the chemistry with Prabhas works wonder in the movie.
Upcoming projects.
She is currently filming for Selvaraghavan's "Irandam Ulagam" opposite Arya and Suriya's Singam 2.
She has signed Gunashekar's bilingual "Rani Rudrama Devi", which is set to start shooting in February 2013.
Other works.
Dubbing.
For the first time in her career she dubs her own voice for herself in the movie Mirchi and also she is set her voice to dubs for herself in the movie Irandam Ulagam is a blingual movie under direction Selvaragavan. She also taking Tamil lessons classes.
Brand endorsement.
In addition of films, sweety also endorses a large number of brands. She is the brand ambassador for head and shoulder in South. She also the brand ambassador of some jewellery stores like MBS Jewellers. She also endorsed the Colgate brand in Tamil and Telugu by Replacing Trisha Krishnan alongside with stylish star Allu Arjun.
Personal life.
Sweety cames from an educated family .She is a Yoga teacher in early,
