Nicholas Scott "Nick" Cannon (born October 8, 1980) is an American actor, comedian, rapper, and radio/television personality. On television, Cannon began as a teenager on "All That" before going on to host "The Nick Cannon Show", "Wild 'N Out", and "America's Got Talent". He acted in the films "Drumline", "Love Don't Cost a Thing", and "Roll Bounce". As a rapper, he released his debut self-titled album in 2003 with the hit single "Gigolo", a collaboration with singer R. Kelly. In 2006, Cannon recorded singles "Dime Piece" and "My Wife" for a planned album "Stages", which was never released. Cannon married American R&B/pop singer Mariah Carey on April 30, 2008.
Music career.
Early music career.
As a teenager, Cannon formed the rap group "Da G4 Dope Bomb Squad" with his friend Steve Groves; they opened for the likes of Will Smith, LFO, 98 Degrees, and Montell Jordan.
Self-titled debut album (2001–2003).
After signing with Jive Records in 2001, he was featured alongside Romeo Miller and 3LW on the "" soundtrack with a cover of the 1988 hit song "Parents Just Don't Understand". His debut self titled album was released in 2003 and included the single "Your Pops Don't Like Me".
"Stages" (2005–2006).
In 2005, Cannon formed his own record label, Can I Ball Records, with plans to release his second studio album, entitled "Stages", later that year. The album's first single, "Can I Live?", a pro-life song, was released in July 2005 followed by the second single "Dime Piece" in March 2006.
But it was never released because of Nick Cannon's acting career.
Slick Rick parody "Slick Nick" (2010–2012).
In 2010, Cannon created a parody of hip hop pioneer "Slick Rick" entitled "Slick Nick". He released two songs of the character such as "I'm A Slick Rick" in which he attempted to diss Hip-Hop mega-star Eminem. It was a freestyle of Cali Swag District's "Teach Me How to Dougie" & "Nick's Story" which was a Freestyle rap version of Slick Rick's "Children's Story".
Other ventures.
Hosting.
In 2005, Cannon produced and hosted the MTV improv comedy series "Wild 'N Out". That same year he hosted the world record slime stunt on Nickelodeon's 2005 Kids' Choice Awards in which a human cannonball was shot into slime. By complete chance, it was Nick Cannon with the Nick(elodeon) Cannon! Donald Trump did the honors of announcing "You're fired" to trigger the cannonballl shooting. 
In 2009, he hosted the fourth, fifth, and sixth seasons of "America's Got Talent" and is currently hosting the seventh season.
He also hosted the first and only season of Nickelodeon's "Friday Night Slimetime". He also was the DJ on Ellen DeGeneres's "Bigger, Longer, And Wider" show. In 2009, Cannon hosted the HALO Awards along with Justin Timberlake, Hayden Panettiere, LeBron James, Kelly Rowland and Alicia Keys which premiered on December 11.
On July 4, 2011 Cannon hosted the Nathan's Hot Dog Eating Contest.
Business.
The former Nickelodeon star and MTV Networks personality is now the Chairman of TeenNick and the development and creative consultant of the network.
Radio hosting.
On January 19, 2010, Cannon started hosting the morning show (6-10AM) with co-hosts Nikki and Southern Sarah Lee at 92.3 NOW FM (WXRK-FM) in New York.
Cannon has a weekly chart program called "Cannon's Countdown" that is syndicated by CBS Radio.
On February 17, 2012, Cannon stepped down from 92.3 NOW citing health issues.
Comedy.
Cannon hosted and performed on the comedy show Wild 'N Out that aired on MTV for four seasons between 2005 - 2007. 
On July 13, 2010, Cannon announced that he was going on a comedy tour in the of Fall 2010 beginning at the Just for Laughs festival in Montreal. 
In early 2011, Cannon recorded his first-ever stand-up comedy special titled "Mr. Showbiz" at the Palms Casino Resort in Las Vegas. The special premiered on Showtime on May 14, 2011. A digital release of "Mr. Showbiz" became available on iTunes beginning May 16, 2011, with a physical release of the album on May 31, 2011. On the special, Cannon unabashedly reveals his thoughts on his famous marriage (to music icon Mariah Carey), pending fatherhood, and how to put an end to his buzzed-about Twitter war with hip-hop star Eminem. He also shares candid stories about his humble beginnings, his family, his 'hood tendencies' and failed attempts at being a gangster.
In 2012, Nick Cannon created a sketch-comedy series, Incredible Crew starring six teenagers as Cannon wrote and produced the theme song. The show is being produced by Cartoon Network Studios, in association with N'Credible Entertainment. 
On November 12, 2012 MTV2 announced that they will be reviving Nick Cannon's Wild 'n Out, the revived show will be produced by Nick's N'Credible Entertainment, the series will premiere in 2013 a few returning faces joined by a roster of fresh talents. When asked about the show coming back, Nick said "With our show's original cast, everyone from Kevin Hart to Katt Williams, Affion Crockett and Taran Killam becoming household names, I am looking forward to working with MTV2 as we work to introduce the biggest comedic stars of tomorrow with the return of Wild 'N Out."Rapper Big Boi of Outkast has confirmed in a tweet on Twitter he is shooting an episode on January 29, 2013 in NYC and for people to join in the audience.
On November 30, 2012 A picture of Nick was posted on the N'Credible Entertainment website that Nick signed a deal with NBCUniversal to produce shows for the network. The site's description saying Nick is thrilled to share the news that he has inked a first-look production deal with NBC to develop scripted and unscripted material for the network. He can't wait to share his cutting edge ideas and create some original programming for the NBC Universal team! This pictures says it ALL!
Controversy.
Eminem.
Eminem's 2009 album, "Relapse", contained a track titled "Bagpipes from Baghdad", poking fun at Cannon's wife Mariah Carey. Cannon responded with tweets via his Twitter page, while Mariah released a song and video titled "Obsessed", with lyrics and visuals aimed at Eminem. 
Eminem responded with a mixtape-style track called "The Warning" in which he addressed both Cannon and Mariah, and later commented that he was finished talking about the subject. 
The feud was thought to have been over until in September 2010 when Cannon responded with the song "I'm a Slick Rick" which in Slick Rick's flow he takes shots at Eminem over the instrumental for Cali Swag District's "Teach Me How to Dougie". This was followed by a campaign via Facebook, Twitter, and his radio show proposing a boxing ring fight between Eminem and Cannon for charity.
In late September 2011, over a year after "I'm A Slick Rick" was released, Cannon took another lyrical jab at Eminem by releasing a song called "I Remember."
On October 3, 2011, Cannon released another diss song called "Warning (Remix)" which also features Uncle Murda aimed at Eminem, radio host Charlamagne Tha God, and the feud between R&B singer Ray J and rapper Fabolous. Cannon fires lyrical shots at Eminem and also featured an audio clip of Eminem with Tim Westwood back in 2009 where Eminem backtracked on the beef saying: “I had no idea Nick Cannon was going to start wiling out on me" which Eminem referred to Cannon's canceled Wild N Out television show. Cannon retorted to the clip by saying: “You said it Marshall, that’s all you had to do!” and that Slim Shady is “forgiven."
Personal life.
With no prior announcement on April 30, 2008, Cannon married Mariah Carey at her private estate on Windermere Island in The Bahamas after just six weeks of dating. Cannon and Carey initially met in 2005 at the Billboard Music Awards. The two remained friends for the years following. On October 28, 2010 Carey confirmed that she and Cannon were expecting their first child. Carey revealed that she had been pregnant shortly after her wedding during the time of the 2008 World Music Awards, but she miscarried, so Carey and Cannon decided to keep the matter private.
On April 30, 2011, the couple's third wedding anniversary, Carey gave birth to fraternal twins. The daughter is named Monroe Cannon (after Marilyn Monroe), the son, Moroccan Scott Cannon (because Cannon proposed to Carey in her Moroccan-style room; Scott is Cannon's middle name and his grandmother's maiden name). Monroe doesn't have a middle name as Mariah herself doesn't have one. Mariah has referred to the twins with the nicknames "Roc and Roe" (Rock and Roll).
On January 4, 2012, Nick Cannon was hospitalized after suffering from mild kidney failure. He was then hospitalized on February 17, 2012, for blood clots in his lungs. On Monday, March 5, 2012 he announced that he was diagnosed with an autoimmune disease called lupus nephritis, which was the cause of his recent kidney problems.
Charitable work.
In 2011, Cannon filmed a public service announcement for Dosomething.org encouraging teens to find a cause about which they are passionate and take action in their communities.
