∆ (pronounced Alt-J) are an English indie rock quartet, formed in 2007. Their debut album "An Awesome Wave" was released in May 2012 in Europe and September 2012 in the United States and won the 2012 British Mercury Prize.
Background.
Alt-J was formed when Gwil Sainsbury (guitarist/bassist), Joe Newman (guitar/vocals), Gus Unger-Hamilton (keyboards) and Thom Green (drums) met at Leeds University in 2007. 
Gus studied English Literature, the other three Fine Art. In their second year of studies, Joe showed Gwil a handful of his own songs and, inspired by his guitar-playing dad and drugs, the pair began recording in their halls rooms with Gwil acting as producer on GarageBand. The band's unusual sound stems from the fact that due to living in student halls, noise had to be kept to a minimum and so they were unable to use bass guitars or bass drums.
After graduating, they moved to Cambridge, however they recorded their debut album in Brixton. The band spent two years rehearsing before signing a deal with Infectious Records in 2011. 
∆'s name is pronounced “Alt-J”, which is the keyboard shortcut used on Apple OS X to insert the Greek letter Delta. "Alt-J" were formerly known as both 'Daljit Dhaliwal' and 'Films'.
Music career.
First releases.
Their eponymous first 4-track EP "∆", was recorded with producer Charlie Andrew in London and showcased the tracks "Breezeblocks", "Hand-Made", "Matilda" and "Tessellate". A 7" single containing "Bloodflood" and "Tessellate" was released by Loud and Quiet in October 2011.
Their first 2012 release for Infectious Records was the triangle-shaped 7" "Matilda"/"Fitzpleasure", followed by "Breezeblocks" as an advance of their first album "An Awesome Wave", released on 25 May 2012 in the UK, Europe, and Australia. The album was released on 18 September 2012 in North America via Canvasback Music. The group's signature blend of layered, folk-inflected dub-pop and soaring alternative rock has been compared to artists such as the Hot Chip, Wild Beasts and Everything Everything, they have even been called the next Radiohead.
"An Awesome Wave".
Their debut album, "An Awesome Wave", was released on 25 May 2012 by Infectious Music, and drew on multiple musical genres and sensibilities (folk, rock bass, catchy pop, hip-hop beats, trip-hop atmosphere, indie-rock quirkiness, electronic heavy synth riffs). They were wedded to intimately personal, sometimes confessional lyrics, peppered with film and literary references including allusions to "The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly", Luc Besson's "" and Maurice Sendak's "Where the Wild Things Are". It was completed over three weeks in January of 2012, the band adding six or seven songs to the pool of already recorded material. 
In February 2013 the band announced they would be composing the soundtrack for Toby Jones' new film "Leave To Remain". 
Concerts.
∆ supported Wild Beasts in April 2012 and started a small concert tour in the United Kingdom and Ireland. The tour kicked off on 24 May 2012 at Dublin Academy and ended on 1 June when the band headlined Bristol Cooler.
The band played a large number of the summer festivals in 2012, including Latitude, Tramlines, Bestival, Reading and Leeds, End Of The Road, Milhões de Festa, T in the Park, Green Man, Pukkelpop, Lowlands, and Into The Great Wide Open.
∆ started their own small headline tour in the UK, starting in Manchester on 27 October 2012. The other venues include places in Birmingham, Brighton, London, Oxford and Bristol. The last gig was in London on 19 January 2013.
∆ played the main stage of Hong Kong's only music festival Clockenflap on 2 December 2012 and behind Bob Boilen's desk at National Public Radio (NPR) in a Tiny Desk Concert on December 17, 2012. They performed a small concert tour in the United States in December 2012 They are confirmed to play at the 2013 Reading and Leeds Festival, Bonnaroo festival and at the Optimus Alive! festival in July 2013. ∆ have been announced to play the Australian 2013 Laneway Festival which visits five cities in Australia and New Zealand, as well as one date in Singapore, in just over a week in late January/February. This will be followed by six European dates and then a full US and UK tour.The US tour starts on March 2nd in Boston and ends on the 10th of April in San Francisco. Many of ∆'s shows have been sold out or have had a venue change due to the high demand of people that would like to see them live. ∆ is also having a ten date UK tour kicking off on the 5th of May at the O2 Academy in Birmingham and ending on May 17 at the O2 Academy in Brixton.
Awards.
∆ have had a very successful beginning, considering that they have both been nominated for and won a few awards. In 2012, ∆ 's debut album was nominated for the British Mercury Prize which promises a ₤20,000 cheque, more exposure to their music and an increase in sales of their album. They were able to beat out competitors for this award such as Plan B, a muscian and actor, and Richard Hawley, a member of pulp. ∆ have also been nominated for three Brit Awards, they are as follows: British Breakthrough Act, British Album of the Year and British Group of the Year. An Awesome Wave was announced as BBC Radio 6 Music Album of the Year 2012. Three of the tracks from this album gained entry into the Australian 2012 Triple J Hottest 100, with 'Something Good' at number 81, 'Tessellate' at number 64, and 'Breezeblocks' coming 3rd overall. 
