Ellen Philpotts-Page (born February 21, 1987), known professionally as Ellen Page, is a Canadian actress. She started out her career in Canada with roles in the television shows "Pit Pony", "Trailer Park Boys", and "ReGenesis". Page ventured into films, appearing in "Juno", "Inception", "Super", "Smart People", "Whip It", and as Katherine "Kitty" Pryde in "". For her performance in "Juno", Page received Best Actress nominations for the Academy Award, Golden Globe Award, BAFTA, and the Screen Actors Guild Award. In 2008 she was ranked 86 on "FHM" Sexiest Women in the World list, and 93 for 2009. In June 2008, Page was listed in "Entertainment Weekly" future A-List stars list.
Early life.
Page was born and raised in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, the daughter of Martha Philpotts, a teacher, and Dennis Page, a graphic designer. She attended the Halifax Grammar School until grade 10, spent some time at Queen Elizabeth High School, and graduated from the Shambhala School in 2005. She also spent two years in Toronto, Ontario studying in the Interact Program at Vaughan Road Academy, along with close friend and fellow Canadian actor Mark Rendall. Growing up, Page enjoyed playing with action figures and climbing trees.
Career.
Page began acting at age four, appearing in numerous school plays. She first acted in front of the camera in 1997 at age ten in the CBC television movie "Pit Pony", which later spun off into a television series. This led to more roles in a number of small Canadian films and television series, notably playing Treena Lahey in season two of "Trailer Park Boys". At 16, she was cast in "Mouth to Mouth", an independent film shot in Europe. Page starred in the 2005 movie "Hard Candy" and gained praise for "one of the most complex, disturbing and haunting performances of the year". She also appeared in "" as Kitty Pryde (Shadowcat), a girl who can walk through walls. In the previous X-Men movies, the part had been used in brief cameos played by other actresses, but never as a main character. As the title character in "Juno", Page garnered substantial praise; A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" noted her as being "frighteningly talented" and Roger Ebert said, "Has there been a better performance this year than Ellen Page's creation of Juno? I do not think so". Page was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in "Juno", but lost to Marion Cotillard in "La Vie En Rose". The role, however, did win her several other awards, including a Canadian Comedy Award, Independent Spirit Award, and Satellite Award. Page also has starred in "Smart People", which premiered at the 2008 Sundance Film Festival. Although released after "Juno", "Smart People" was shot earlier. Her other film credits include "An American Crime", which premiered at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival; "The Tracey Fragments", which was released in November 2007 in Canada and May 2008 in the U.S.; and "The Stone Angel".
In 2007, she was attached to play the title character in an adaptation of Charlotte Brontë's "Jane Eyre" and had planned to work on an as-yet unmade film entitled "Jack and Diane" opposite Olivia Thirlby, with whom she co-starred in "Juno" but it was announced in August 2009 that her role in "Jack and Diane" would be played by the actress Alison Pill. Before his death in January 2008, Heath Ledger had discussed with Page the idea of starring in his directorial debut, "The Queen's Gambit".
Page hosted "Saturday Night Live" on March 1, 2008 and on May 3, 2009, she guest starred in the episode "Waverly Hills 9-0-2-1-D'oh" of the animated series "The Simpsons" as a character named Alaska Nebraska, a parody of Hannah Montana. She also starred in Drew Barrymore's directorial debut, "Whip It", alongside Juliette Lewis, Marcia Gay Harden, Drew Barrymore and Kristen Wiig. The film premiered at the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival and had its wide release on October 2, 2009.
She features in Michael Lander's film "Peacock", opposite Cillian Murphy, Susan Sarandon, Bill Pullman and Josh Lucas, which was released in 2010 despite an original release date of 2009. In August 2009, Page began shooting the thriller "Inception", a film directed by Christopher Nolan and co-starring Leonardo DiCaprio, Marion Cotillard, Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Ken Watanabe. The film was released on July 16, 2010. 
She has starred in the film "Super", and will reportedly play Stacie Andree in an upcoming film about Laurel Hester.
, she serves as a spokesperson for Cisco Systems in a series of ads appearing in three commercials set in Lunenburg, Nova Scotia. On May 26, 2010 it was reported in a column on "Deadline Hollywood" and by "Entertainment Weekly" that Page will star in the new HBO series "Tilda" alongside Diane Keaton, who plays the title role. "Tilda" is based on the life of Nikki Finke, the founder of the influential Hollywood blog, DeadlineHollywood.com. "Tilda" was reportedly dropped by HBO due to friction between the creators. She is also the narrator of the documentary on colony collapse disorder, "Vanishing of the Bees".
In April 2011 it was announced that Page would co-star in the Woody Allen film "To Rome with Love" alongside Jesse Eisenberg, Penélope Cruz, and Alec Baldwin.
In June 2012, Quantic Dream announced a video game entitled "" in which Page will portray the protagonist Jodie Holmes, with a planned launch date in early 2013.
In January 2013, Bryan Singer tweeted revealing that Page will be back to repeat her role as Katherine "Kitty" Pryde in "". In February 2013, Page confirmed that her directorial debut will be titled "Miss Stevens" and star Anna Farris.
Personal life.
Page resides in her hometown of Halifax, Nova Scotia and has two dogs named Julie and Sprout. She is prone to walking and talking in her sleep. In 2008, Page was one of 30 celebrities who participated in an online ad series for U.S. Campaign for Burma, calling for an end to the military dictatorship in Myanmar. She describes herself as a pro-choice feminist.
