Ezra Matthew Miller (born September 30, 1992) is an American actor, known for his roles in the films "City Island" (2009), "Another Happy Day" (2011), and "We Need to Talk About Kevin" (2011). He starred in the 2012 teen drama "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", with Logan Lerman and Emma Watson, and has signed on to play the role of Léon Dupuis in Sophie Barthes' adaptation of the Gustave Flaubert novel "Madame Bovary".
Early life.
Miller was born and raised in Wyckoff, a community in Bergen County, New Jersey. His mother, Marta, is a modern dancer. His father, Robert S. Miller, was senior vice president and managing director of Walt Disney Company's adult book publishing division, Hyperion Books, and is a publisher at Workman Publishing. Miller has two older sisters, Saiya and Caitlin. He considers himself Jewish, and "spiritual" (his father is Jewish and his mother is from a Christian background).
When he was six, Miller started to train as an opera singer, to help him overcome a speech impediment. He has sung with the Metropolitan Opera. He performed in the U.S. premiere of Philip Glass’s contemporary opera "White Raven". He attended Rockland Country Day School and The Hudson School, dropping out at sixteen, after the release of his film "Afterschool".
Career.
Miller began his film career in 2008 with the Antonio Campos’s "Afterschool", in which he played a teenager at a boarding school. After that, Miller appeared in "City Island" (2009), with Andy Garcia, Julianna Margulies, and Steven Strait, and co-starred in "Beware the Gonzo" and "Every Day", both of which premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival. Miller next appeared in the BBC Films movie "We Need to Talk About Kevin" with John C. Reilly and Tilda Swinton, which was directed and adapted by Lynne Ramsay from American author Lionel Shriver's 2003 novel of the same name. The film became a Cannes Film Festival sensation, winning critical acclaim. Miller also acted as Damien on the Showtime's hit comedy television program "Californication". He appeared on "Royal Pains" as Tucker Bryant for two seasons. His most recent role was Patrick, in the movie adaptation of the novel "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", opposite Logan Lerman and Emma Watson. The film was released on September 21, 2012.
Miller is a drummer and a singer in a New York-based band called Sons of an Illustrious Father.
Personal life.
Miller has described himself as queer. He has stated "The way I would choose to identify myself wouldn’t be gay. I’ve been attracted mostly to ‘shes’ but I’ve been with many people and I’m open to love wherever it can be"; and that he has "a lot of really wonderful friends who are of very different sexes and genders. I am very much in love with no one in particular". He has also detailed, "I've had many, you know, 'happy ending sleepovers' in my early youth... my period of exploration—I think that's essential. Anyone who hasn't had a gay moment is probably trying to avoid some confrontation with a reality in their life".
On June 28, 2011, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where he was shooting "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", Miller was a passenger in a vehicle that was pulled over for a broken brake light, and police discovered that he had 20 grams of marijuana in his possession. He was initially charged with drug possession, but the charge was later dropped by a judge. Instead of these charges, Miller faced a penalty of $600 for two citations of disorderly conduct. Miller later commented: "I don't feel like there's any need to hide the fact that I smoke pot. It's a harmless herbal substance that increases sensory appreciation."
On August 11, 2012, Miller was in a cab which was slammed by a firetruck as it was turning onto the Williamsburg Bridge in Manhattan. He had a few bruises and did not seek medical treatment.
