iCarly is an American teen sitcom that ran on Nickelodeon from September 8, 2007 until November 23, 2012. The series was created by Dan Schneider and follows teenager Carly Shay and her best friends Sam Puckett and Freddie Benson as they create and star in their own web show.
The show focuses on a girl named Carly Shay who creates her own web show called "iCarly" with her best friends Sam and Freddie. It stars Miranda Cosgrove as Carly, Jennette McCurdy as Sam, Nathan Kress as Freddie, Jerry Trainor as Spencer, and Noah Munck as Gibby. The show was taped at Nickelodeon on Sunset (season 1–5) and KTLA Studios (Season 6–7) in Hollywood, California. The show was originally rated TV-Y7, and later changed to TV-G.
On May 17, 2012, it was announced that the show's seventh season was the last for "iCarly" and that a series finale event would air in November 2012. The series finale, "iGoodbye" aired on November 23, 2012.
Development.
"iCarly" is the fourth series created by Dan Schneider for Nickelodeon. Schneider originally wanted to make a new TV series starring Miranda Cosgrove; the original idea was that she play a normal girl who, in a twist of fate, gets cast to star in her favorite TV show, "Starstruck". The pilot was written (and turned in to Nickelodeon), which was about Carly, a regular girl who gets cast to star in her favorite TV show. However, things started to take a turn. During a casual meeting in his den with his wife and his friend Steve, Schneider decided that it would be much better if Carly had her own show – a show she could run herself, the way she wanted, and do whatever she wanted to do which would become a web show. In November 2006, Schneider threw out his "Starstruck" script and wrote a brand new pilot called "iCarly" during December. The pilot was shot in January 2007.
During production of "Zoey 101", Schneider came up with the idea of the show and its name with his friend and producer of "The Big Bang Theory", Steve Molaro. He was trying to think of a good title for the new series about kids who start their own web show. However, "iCarly" was not going to be the original name for the show. In fact, the pilot script followed the lead girl's name was "Sam" but the URL for iSam was already taken. Schneider tried other girl's names and bought the URL for iJosie, but he decided he did not like the name. Schneider tried "iCarly" and loved the name for the lead character. The names of the two lead girls were then changed from Sam and Kira to Carly and Sam.
Plot.
When Carly and her sassy best friend Sam act funny at a school talent show audition, tech-savvy Freddie tapes it and posts it online without telling them. After seeing the girls' strong chemistry and banter, the online audience clamors for more and the iCarly webcast is born. While grappling with typical issues of adolescence, Carly, Sam, and Freddie find out that they have also become online celebrities as their show – which features talent contests, recipes, problem-solving, and random dancing – garners international accolades.
Carly lives in Seattle, Washington with her 26-year-old brother and guardian Spencer and produces the show in a makeshift third-floor studio loft in their apartment. Their mother has never been seen or mentioned, but their father, Steven Shay, is a U.S. Air Force officer temporarily stationed on a submarine, and is often mentioned but is only seen in person during the series finale episode, "iGoodbye".
Exterior shots of the Shays' apartment building, Bushwell Plaza, are digitally altered images of the Eastern Columbia Building in Los Angeles.
Episodes.
iParty with Victorious.
A crossover between "iCarly" and "Victorious" was completed in 2010; "iParty with Victorious" aired on June 11, 2011. The crossover is considered a 3-part episode of "iCarly". A two-hour extended version debuted August 27, 2011.
Season 5 onward.
In late January 2011, while doing press for her North American Dancing Crazy concert tour, Miranda Cosgrove began telling news sources that she was looking forward to returning to Hollywood to begin filming a 5th season of "iCarly". On January 27, 2011, Cosgrove told Cleveland Live News "We're getting ready to start the next season, right after the tour. I would be willing to do the show as long as people like it and as long as it works." On January 28, 2011, Reuters news agency also reported that Cosgrove was preparing to begin filming a 5th season of "iCarly", and on February 3, 2011 Cosgrove told The Middletown Press, when speaking of the show and her co-stars Jennette McCurdy and Nathan Kress, “I’ve known them since I was little. I can’t wait to get back. I’m really comfortable doing iCarly. It’s like my home away from home.” Cosgrove concluded her Dancing Crazy concert tour on February 24, 2011, and Jennette McCurdy finished her Generation Love mall tour on April 14, 2011. The entire cast did not even get together until the 2011 Kids' Choice Awards. Miranda Cosgrove recently confirmed that filming would resume shortly. At the 2011 Kids' Choice Awards, Jerry Trainor stated that filming would resume in May.
On April 14, 2011, Nickelodeon officially announced the 5th and final production season renewal of "iCarly" to begin in 2012 with the episodes airing later that year. These episodes would air as the show's sixth season due to the second season production of 45 episodes being split into two broadcast seasons. The third production season originally consisted of 26 episodes as ordered in early 2010, however half that amount was shot from May to September 2010 that aired as the show's fourth season. Dan Schneider then shot the next half in May 2011 to July which became a whole new season production that aired as the show's fifth season later that year. However, due to Miranda's leave for a tour on July 15, 2011, only eleven episodes were produced and the last two were held over and produced during filming of the show's final season.
The final season, Season 7, began on March 24, 2012 with a total of fifteen episodes to air. However, after a four month hiatus after six episodes of the season aired from March to June, "iShock America" was promoted as the start of a new season for the last batch of episodes, effectively splitting the season into two. The series ended on November 23, 2012 with the episode "iGoodbye".
Internationalization.
Some minor alterations have been made for transmission in markets where the series is dubbed. In the German version (but not on all transmitted episodes) the intro music lyrics are in German. Episode titles are usually the same when the series is dubbed.
DVD releases.
Note: The season DVDs are released by the production seasons.
Other media.
Music.
Columbia Records and Nickelodeon Records have released a soundtrack for the show entitled iCarly. It includes the theme song and four original songs by Miranda Cosgrove. Several tracks by guest artists and cast dialogue are also included. A follow-up soundtrack, titled iSoundtrack II, came out on January 24, 2012.
Website.
In reality, the iCarly.com website contains many promotional videos by the cast (as their respective characters), as well as content created and sent in by viewers. Other features on the site include characters' blogs, pictures from the set, songs, games, and comments from viewers. Many fictional websites from this show redirect to this page. For example, Zaplook, SplashFace, ToonJuice, CraigsMix, Nevelocity, GirlyCow.com, WebFlicks.com, RadioDingo.com, PillowMyHead.com, AggressiveParenting.com, SamPuckett.com, TheValerieShow.com, SendMeaSack.com, Beavecoon.org, NeverWatchiCarly.com, iSnarly.com, SprayYourChildren.com, and any other website mentioned on the show redirect to this page.
Video games.
An animated PC hidden object game, "iCarly: iDream in Toons", was released by Nickelodeon on their "Nick Arcade". Jerry Trainor is the only actor from the cast who lends his voice to the game, the rest of the characters' speech being dubbed with typing sounds on a keyboard.
On May 13, 2009, Nickelodeon announced they had reached an agreement with Activision to produce an "iCarly video game" for the Nintendo DS and Wii. The game was released October 28, 2009. The cast lend their voices in the videogame. A sequel, , was released on November 16, 2010 for the same platforms.
On January 11, 2010, the official iCarly Facebook page announced the release of an application called "Sam's Remote" exclusively for iPhone and iPod Touch. This app consists of Sam's remote, which she uses on live casts of iCarly in the show, where one pushes different buttons and they make silly sound effects. Available through the iTunes App Store for $1.99 download.
Proposed spin-off series.
Two spin-off series have been proposed as pilots for Nickelodeon, and were both announced during the network's presentation at the Television Critics Association Summer Press Tour on August 3, 2012.
The first is "Sam & Cat", which would pair Ariana Grande from "Victorious" and Jennette McCurdy together in a traditional "buddy sitcom" setting as their characters, Cat Valentine and Sam Puckett. The pilot suggests they will be roommates who launch a babysitting business for income. The show was picked up by Nickelodeon on November 29, 2012.
The second would spin-off Noah Munck's character Gibby Gibson into a self-titled sitcom named "Gibby" where the character works at a recreation center as a mentor to four middle school students.
Reception.
Critical.
"iCarly" received mixed reviews from critics. Carey Bryson of About.com, gave the show 2 1/2 stars, concluding "The show's comedic elements don't all rest on the irreverent, though, there are some clever storylines and even a few touching moments. Overall, the show has some great comedy, interesting stories, and fun actors." The show was awarded 3 stars by Common Sense Media reviewer Emily Ashby. Emily praised that "show isn't designed to be educational, per se, but young viewers will learn a bit about interacting with media."
On the more positive side, Hollywood.com's Michelle Lee considered the show to be the best sitcom since arrested development: "Like the Lost fan rejecting every Lost-like show that came after it, I resented all of the shaky single-camera docu-style comedies that came after Arrested's demise. Because, frankly, my favorite dead show did it better. I needed something completely different to break me out of my comedy funk and get me back on that horse. And it worked."
On TV.com, the show has received mixed reviews from users. Despite some negative reviews of "iCarly", the series has an 8 (Great) rating on the website.
The first airing of the episode, at 8:30 PM on Saturday, September 8th drew 5.65 million viewers. This is the second highest of any Nickelodeon live action show only trailing behind whose premiere drew 5.7 million viewers.
The second airing at 11:30am on Sunday, September 9th drew 7.35 million viewers for a total of 13 million.
