The Powerpuff Girls is an American animated television series created by animator Craig McCracken and produced by Hanna-Barbera (later Cartoon Network Studios) for Cartoon Network. The show centers on Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup, three kindergarten-aged girls with superpowers, as well as their "father", the brainy scientist Professor Utonium, who all live in the fictional city of Townsville, USA. The girls are frequently called upon by the town's childlike mayor to help fight nearby criminals using their powers.
McCracken originally developed the show in 1992 as a cartoon short entitled "Whoopass Stew!" while in his second year at CalArts. Following a name change, Cartoon Network featured the first "Powerpuff Girls" pilots in its animation showcase program "World Premiere Toons" in 1995 and 1996. The series made its official debut as a Cartoon Cartoon on November 18, 1998, with the final episode airing on March 25, 2005. A total of 78 episodes were aired in addition to two shorts, a Christmas special, a feature film, and a tenth anniversary special. Additionally, the series has been nominated for six Emmy Awards, nine Annie Awards, and a Kids' Choice Award during its run. Spin-off media include an anime, three CD soundtracks, a home video collection, and a series of video games, as well as various licensed merchandise. The series has received generally positive reception and won four awards.
Overview.
"The Powerpuff Girls" revolves around the adventures of Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup. Each of the girls has a color: Blossom is pink, Bubbles is blue, and Buttercup is green. The plot of a typical episode is some humorous variation of standard superhero and tokusatsu fare, with the girls using their powers to defend their town from villains and giant monsters. In addition, the girls have to deal with normal issues young children face, such as sibling rivalries, loose teeth, personal hygiene, going to school, bed wetting, or dependence on a security blanket. Episodes often contain more or less hidden references to older pop culture (especially noticeable in the episode "Meet the Beat Alls").
The setting of the show is mainly the city of Townsville, USA. Townsville is depicted as a major American city, with a cityscape consisting of several major skyscrapers. In his review of "The Powerpuff Girls Movie", movie critic Bob Longino of "The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" said that, "the intricate drawings emanate 1950s futuristic pizazz like a David Hockney scenescape," and that the show is "one of the few American creations that is both gleeful pop culture and exquisite high art."
James L. Venable composed the opening theme of the series, and Scottish band Bis performed the ending theme song, as played during the credits. The opening theme is based on the Clyde Stubblefield performed "Funky Drummer" drum break sample.
Production.
During Craig McCracken's freshman year in the character animation program of CalArts, he created a series of short cartoons based on a character called No Neck Joe. In June of 1991 he created a drawing of three girls on a small sheet of orange construction paper as a birthday card design for his brother. The following year he included the three girls as the main characters of his short film "Whoopass Stew! The Whoopass Girls in: A Sticky Situation". Initially McCracken wanted to animate four "Whoopass Girls" shorts, but only one came to be. McCracken's shorts were selected to be shown at Spike and Mike's Sick and Twisted Festival of Animation in 1994. While working on "2 Stupid Dogs" in 1993, McCracken's "Whoopass Girls" short was picked up for a series by Cartoon Network; however, the channel decided to include it as part of its new "What a Cartoon!" animated shorts showcase instead. McCracken's new short, entitled "The Powerpuff Girls in: Meat Fuzzy Lumpkins", aired as part the network's first "World Premiere Toon" on February 20, 1995. It was followed by a second short, "Crime 101", a year later. Announcer Ernie Anderson, the narrator of the pilot episodes, died of cancer in 1997 before the show premiered, and he was replaced by Tom Kenny for the remainder of the series. The show's animation director was McCracken's former classmate Genndy Tartakovsky ("Dexter's Laboratory", "Samurai Jack"), who also directed many episodes himself. All of the original episodes (except the WAC shorts with the first one being animated at Animal House in Japan and the second being animated at Fil Cartoons in the Philippines) were hand-drawn and produced at Rough Draft Studios in South Korea.
"The Powerpuff Girls" series debut on November 18, 1998, was the highest rated premiere in Cartoon Network's history at the time. The series consistently scored the highest rating each week for the network across a wide range of demographics—from young children to adults. In October 2000, Cartoon Network credited "The Powerpuff Girls" for its Friday night prime time ratings win among cable networks. By the end of 2000, merchandising based on "The Powerpuff Girls" encompassed a whole variety of products, including T-shirts, toys, video games, lunchboxes, and dishware. Concerning "The Powerpuff Girls" success, Craig McCracken has stated, "I thought it would get on Cartoon Network and college kids would watch it and there would be a few random T-shirts out there in the rave scene or in record shops. But I had no idea that it would take off to this extent." The show's last original run episode was on March 25, 2005, in all six seasons were made.
In August 2008, McCracken revealed on his DeviantArt account, as had been announced in that year's Comic Con, that he was working with Cartoon Network on a new half-hour "Powerpuff Girls" special to celebrate the series' tenth anniversary. The special, titled "The Powerpuff Girls Rule!!!", aired on the Pan-Euro Cartoon Network on November 29, 2008, on the Powerpuff Girls Birthday Marathon, and in the United States on January 19, 2009, as part of its 10th anniversary marathon. Unlike previous episodes in the series, the anniversary special was animated using Adobe Flash at Cartoon Network Studios. In March 2012, the series returned to Cartoon Network in reruns on the revived block, Cartoon Planet.
On January 28, 2013, it was announced that a new CGI special starring the girls will premiere later in the year. The special will feature Ringo Starr of The Beatles singing a new original song "I Wish I Was A Powerpuff Girl". The special will be directed by Dave Smith, who directed episodes for the series in the past, with the original cast members returning to reprise their roles.
Characters.
As depicted in the opening sequence of each episode, the Powerpuff Girls were created by Professor Utonium in an attempt "to create the perfect little girls" using a mixture of "sugar, spice, and everything nice" (shown in respective fields of baby blue, light green, and pink). However, he accidentally spilled a mysterious substance called "Chemical X" into the mixture, creating, instead of the "perfect little girl", three girls (each possessing one of the above elements dominating her personality), and granting all three superpowers including flight, super strength, super speed, near invulnerability, x-ray vision, super senses, heat vision, and energy projection. In the original plot, the accidental substance was , which was replaced by "Chemical X" in the aired version.
The three girls all have oval-shaped heads, abnormally large eyes (inspired by Margaret Keane's art), stubby arms and legs, and lack noses, ears, fingers, necks, and flat feet with toes (McCracken preferred them to look more symbolic of actual girls rather than going for a realistic look, meaning fewer details were added.). They wear dresses with black stripes that match the colors of their eyes, as well as white stockings and black Mary Janes. The closing theme to the cartoon offers a nutshell description of the three Powerpuff Girls' personalities: "Blossom, commander and the leader. Bubbles, she is the joy and the laughter. Buttercup, she is the toughest fighter."
Reception.
"The Powerpuff Girls" has been met with generally positive response from critics and fans. In a 2000 "Entertainment Weekly" review, Marc Bernadin complimented the show on its "spot-on pop-culture acumen" and "unparalleled sense of fun", giving it a warm welcome from earlier "lame" superhero cartoons that he grew up with. Peter Marks of "The New York Times" noted the show's use of adult humor and pop culture references, declaring it "the sort of playful satire that can appeal as much to a viewer of 37 as 7." Joly Herman of Common Sense Media describes the show as a "cute, highly stylized series thrills the senses with its strange characters, funny situations, and lots of lowbrow humor". She goes on to say, however, that the show does go from innocent to violent in no time and that there is not much protecting young viewers against the violent undertones. Robert Lloyd of the "LA Times" said that the series might be "transgressive" based on the violence but "also cute". TV Guide chose "The Powerpuff Girls" as #17 in a list of the 50 Greatest cartoon characters of all time. IGN ranked the series 18th in its Top 25 Primetime Animated Series of All Time list in 2006. Delta Express also promoted the series by having a Boeing 737-200 jet painted with a special livery featuring the characters Blossom, Bubbles, and Buttercup on the exterior. The plane's inaugural flight was held at Logan International Airport in Boston, Massachusetts, on July 17, 2000. In 2002 the aircraft was repainted with a different "Powerpuff Girls" theme to promote "The Powerpuff Girls Movie". The "Powerpuff Girls" series has won two Primetime Emmys, two Annie Awards, and including those four wins, has been nominated a total of sixteen times for various awards.
Media.
Anime and manga.
In April 2005, plans for a Japanese anime version, "Demashita! Powerpuff Girls Z", were announced. The series premiered in Japan the following year with 52 half-hour episodes, airing each Saturday from July 1 to December 23, 2006, and from January 6 to June 30, 2007. The series deviated from its American predecessor in terms of style, storyline, and characterization, but only minimally retained the essential themes that made the original a success. An English version has also been produced by Ocean Studios in Vancouver, Canada and has been broadcast on Cartoon Network Asia and Boomerang Australia. A manga adaptation, illustrated by Shiho Komiyuno, was serialized in Shueisha's Ribon magazine between June 2006 and July 2007.
Another manga series called PowerPuff Girls Doujinshi was created in 2004 and released through Snafu Comics. The girls are shown to be a bit older than, but with the same personalities as their T.V. counterparts, and combines characters from other cartoon shows. The story has the girls now going to school in the neighboring city of Townsville known as Megaville. The comic was the "Outstanding Superhero Comic" and "Outstanding Character Art" winner on the Web Cartoonist's Choice Awards in 2005.
Film.
"The Powerpuff Girls Movie" was released in the United States on July 3, 2002, by Warner Bros. and Cartoon Network. The movie, a prequel to the series tells the story of how the Powerpuff Girls were created, and how Mojo Jojo became a supervillain. After the girls were created by Professor Utonium to help the city against crime, they end up only causing chaos in Townsville. Down about how everyone refers to them as freaks, they turn to Mojo Jojo, a monkey who says he is there to help make people like them again. Unknown to the girls, Mojo Jojo was Professor Utonium's lab chimp helper who was mutated as a cause from the Powerpuff Girls being made and has become super smart as a result and jealous of them. Mojo Jojo ends up tricking the girls into helping him make a machine to mutate other chimps. Seeing what they have done the girls run away in shame but come back after seeing Professor Utonium in trouble, and they end up beating Mojo Jojo and his army of mutated smart chimps and saving the day, thus becoming Townsville's new defenders.
The movie received mixed to positive reviews with a rating of 63% at Rotten Tomatoes; however, it did receive negative reviews for the violence involved. In all, the movie grossed $16 million worldwide with an $11 million budget.
Music CDs.
Three CD soundtracks were officially released for the series. The first, entitled "Heroes & Villains", features original songs about the "Powerpuff Girls" characters by a number of artists, including the New Wave group Devo, Bis, The Apples in Stereo, and Frank Black. The first album did well topping the "Billboard"s children's music chart for six weeks. Another album entitled "The City of Soundsville" features electronica-style character themes and also did well with critics. The third album entitled "Power Pop" features a more teen-oriented variety of pop songs. The album was considered a "big disappointment" and not received as well.
Parodies.
On January 30, 2012, a crossover parody of "The Powerpuff Girls" and "2 Broke Girls" was done in Cartoon Network's TV series "MAD"'s second season known as, "2 Broke Powerpuff Girls." The parody is of Bubbles and Buttercup, who are broke and work for "Him" in a diner after the show got placed on permanent hiatus. Tara Strong (Bubbles) and Tom Kane ("Him") reprised their roles here. The "MAD" episode with the parody ranked #26/30 for the week with 1.903 million viewers.
Video games.
Video games were made for The Powerpuff Girls all being action in genre. "The Powerpuff Girls: Bad Mojo Jojo", released on November 14, 2000, follows Blossom as she tries to beat Mojo Jojo. The game was called "simple and boring" by Gamespot and was a failure critically. "The Powerpuff Girls: Paint the Townsville Green", another game released in November 2000, follows Buttercup as she fights crime. "The Powerpuff Girls: Battle HIM" follows Bubbles in her fight against HIM and was released in February 2001. "The Powerpuff Girls: Chemical X-traction" was released in October 2001, where the girls battle enemies in a variety of settings in order to reclaim Chemical X and track down Mojo Jojo. IGN gave the game a positive review while giving the PSone version a 2.0/10 bad review "The Powerpuff Girls: Relish Rampage" was released in November 2002. All three girls are playable in a 3D world, and the game received mixed reviews. "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo A-Go-Go" released in 2001 centers around the name of the Powerpuff Girls' mission to stop Mojo Jojo and his minions. The game received mixed reviews. PC games were also made for the series. These include: "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo Clone Zone", "The Powerpuff Girls: Princess Snorebucks", "The Powerpuff Girls: Mojo Jojo's Pet Project", and "The Powerpuff Girls: Gamesville". In addition, other games were made that are not main Powerpuff Girls games but do feature the characters such as "".
