Sara Loren (born 11 December 1985), previously known as Mona Lizza is a Pakistani Actress and Model who works in Lollywood, Bollywood and Pakistani serials. She made her film debut in 2011 Lollywood film "Gidh" directed by Shamoon Abbasi. Later she appeared in Syed Faisal Bukhari's directional film "Saltanat". She made her Bollywood debut in the movie Kajraare directed by Pooja Bhatt. In 2013, she appeared her second Bollywood film Murder 3.
Early life and family.
Mona Lizza was born into a Muslim family in Kuwait city, Kuwait and brought up in Pakistan. She has four siblings and was named "Mona" before her birth by other relatives and friends when Mona Lizza was around three years of age. After the death of her father in 2001, Mona Lizza's family moved back to Pakistan which is where she started her career as an actress. Mona's interests consist of poetry, painting, writing and travelling the world. In 2012, Mona changed her name to "Sara Loren" and currently resides in Mumbai.
Career.
Mona accompanied a close friend who was a model to dance in a photo shoot. The photographer took a few casual pictures of Mona which was what won Mona Lizza her first ad campaign. Following this, Mona Lizza made her acting debut in 2003 with Pakistani director S. Suleman in the serial called "Rabia Zinda Rahegi".
Mona Lizza has been part of Pakistani artist performances in the United States, UK, and Canada. She has also done theater, "Anarkali", "Shahyad Issi Ka Naam Mohabbat Hai Sheiftaa", in Karachi and Delhi.
In 2010, Mona made her Bollywood debut in "Kajraare" opposite Himesh Reshammiya and Amrita Singh directed by Pooja Bhatt. Then she appeared in 2011 film "Hum Paanch". 
In 2011, she made her Lollywood debut in Shamoon Abbasi's "Gidh" opposite Humayun Saeed and Ayesha Khan. Then she appeared in "Saltanat" as an Item girl directed by Syed Faisal Bukhari in the same year 2011.
In August 2012, Lizza was signed on for the second female lead role in "Murder 3" opposite Randeep Hooda and Aditi Rao Hydari. The film is set for release in 2013.
