While there is no general agreement upon the greatest film, many publications and organizations have tried to determine the films considered the best. The films mentioned in this article have all been mentioned in a notable survey – be it a popular poll or critics' poll. Many of these sources focus on American films or were polls of English-speaking film goers, but those considered the greatest within their respective countries are also included here.
None of these citations should be viewed as scientific measures of the film-watching world. They are often influenced by vote stacking or they survey a population with skewed demographics. Internet-based surveys have a self-selecting audience of unknown participants. The methodology of some surveys may be questionable. Sometimes (as in the case of the American Film Institute) voters were asked to select films from a limited list of entries.
Polls of critics and filmmakers.
Every decade, the British film monthly "Sight & Sound" asks an international group of film professionals to vote for their greatest film of all time. The "Sight & Sound" accolade has come to be regarded as one of the most important of the "greatest ever film" lists. Roger Ebert described it as "by far the most respected of the countless polls of great movies—the only one most serious movie people take seriously." 
Countries.
Czech Republic/Slovakia.
In a poll of filmmakers, critics, and theorists "Marketa Lazarova" was named best film in the 100 years of Czechoslovak cinema.
United States.
Since 1998, the American Film Institute has assembled juries of film community leaders and polled them for a series of top 100 lists. Two of the lists from the series, "100 Years... 100 Movies" from 1998 and "100 Years... 100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition)" from 2007, identified "Citizen Kane" as the best American film ever. In other years, AFI's jury members selected "Some Like It Hot" the greatest American comedy, "Psycho" as the most thrilling American movie, "Casablanca" as the greatest American love story, "Singin' in the Rain" as the greatest American film musical, and "It's a Wonderful Life" as the most inspiring American film.
