Sarah Michelle Prinze (née Gellar; born April 14, 1977) is an American actress and producer. After being found by an agent in a local restaurant in New York City, she had a role in the made-for-TV movie "An Invasion of Privacy" and went on to appear in shows like "" and "Crossbow". Gellar had her first lead part in 1992's mini-series "Swans Crossing" and then, she originated the role of Kendall Hart on the ABC daytime soap opera "All My Children", winning the 1995 Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actress in a Drama Series. 
Gellar came to prominence in the late 1990s when she landed significant parts in 1997's successful horror films "I Know What You Did Last Summer" and "Scream 2" and the role of Buffy Summers on the WB/UPN television series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", for which she won six Teen Choice Awards and the Saturn Award for Best Genre TV Actress and received a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Television Series Drama. She found film critics praise for her performance in the teen drama "Cruel Intentions" (1999) and she subsequently appeared as Daphne Blake in the box office hits "Scooby-Doo" (2002), "" (2004), and the American remake of Japanese horror film "The Grudge" (2004). She also had the main role in the television series "Ringer". She has been married to Freddie Prinze Jr. since 2002. The couple have two children.
Early life.
Gellar was born in New York City. She is the only child of Rosellen (née Greenfield), a nursery school teacher, and Arthur Gellar, a garment worker. Both of her parents were Jewish, though Gellar's family had a Christmas tree during her childhood holidays.
In 1984, when she was seven years old, her parents divorced and she was raised solely by her mother on the city's Upper East Side. She graduated from Fiorello LaGuardia High School of the Performing Arts in 1995. Gellar was estranged from her father until his death from liver cancer on October 9, 2001. Talking about not having a father figure in her early life, she remarks: "I might have been an immaculate conception. You never know. My father, you can just say, is not in the picture. I'm not being deliberately evasive about him, it's just that there's so little to say. He is not a person who exists in my life. Just because you donate sperm does not make you a father. I don't have a father. I would never give him the credit to acknowledge him as my father".
Career.
Early career (1981–1996).
At the age of four, she was spotted by an agent in a restaurant in Uptown Manhattan. Two weeks later, she auditioned for a part in "An Invasion of Privacy", a television film starring Valerie Harper, Carol Kane and Jeff Daniels. At the audition, Gellar read both her own lines and those of Harper, impressing the directors enough to cast her in the role. She subsequently appeared in a controversial television commercial for Burger King, in which her character criticized McDonald's and claimed to eat only at Burger King. This led to a lawsuit by McDonald's. As a child, Gellar modeled for magazines.
Gellar appeared in TV series such as "" and "Crossbow", and had minor roles in the films "Funny Farm" (1988) and "High Stakes" (1989). She also appeared in the young-teen girl talk show Girl Talk. In 1991, she appeared as a young Jacqueline Bouvier in the TV movie "A Woman Named Jackie". Gellar's first major acting work came in 1992, when she starred in the serial "Swans Crossing" and was subsequently cast in the soap opera "All My Children", playing Kendall Hart, the long-lost daughter of character Erica Kane (Susan Lucci). In 1995, at the age of eighteen, she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Younger Actress in a Drama Series for the role. Gellar left "All My Children" in 1995. 
"Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and breakthrough (1997–2003).
Gellar landed the lead in the 1997 TV series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", playing a teenager burdened with the responsibility of fighting a number of mystical foes, mostly vampires. She stated that she was screen tested eleven times (originally auditioning for the role of Cordelia Chase). The show was well received by critics and audiences alike. Throughout its seven seasons and a total of 144 episodes, "Buffy", and by extension Gellar, became cult icons in the United States, Canada, the UK, Ireland and Australia. Gellar sang several of the songs during the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" musical episode "Once More, with Feeling", which spawned an original cast album.
She first had her major film role in the popular slasher film "I Know What You Did Last Summer". She was cast as Helen Shiver, an aspiring beauty actress. "Washington Post" found her "likable". The film was successful at the box office, grossing $125,586,134 worldwide and earned Gellar a Blockbuster Entertainment Award for Favorite Supporting Actress – Horror and a MTV Movie Award nomination for Best Breakthrough Performance. As a result the film has been parodied and referenced in popular culture. Gellar got a role in the teen horror "Scream 2", in which she portrayed Cici Cooper, a Sorority sister and film fan. She signed on to "Scream 2" without having read the script, on the basis of the success of the first film. The film gained acclaim and earned an impressive $172,363,301. With her recent work at the time, she cemented her It girl status with her first appearance on the 'Most Beautiful' list by "People" magazine. In 1998, she appeared in one episode of "Saturday Night Live" and went on to host the show two more times until 2002. 
After making a cameo appearance in the romantic comedy "She's All That", Gellar had the starring role in "Simply Irresistible", film that premiered in early 1999. The film opened to negative reviews and did not do well at the box office. She admitted in an interview having regrets for her choice to work in the film: ""Simply Irresistible" was just a bad choice – and for that, it was a great learning experience. I wasn't ready to make that movie. I was too young. The script was not ready. I knew in my heart before I left to make it that I should back out."
"Cruel Intentions" (1999), a modern-day retelling of "Les Liaisons dangereuses" featured a kiss between Gellar and co-star Selma Blair that won the two the "Best Kiss" award at the 2000 MTV Movie Awards. This film was a modest hit at the box office, grossing over $38 million in the United States and over $75 million worldwide, and earned several awards and nominations. Critic Roger Ebert stated that Gellar and co-star Ryan Phillippe "develop a convincing emotional charge" and that Gellar is "effective as a bright girl who knows exactly how to use her act as a tramp". Gellar's role showed her versatility as an actress, and many were surprised to see her playing a brunette cocaine addict with an appetite for manipulating and using people. Her performance was praised by a number of critics, including Rob Blackwelder for SPLICEDwire, who wrote about the "dazzling performance by Sarah Michelle Gellar who plunges headlong into the lascivious malevolence that makes Kathryn so delightfully wicked. (Plus she looks great in a corset.)". Around that time, she guest-starred in three episodes of "Angel" and appeared as Debbie in the HBO series "Sex and the City" episode "Escape from New York".
Gellar next played a lead role in James Toback's independent "Harvard Man" (2001), where she played the daughter of a mobster. The movie gained mixed reviews after its premiere. "Filmcitic.com" found Gellar's performance "memorable" along with cast's. The movie included two sex scenes with Gellar, helping her shed her good girl image even more after 1999's "Cruel Intentions". She then starred in 2002's "Scooby-Doo". The movie came out to a negative reception but grossed $275,650,703 worldwide, making it the 15th most successful film worldwide of 2002. Gellar won the Teen Choice Award in the category of Choice Movie Actress: Comedy.
During her growing film career Gellar continued work on the television series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer"; however, she decided to leave the show after the seventh season. When asked why, she explained, "This isn't about leaving for a career in movies, or in theater – it's more of a personal decision. I need a rest." Shortly after the show's end, Gellar stated that she had no interest in appearing in a "Buffy" feature film, but that she will consider it if the script is good enough. She did not appear in the final season of "Angel", causing the intended episode ("You're Welcome") to be rewritten for the character of Cordelia Chase. Gellar has said that she was willing to appear in the episode, but scheduling conflicts and family problems prevented it. Another actress, Giselle Loren, voiced Buffy for an animated series based on the show, which never aired, and the various "Buffy" video games. In her feature in "Esquire" magazine Gellar expressed her pride for her work on "Buffy", "I truly believe that it is one of the greatest shows of all time and it will go down in history as that. And I don’t feel that that is a cocky statement. We changed the way that people looked at television." Gellar's likeness is used in the comic continuation of the series.
Focus on films and hiatus (2004–2010).
After the end of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", Gellar provided her voice for the character Gina Vendetti in "The Simpson" episode "The Wandering Juvie" that aired in March 2004. Her next film was "". The movie received negative reviews but was a commercial success, grossing $181,466,833 around the globe. In that year, she appeared in the horror film "The Grudge", which was also a hit with a $187,281,115 worldwide gross. Gellar received praise for her role, and many critics referenced her performance as the reason for the film's success. David Wirtschafter, the president of the William Morris Agency (which represented Gellar), subsequently told "The New Yorker" that the success of "The Grudge" "takes our client Sarah Michelle Gellar, who now is nothing at all, and… makes her a star, potentially. Suddenly, the Sarah Michelle Gellar space is meaningful". The remark led her to terminate her association with the agency; she is now represented by the Creative Artists Agency. She then received a MTV Movie Award nomination for Best Frightened Performance as well as a nomination for the Teen Choice Award for Choice Movie Actress: Thriller for the part of Karen Davis. In 2005, she had a voice-over role in an episode of the animated television series "Robot Chicken". Gellar has landed her voice for various characters in 12 episodes of the show as of 2013.
Gellar appeared in the sequel "The Grudge 2", which opened in October 2006; in the film, she has a minor role reprising her character from the first film. Gellar next appeared in the thriller "The Return", which was released the following month and in which she played a businesswoman haunted by memories of her childhood and the mysterious death of a young woman. The movie was marketed as a horror movie and many including critics were surprised to find "The Return" was, as Rafe Telsch said, "just a murder mystery with a few supernatural elements". The movie pulled in a disappointing $4,800,000 weekend gross with little promotion.
Gellar then lent her voice to the animated film "Happily N'Ever After", which was universally panned by critics and unsuccessful at the box office. However, her next animated movie, "TMNT" (in which she played April O'Neil), was a commercial success, grossing over $95 million while it received a mixed reception. Her project, Richard Kelly's thriller "Southland Tales" opened at the Cannes Film Festival in May 2006 and came out in a limited release in the U.S. on November 9, 2007, garnering divided reviews. Gellar had met with Kelly and was drawn to the original ideas in his script for the movie.
"Suburban Girl" and "The Air I Breathe" – in which Gellar starred – were screened at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival. "Suburban Girl" was released direct-to-DVD in January 2008. It was described as "a blend of "Sex and the City" and "The Devil Wears Prada"" and a "pseudo-sophisticated romantic comedy" according to "Variety.com". Her on screen chemistry with Alec Baldwin was either criticized or praised, with "Eye For Film" commenting, "The film works best when Baldwin and Gellar are together – aside from the fact that Gellar seriously needs to eat a bun or two". Film website "Moviepicturefilm.com" stated "Gellar and Baldwin both give wonderful performances and make their chemistry incredibly real and ultimately, quite heartbreaking. Containing a ton of laughs and killer fashion that could give ""The Devil Wears Prada"" a run for its money, this movie has something uncommon in most romantic comedies, tons of style and a huge heart."
"The Air I Breathe" premiered theatrically the same month in a limited release to generally poor reviews. "The New York Times" called it a "gangster movie with delusions of grandeur." However, Gellar's performance was praised by a number of critics, "DVD Talk Review" noted that "her character here has the deepest emotional arc, and she hits all the right notes."
On June 25, 2008, it was announced she is no longer attached to the film version of the video game "American McGee's Alice".
It was reported on September 25, 2008 that Gellar would return to television in the HBO series "The Wonderful Maladys". The show is about three dysfunctional adult siblings living in New York and struggling to deal with the loss of their parents years ago. Creator Charles Randolph told "Variety" that he wrote the part with Gellar in mind, and described Gellar's character as having "a kind of zealous immaturity – like a drug addict with a to-do list." Gellar and Randolph would serve as executive producers. HBO shot the pilot in May 2009. According to an interview with Adam Scott the show was not picked up.
Gellar had the starring role in the psychological thriller "Possession", which was presented at the Cannes Film Market in May 2008. Due to financial problems at YARI Film Group, the movie had a range of release dates in the U.S. between 2008 and 2009, and it was ultimately released straight-to-video in March 2010. However, "Possession" had theatrical openings in various countries such as Argentina, Ecuador and Mexico, gaining $682,173. 
Gellar also stars in "Veronika Decides to Die" (2009). The film tells the story of a young woman suffering from severe depression who rediscovers the joy in life when she finds out that she only has days to live following a suicide attempt. Filming of the movie began on May 12, 2008, in New York City and finished in late June. It was reported that Kate Bosworth was previously attached to the project. The movie and Gellar herself received acclaim and "Veronika" was theatrically opened in limited release in several countries throughout 2009 and grossed over $1.3 million worldwide. At that time, her daughter Charlotte Grace Prinze was born and Gellar took a rest from film roles in order to spend time with her child.
Television work (2011–present).
In 2011, Gellar signed on to star and work as executive producer for a new drama titled "Ringer", in which she plays a woman on the run who manages to hide by living the life of her wealthy twin sister. The show was originally made for CBS but was picked up by its sister channel The CW in May 2011. On May 11, 2012, The CW announced the cancellation of "Ringer". Gellar has stated that part of her decision to return to a television series was because it allows her to both work and raise her daughter. The series premiered with high rating for the network (the first episode brought 2.84 million viewers) and mixed-positive reviews. "E! Online" wrote that Gellar was "awesome" and "fantastic", "TV Line" remarked she "does a fine job" as both characters and "USA Today" found her performance "well-defined".
On August 4, 2011, Gellar confirmed she will be returning as a guest star on the ABC soap opera "All My Children" before the show's ending in September but not as Kendall Hart. Her airdate was September 21, 2011. She portrayed a patient at Pine Valley Hospital. She tells Maria Santos that Pine Valley is familiar to her, and, that she is "Erica Kane's daughter". She also states that she saw vampires before they became trendy—a reference to "Buffy the Vampire Slayer".
Gellar is featured as a playable character in the new "" map pack Escalation, and also the second female playable character in the whole "Call of Duty" series, in which she appears as herself shooting a movie for George Romero, fighting off a horde of zombies.
On February 15, 2013, it was reported that Gellar would return to television with a pilot for CBS entitled "Crazy Ones" opposite Robin Williams. The show will be a single-camera comedy, about an advertising agency run by a father (Williams) and his daughter (Gellar).
Media personality.
Gellar has appeared on the covers of "Cosmopolitan, Glamour, FHM, Rolling Stone", and other magazines. She was featured in the annual "Maxim" "Hot 100" list in 2002, 2003, 2005 and 2008 and in "FHM"'s "100 Sexiest Women" of 2005. She was voted number 1 in the magazine's 1999 edition. In 1998, she was named one of "People"'s "50 Most Beautiful People (in the World)". Gellar has appeared in "Got Milk?" ads as well as in the Stone Temple Pilots music video "Sour Girl" and Marcy Playground music video "Comin' Up From Behind". In 2007, she was ranked No.54 on "FHM" Hot 100 List and was a celebrity spokesperson for Maybelline. Wearing a black lace brassiere, she was on the cover of the December 2007 issue of "Maxim" magazine and was named "Maxim" magazine's 2009 Woman of the Year. In 2009 she ranked in the top 5 of the "Maxim" "Hot 100" list.
She was also featured in Google's Top 10 Women Searches of 2002 and 2003, coming in at #8, and featured in UK Channel 4's 100 Greatest Sex Symbols in 2007, ranked at #16. Roles like "Buffy" and "Cruel Intentions" made her a sex symbol across the globe. Gellar featured in "FHM"'s German, Dutch, South African, Danish and Romanian editions 100 Sexiest Women lists every year from 1998 onwards. "Topsocialite.com" listed her as the 8th Sexiest woman of the 90s along with Alicia Silverstone, Gillian Anderson and Shannen Doherty. Other appearances and listings include: "Entertainment Weekly"'s Top 100 TV Icons in 2007, "Entertainment Weekly"'s Top 12 Entertainers of the Year in 1998 (ranked #3) and "Glamour"'s 50 Best Dressed Women in the World 2004 and 2005 (ranked at No.17 and #24). BuddyTV ranked her #27 on its TV's 100 Sexiest Women of 2011 list.
In 2007, Gellar was featured in Vaseline's "Skin Is Amazing" campaign, with other actors such as Hilary Duff, Amanda Bynes, and John Leguizamo. Gellar graced the cover of "Gotham" and featured as their main story in the March 2008 issue, in which she spoke about how passing 30 has evolved her style. Gellar said "It sounds clichéd, but when women turn 30, they find themselves. You become more comfortable in your own skin. Last night on "Letterman", I wore this skintight Herve Leger dress. Two years ago, three years ago? I would never have worn it."
In 2011 Gellar joined "The Nestlé Share the Joy of Reading Program" which aims to promote the importance of reading to the development of young children and to encourage them to continue reading over the summer break.
Personal life.
Gellar met her future husband Freddie Prinze, Jr. during filming of the 1997 teen horror film "I Know What You Did Last Summer", but the two did not begin dating until 2000. They were engaged in April 2001 and married in Mexico on September 1, 2002 in a ceremony officiated by Adam Shankman, a film director and choreographer with whom Gellar had worked on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer". Gellar's bridesmaid was her closest friend of many years, Lindsay Sloane. Prinze and Gellar also played each other's respective love interests as Fred and Daphne in the 2002 film "Scooby-Doo" and its sequel, "". 
In 2007, Gellar legally changed her name to Sarah Michelle Prinze in honor of the couple's fifth year of marriage. In 2004, while filming "The Grudge" in Japan, Gellar visited the Japanese swordsmith Shoji Yoshihara (Kuniie III) and bought a katana from him as a birthday present for her husband. Gellar learned that she needed clearance from the Japanese government to remove the sword from the country and, after eventually succeeding, stated that it was "incredibly difficult" to do.
Gellar and Prinze have two children together: daughter Charlotte Grace Prinze (born in September 2009), and son Rocky James Prinze (born in September 2012).
Gellar has four tattoos. She has a symbol for integrity on her lower back; the symbol for patience/perseverance and a cherry blossom on her ankles and two dragonflies on her back.
Interests and activities.
Gellar is an active advocate for various charities, including breast cancer research, Project Angel Food, Habitat for Humanity and CARE, Of her charitable pursuits, she says, "I started because my mother taught me a long time ago that even when you have nothing, there's ways to give back. And what you get in return for that is tenfold. But it was always hard because I couldn't do a lot. I couldn't do much more than just donate money when I was on the show because there wasn't time. And now that I have the time, it's amazing." 
Gellar has a black belt in taekwondo.
