Tamannaah Bhatia (born 21 December 1989) is an Indian film actress and model, who performs under the mononym Tamannaah and predominantly appears in South Indian cinema. In 2005, she made her acting debut in the Bollywood film, "Chand Sa Roshan Chehra", before working in the major South Indian film industries. Also in 2005, Tamannaah made her Telugu debut in "Sri", and in the following year she appeared in her first Tamil film, "Kedi". In 2007, she starred in two college-life-based drama films, "Happy Days" in Telugu and "Kalloori" in Tamil, which both earned her critical acclaim.
After being part of the several commercially successful films, including "Padikathavan" (2009), "Ayan" (2009), "Paiyaa" (2010) and "Siruthai" (2011), she emerged a leading contemporary actresses in Kollywood and became informally referred to as the "Queen of Kollywood". She staged a successful comeback in Tollywood in 2011 with the romance film "100% Love" (2011), which won her several accolades. She was subsequently signed for several high-profile projects like "Oosaravelli" (2011). With the blockbusters "Rachcha" (2012) and "Cameraman Ganga Tho Rambabu" (2012), she established herself as one of Tollywood's leading contemporary actresses.
Early life.
Tamannaah was born on 21 December 1989 in Mumbai, Maharashtra, India, to Santhosh and Rajani Bhatia and she has an elder brother, Anand. Her father is a financial consultant. She is of Sindhi descent. She did her schooling in Maneckji Cooper Educational Trust School, Juhu, Mumbai whilst she is currently pursuing a BA degree at National College, Mumbai through distance education. She later changed her screen name for numerological reasons, varying it slightly to Tamannaah. She has been working since the age of 13 since she was spotted at her school’s annual day function and offered the lead role which she took up. She also appeared in the music video of "Lafzon Mein Keh Na Saku" by Abhijeet Sawant, the winner of the first Indian Idol.
Career.
Early career (2005-2008).
Tamannaah started her acting career in 2005, essaying the female lead role in "Chand Sa Roshan Chehra", her only Hindi film to date before Himmatwala. The same year, she debuted in Telugu cinema in "Sri", playing the leading female role opposite Manoj Kumar. In 2006, she made her debut in the Tamil film industry in "Kedi", produced by A. M. Rathnam, along with Ravi Krishna and another newcomer, Ileana D'Cruz. In 2007, she had three releases. After her role in the unsuccessful "Vyapari", Tamannaah rose to popularity with the Sekhar Kammula-directed Telugu film "Happy Days" which received positive reviews and became her first major box office success. Her next release was the Tamil drama film "Kalloori", directed by Balaji Sakthivel, that won her accolades and critical acclaim in Tamil as well. In 2008, Tamannaah again had three releases, appearing only in cameo roles in two of them.
Stardom in Kollywood (2009-2010).
In 2009, she received box office success with "Padikathavan", with Dhanush. Her next release was a Telugu movie "Konchem Ishtam Konchem Kashtam" opposite Siddharth. It became a success and she was praised for her refreshing performance. Her next film was "Ananda Tandavam", which sank without a trace although her performance was praised by critics. Her next Tamil film "Ayan" alongside Suriya became a huge blockbuster and made her a leading star in the Tamil film industry. Her successive release "Kandein Kadhalai", which was a remake of the 2007 Hindi blockbuster "Jab We Met", was considered a moderate success. She did the role originally played by Kareena Kapoor and was praised by critics for her performance.
Her first 2010 release was Lingusamy's romantic-action flick "Paiyaa" co-starring Karthi, which went on to become a blockbuster. Tamannaah's chemistry with Karthi in the film was widely praised. Her next release was "Sura" opposite Vijay. The film opened to negative reviews and became a disaster. Her performance was panned by critics. Her next release was "Thillalangadi" with Jayam Ravi, which became an above average grosser, but her performance was praised. Her success in Tamil films during 2009 and 2010 established her as the numero uno actress in Kollywood at the time.
Stardom in Tollywood (2011-present).
Tamannaah appeared in six films in 2011, five of which featured her in a starring role. Her first release was the Tamil action film, "Siruthai", which was the remake of the Tollywood blockbuster "Vikramarkudu" and was her second film alongside Karthi. The film becoming a blockbuster, although her character was received poorly by critics, with a reviewer citing that she offered "little more than arm-candy". 
Her next release was her first Telugu release after two years, the highly successful romantic comedy "100% Love" (2011) with Naga Chaitanya, which fetched positive reviews from both critics and viewers. Tamannaah won the CineMAA Award for Best Actress, besides receiving nominations at various award ceremonies. She was next seen in the Telugu historical masala film "Badhrinaadh" (2011) opposite Allu Arjun that became a critical and commercial failure, which was followed by a Tamil action-masala film again, Hari's "Venghai" (2011), where she acted alongside Dhanush for the second time in her career. The film was not well received, however critics lauded her performance. Her final release of 2011 was "Oosaravelli", starring Jr. NTR, which was average at the box office, but was praised for her acting. Her first film in 2012 was the Ram Charan Teja starrer "Rachaa", which became a huge blockbuster. "Rachaa"'s success established her as one of the leading and in-demand actresses in Tollywood. Her next release "Endhukante Premanta" featuring her opposite Ram, opened to average reviews. Her next release was "Rebel" alongside Prabhas. Her latest release is the Pawan Kalyan-starrer "Cameraman Ganga Tho Rambabu". It is declared a huge blockbuster.
She is all set to star in her second Hindi film, "Himmatwala" opposite Ajay Devgn,which is a remake of the 1983-film with the same title. She recently signed "Bhale Thammudu", remake of 2012 Tamil hit "Vettai", opposite Naga Chaitanya which is scheduled for 2013.
Brand Endorsement.
Tamannaah also has experience as a model appearing in various television commercials. She is endorsing popular brands like Celkon Mobiles, Fanta and Chandrika Ayurvedic Soap. She is also the brand ambassador of the Salem based jewellery shop "AVR" and "Khazana Jewellery". Before entering the film industry, she also acted in Tamil advertisements like Shakthi Masala, Power Soap and Sun Direct.She also worked with "Virat Kohli" recently for an ad shoot of celkon mobile.
