Brooke Shields (born May 31, 1965) is an American actress, model and former child star. Some of her better-known movies include "Pretty Baby" and "The Blue Lagoon", as well as TV shows such as "Suddenly Susan", "That '70s Show", and "Lipstick Jungle".
Early life.
Brooke Christa Shields was born in New York City to Frank (1941-2003) and Teri (née Schmon; 1933-2012) Shields. Through her father's side, she has Italian, French, Irish, and English roots, along with high social position and relations to nobility. When her mother Teri first announced that she was pregnant, her father Frank's family paid her a sum to terminate the pregnancy. Instead, Teri took the money, but gave birth to their daughter Brooke regardless. Frank married Teri, but they were divorced when Brooke was five months old. Her paternal grandmother was the Italian princess Donna Marina Torlonia (Donna Marina was the daughter of an Italian nobleman and an American socialite). Shields' mother was of German, English, Scots-Irish, and Welsh descent. Shields was raised in the Roman Catholic faith. She has two stepbrothers and three half-sisters.
When Shields was five days old, her mother openly stated she wanted her to be active in show business: "She's the most beautiful child and I'm going to help her with her career."
For her confirmation in the Roman Catholic Church at age 10, she took the name "Camille". While attending high school, she resided in Haworth, New Jersey.
Education.
She attended the all-female New Lincoln School until eighth grade. Shields graduated from The Dwight-Englewood School in Englewood, New Jersey, in 1983. She moved to a dorm at Princeton University to pursue her bachelor's degree in French literature, where she graduated in 1987.
At Princeton, she spoke openly about her sexuality and virginity. Shields was a member of the Princeton Triangle Club and the Cap and Gown Club. Her autobiography, "On Your Own", was published in 1985. Her 1987 senior thesis was titled "The Initiation: From Innocence to Experience: The Pre-Adolescent/Adolescent Journey in the Films of Louis Malle, "Pretty Baby" and "Lacombe Lucien"."
On the op-ed page of "The New York Times", she was scrutinized after she had publicized her school records in the July 1987 edition of "Life Magazine" shortly after graduation from Princeton. The criticism emphasized that Shields did not take any courses in history, mathematics, philosophy, economics, world literature or science with laboratory experience.
Career.
Early work.
Shields began her career as a model in 1966, when she was 11 months old. Her first job was for Ivory Soap, shot by Francesco Scavullo. She continued as a successful child model with model agent Eileen Ford, who, in her Lifetime Network biography, stated that she started her children's division just for Shields. In 1978, when she was 12-years-old, Shields played a child prostitute her age in film "Pretty Baby". Eileen Ford, founder of the Ford Modeling Agency, said of Brooke Shields: "She is a professional child and unique. She looks like an adult and thinks like one."
In 1980, the 14-year-old Shields was the youngest fashion model ever to appear on the cover of "Vogue". Later that same year, Shields appeared in controversial print and TV ads for Calvin Klein jeans. The TV ad included her saying the famous tagline, "You want to know what comes between me and my Calvins? Nothing." Brooke Shields ads would help catapult Klein's career to super-designer status.
From 1981 to 1983, Shields, her mother, photographer Gary Gross, Playboy Press and the New York City Courts were involved in litigation over the rights to some photographs her mother had signed away to the photographer (when dealing with models who are also minors, a parent or legal guardian must sign such a release form while other agreements are subject to negotiation) which were originally intended to appear in a book titled "Sugar and Spice" to be published by Playboy Press. The courts ruled in favor of the photographer, but due to a strange twist in New York law, it would have been otherwise had Brooke Shields been considered a child "performer" rather than a model.
By the age of 16, Shields had become one of the most recognizable faces in the world, because of her dual career as a provocative fashion model and controversial child actress. "Time" magazine reported, in its February 9, 1981, cover story, that her day rate as a model was $10,000. In 1983, Shields appeared on the cover of the September issue of Paris "Vogue", the October and November issues of American "Vogue" and the December edition of Italian "Vogue". During that period Shields became a regular at New York City's nightclub Studio 54. In 2009, a naked picture of Brooke Shields, taken when she was 10, and included in a work by Richard Prince, "Spiritual America", created a row. It was removed from an exhibition at the Tate Modern after a warning from the police.
Film.
Shields' first major film role was an appearance in Louis Malle's "Pretty Baby" (1978), a movie in which she played a child who lived in a brothel (in which there were numerous nude scenes). As she was only 12 years old when the film was released, controversy regarding child pornography arose. This was followed by a slightly less controversial and less notable film, "Wanda Nevada" (1979).
After two decades of movies, her best known films are still arguably "The Blue Lagoon" (1980), which included a number of nude scenes between teenage lovers on a tropical island (Shields later testified before a U.S. Congressional inquiry that older body doubles were used in some of them), and "Endless Love" (1981). The MPAA initially rated "Endless Love" with an X rating. However, the film was re-edited to earn an R rating. She won the People's Choice Award in the category of Favorite Young Performer in four consecutive years from 1981 to 1984. In 1998, she played a lesbian, Lily, in "The Misadventures of Margaret".
In 2001, Lifetime aired the film "What Makes a Family", starring Brooke Shields and Cherry Jones in a true-to-life story of two married lesbian mothers and a baby versus the adoption laws of Florida.
Television appearances.
Shields has appeared in a number of television shows. In 1980, she was the youngest guest star to ever appear on "The Muppet Show", in which she and the Muppets put on their own version of "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland". She was also the youngest person to host ABC's "Fridays", a "Saturday Night Live"-like sketch comedy show, in 1981. In one episode of the popular comedy sitcom "Friends", Shields played Joey's stalker. This role led directly to her being cast in the NBC sitcom "Suddenly Susan", in which she starred from 1996 until 2000, and which earned a People's Choice Award in the category of Favorite Female Performer in a New Television Series for her, in 1997, and two Golden Globe nominations.
In the early 1980s, she starred in the USPHS PSA sponsored by the American Lung Association as an initiative that VIPs should become examples and advocates of non-smoking. In the mid-1980s, Brooke began her support of the USO by touring with Bob Hope.
Shields made a couple of guest appearances on "That '70s Show". She played Pam Burkhart, Jackie's (Mila Kunis) mother, who later was briefly involved with Donna's (Laura Prepon) father (played by Don Stark). Shields left "That '70s Show" when her character was written out. Shields recorded the narration for the Sony/BMG recording of "The Runaway Bunny", a Concerto for Violin, Orchestra and Reader, by Glen Roven. It was performed by the Royal Philharmonic and Ittai Shapira.
In the latter half of the first decade of the 21st century, Shields guest-starred on shows like FX's "Nip/Tuck" and CBS' "Two and a Half Men". In 2005, Shields appeared in a season-two episode of HBO's "Entourage", entitled "Blue Balls Lagoon." In 2007, she made a guest appearance on Disney's "Hannah Montana", playing Susan Stewart, Miley and Jackson's mother, who died in 2004. In 2008, she returned in the primetime drama "Lipstick Jungle." The series ended a year later.
In 2010 and 2012, she made guest appearances on "The Middle" as the mother of a brood of terror-inducing children and the nemesis of Frankie Heck (played by Patricia Heaton). She also appeared as a featured celebrity in NBC's genealogy documentary reality series, "Who Do You Think You Are?", where it was revealed that, through her father's ancestry, she is the distant cousin (many generations removed) of King Louis XIV of France, and thus a descendant of both Saint Louis and Henry IV of France.
Theatre.
Shields has appeared in several Broadway theatre productions, including the musicals "Grease" (1994 revival) as Betty Rizzo, the 1998 revival of "Cabaret" (in 2001), the 2003 revival of "Wonderful Town" (in 2004-2005) and "Chicago". She also performed in "Chicago" in London's West End. She took over the role of "Morticia" in the Broadway musical "The Addams Family" on June 28, 2011.
Personal life.
In the June 2009 issue of "Health" magazine, Shields related that she lost her virginity at age 22. She said it would have occurred earlier had she had a better self-image.
In the mid-1980s while at Princeton, Shields dated classmate Dean Cain. Shields has also been linked to John F. Kennedy Jr, actor Liam Neeson and singer George Michael. She was also a favorite date of Prince Naruhito of Japan. After a romantic interlude with John Travolta, the 16-year-old Brooke Shields dated 18-year-old Mohammed, son of the arms-dealer billionaire Adnan Khashoggi, in Cannes where they first met. At 18, Brooke Shields met Dodi Fayed and they became friends. Brooke was 24-years-old when she spent the evening with Dodi Fayed in Paris to celebrate his 33rd birthday.
By the 1990s, she promoted physical fitness as an extension of femininity, demonstrating that femininity and athletics are consistent rather than incongruous. Although she was not the only one, Shields had what was required to promote women's athletics.
Shields has been married twice. From April 19, 1997, to April 9, 1999, she was married to professional tennis player Andre Agassi; the couple had been together since 1993. On April 4, 2001, she married television writer Chris Henchy after they met in 1999 through mutual friends. The couple has two daughters. She is a spokeswoman for Tupperware's Chain of Confidence SMART Girls campaign, a program that teaches girls to nurture their mental and physical well-being.
Postpartum depression.
Between April and May 2005, Shields spoke to magazines (such as "Guideposts") and appeared on "The Oprah Winfrey Show" to publicize her battle with postpartum depression, an experience that included depression, thoughts of suicide, an inability to respond to her baby's needs and delayed maternal bonding. The illness may have been triggered by a traumatic childbirth, the death of her father three weeks earlier, stress from in vitro fertilization, a miscarriage and a family history of depression, as well as the hormones and life changes which were brought on by childbirth. Her book, "Down Came the Rain", discusses her experience, contributing to a greater public awareness of postpartum depression.
In May 2005, Tom Cruise, a Scientologist whose beliefs frown upon psychiatry, condemned Brooke, both personally and professionally, for both using and speaking in favor of the antidepressant drug Paxil. As Cruise said, "Here is a woman and I care about Brooke Shields, because I think she is an incredibly talented woman, you look at think, where has her career gone?" Shields responded that Cruise's statements about anti-depressants were "irresponsible" and "dangerous." She said that he should "stick to fighting aliens" (a reference to Cruise's starring role in "War of the Worlds" as well as some of the more exotic aspects of Scientology doctrine and teachings), "and let mothers decide the best way to treat postpartum depression." The actress responded to a further attack by Cruise in an essay "War of Words" published in "The New York Times" on July 1, 2005, in which she made an individual case for the medication and said, "In a strange way, it was comforting to me when my obstetrician told me that my feelings of extreme despair and my suicidal thoughts were directly tied to a biochemical shift in my body. Once we admit that postpartum is a serious medical condition, then the treatment becomes more available and socially acceptable. With a doctor's care, I have since tapered off the medication but, without it, I wouldn't have become the loving parent I am today." On August 31, 2006, according to USAToday.com, Cruise privately apologized to Shields for the incident and Shields accepted and said that it was "heartfelt." Three months later, she and her husband attended the wedding of Cruise and Katie Holmes, in November 2006.
Relationship with Michael Jackson.
Brooke Shields spoke at the memorial service for Michael Jackson on July 7, 2009, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, California, before a television audience of more than one billion people. Shields stated in that speech that she first met Michael when she was 13-years-old, and the two instantly became friends. Shields said: 
In her eulogy, she shared a number of anecdotes, including an occasion in which she was his date for one of Elizabeth Taylor's weddings, and the pair sneaked into Taylor's room to get the first look at her dress, only to discover Taylor asleep in the bed. Shields gave a tearful speech, referring to the many times she and Michael Jackson shared and briefly joked about his famous sequin glove. She also mentioned Jackson’s favorite song "Smile" by Charlie Chaplin which was later sung in the memorial service by Jermaine Jackson.
"New York Times" columnist Gail Collins wrote that "it was a little peculiar hearing Brooke Shields’s weepy testimony about her deep friendship with Jackson given the fact that she told reporters that the last time she saw him was at Elizabeth Taylor’s eighth wedding in 1991." This however does not agree with Michael's statements during his 1993 interview with Oprah Winfrey that he was dating Shields at the time, as well as with the fact that Shields was Michael Jackson's date to the 1993 Grammys. Shields has stated that Jackson asked her to marry him numerous times and to adopt a child together. 
