Barfi! is a 2012 Indian romantic comedy-drama film written and directed by Anurag Basu. It revolves around Murphy "Barfi" Johnson, a mute and deaf boy from Darjeeling, West Bengal and his relation with two girls, one of whom is autistic. The film stars Ranbir Kapoor, Priyanka Chopra and Ileana D'Cruz in lead roles.
Made on a budget of between 30-35 crore (US$5.46-6.37 million), the film was released on 14 September 2012 across 1300 screens in India. Basu later announced that he planned an English language version of the film. The film was praised for showing positive portrayal of the differently abled in films.
The film was sent as India's official entry for the Best Foreign Language Film nomination for the 85th Academy Awards in February 2013. However, it dropped out of the race in the first round, and was criticised for copying several scenes from English films. Nevertheless, "Barfi!" was a box-office success, becoming one of the highest-grossing Bollywood films of 2012 in India and was declared a ""Super Hit"" after its three week run by Box Office India. The film went on to gross worldwide.
Plot.
1972.
Murphy ""Barfi"" Johnson (Ranbir Kapoor) is an optimistic, street smart, charming young man who was born deaf-mute to a Nepali-origin couple in Darjeeling. He lost his mother as a baby; and his father raised him alone, working as a chauffeur. Barfi is also known as a troublemaker. From cutting lamposts to fooling people, he is always chased by Sudhanshu Dutta (Saurabh Shukla) a local police officer. Barfi meets Shruti Ghosh (Ileana D'Cruz), who has just arrived in the city, and is engaged to Ranjit Sengupta (Jisshu Sengupta), and about to get married in three months, and Barfi is immediately smitten. Shruti also falls in love with Barfi but she is dissuaded from pursuing him by her mother because he won't be able to take care of her due to his disabilities and lack of money. Shruti takes her mother's advice, gets married, and moves to Kolkata, breaking all contact with Barfi. 
Meanwhile, Barfi's father falls ill and Barfi must somehow raise the money for his treatment. After an unsuccessful attempt to rob a local bank, he attempts to kidnap his childhood friend, Jhilmil Chatterjee (Priyanka Chopra) to hold her for ransom. Jhilmil is the autistic granddaughter of a wealthy man who left all his money in her name after his death. Upon arriving however, Barfi finds she has already been kidnapped. Sneaking aboard a van he spots her in, he drives Jhilmil away from the actual ransom delivery and hides her in his apartment with the police in their pursuit. He collects the ransom but finds that his father has died just as he makes the payment. Dejected, he tries to drop off Jhilmil at the village of her caretaker but she refuses to leave him and they soon move to Kolkata, with Barfi assuming responsibility of Jhilmil and taking care of her.
1978.
After 6 years, Barfi happens to meet Shruti again. She is unhappy with her marriage and they rekindle their friendship, much to the chagrin of the lovestruck Jhilmil, who then goes missing. Shruti files a missing person's report for Jhilmil; the Darjeeling police learn about the report and resume their pursuit of Barfi, arresting him. As he is being interrogated, another ransom demand for Jhilmil is made and she is apparently killed in the process of the exchange, though her body is never found. In order to wrap up the case, the police attempt to frame Barfi for the murder. Sudhanshu Dutta, who grew a soft spot for Barfi after chasing him all these years for his nuisances, asks Shruti to take him away, offering him a second chance at life, to which she agrees, hoping now that Jhilmil is gone, she can finally be with Barfi.
Barfi, however, is deeply affected by Jhilmil's loss and finds living with Shruti unfulfilling. Barfi deduces the location of the home where Jhilmil had spent her childhood and takes Shruti to look for her. It is revealed that Jhilmil is alive, both kidnappings having been fabricated as a means for her father to embezzle money from the trust fund in her name; the second time, they faked her death so that she could return to her special-care home, away from the clutches of her alcoholic mother. Barfi has a sweet reunion with Jhilmil and the two get married, while Shruti spends the rest of her days alone, regretting having lost her opportunity to be with Barfi.
Present day.
Barfi is deeply ill and close to death in a hospital. Jhilmil arrives and lies with Barfi in his hospital bed as Shruti narrates that the two peacefully passed away together, not wanting to leave each other behind in neither life nor death. The film closes showing the last days of Barfi and Jhilmil as credits roll.
Production.
Development.
Anurag Basu who wrote the script of the film, stated that Ranbir Kapoor had always been his first choice to play the role of Murphy "Barfi" Johnson. In an interview the director quoted, "If Ranbir wouldn’t have done this movie, I wouldn’t have made it. I always had Ranbir in my mind for this role. Even on the day when I was writing the 10th page of the script." A three day workshop was held prior to the filming. Though the film script Basu had written was back and forth time traversing, he still kept the non-linear narration. Basu added that the film script required 30-year span for the characters' love to grow and hence, set the backdrop of the film in 1970s. As per former titles like "Khamoshi" or "Silence", media reports claimed the story to be grim or dark. However the director stated contrary that the film was indeed happy and commercial. The director paid homage to Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin by adding similar inspired scenes from their era of silent cinema on account of physical comedy in the film, involving much non-talkie portions.
Casting.
In March 2010, The Times of India reported that Ranbir Kapoor and Katrina Kaif were signed to play lead roles in then titled "Khamoshi" and "Silence". Basu confirmed that Kapoor and Kaif were signed for the lead roles. Later, Priyanka Chopra joined the cast to play the mentally challenged girl part. Following the inclusion of Chopra, Kaif opted out of the film for unknown reasons. Media reported that her opting out of the film may have because of Chopra been given stronger role. In June 2010, Anurag Basu confirmed that his film would feature three lead roles with Ranbir Kapoor playing as a deaf and mute person, Priyanka Chopra as a mentally challenged girl and a narrator. Later, media reported that Asin was approached to play the role of narrator, replacing Kaif. However, she was never signed. Media reported that no other actress wanted to sign the film because according to them, the autistic part was more stronger. In July 2010, Mumbai Mirror reported that Chopra was ready to play the role of narrator and leave the autistic part, so that other actress would be cast in the film as Chopra do not wanted the film to being stalled. Basu confirmed this development and said, “It’s true we’ve been unable to cast the other part." However, the casting confusions significantly delayed the filming schedule, forcing Basu to opt for a completely new fresh face to play the second female role. In early December 2010, Ileana D'Cruz was finalised for the second female lead, featuring as narrator and Kapoor's first love interest in the film. Roopa Ganguly was also reported to essay an important supporting role.
Filming.
The official filming began on 11 March 2011. Though schedules were set at different instances, "Barfi!" was shot precisely in June 2011 and February 2012, extensively in Darjeeling. In March 2011, Basu himself visited Kolkata to finalize the locations within the city. The schedule in Mumbai began on March 20, 2011 and continued until May 2011. In June 2011, the cast and crew shot in Darjeeling. The song "Main Kya Karoon" highlighted the Darjeeling Clock Tower. Scenes were also shot at St. Paul's School, Darjeeling, Sukna, Tindharia, Chowrasta, Darjeeling Himalayan Railway Station at Ghoom, Windamere Hotel, Keventer's and Planters Club. Shooting resumed in July 2011 in Kolkata as that period marks monsoon and the director opined to have couple of natural shots. The cycling scenes were shot in northern Kolkata's Dorji Para street lanes. The opening rainy scenes of the film were shot at Esplanade in the city. The shooting was significantly delayed as Ranbir's dates were altered to adjust his other film "Rockstar". In December 2011, some scenes were canned outskirts of Coimbatore especially Pollachi and Ooty. The scenes that involved Kapoor being chased by the policemen over the roof tops were shot in Kolkata by end of January 2012. The first look of Priyanka Chopra was revealed in February 2012 wherein she was shooting at Sukna near Siliguri. In January 2012 the release date was fixed as July 13, 2012. The shooting was completed by April 2012 except for few scenes featuring Chopra. The producers postponed the release from July 13, 2012 to August 31, 2012 as the September 2011 shooting schedule was cancelled and was pending to be shot. However, Basu began working on Ileana's dubbing portions by end of April 2012. This was because she was unfamiliar with Hindi language and ensured to grasp it whilst filming.
Soundtrack.
The music and background score of the film is composed by Pritam, with lyrics by Swanand Kirkire, Ashish Pandit, Neelesh Misra and Sayeed Quadri. The soundtrack album has 6 songs. A song named "Ala Barfi!" sung by Mohit Chauhan was released as a single track on 7 August 2012. "Main Kya Karoon", a romantic number was released on 11 August 2012 which also features Ileana D'Cruz & Ranbir Kapoor. Priyanka Chopra was supposed to sing a track for the film but her contract with Universal Music prevents her from taking the offer. There is also one more song titled "Fatafati" which was not be used in the final film, but was released on YouTube on 10 September 2012 as behind-the-scenes footage. It is merely a promotional track, sung by Pritam. Some additional vocals are sung by Ranbir Kapoor himself. "Fatafati" also has some Bengali lyrics, penned by Amitabh Bhattacharya. It has become a hit on YouTube, gaining over 750,000 views. It has been recently released along with "Phir Le Aya Dil (Redux)" and "Aashiyan (Solo)" in the soundtrack.
Reception.
"Barfi!"s soundtrack was well received by critics. Hindustan Times rated the album 4.5 out of 5 stars and stated "Overall, the soundtrack is a joyride sans flaws. Pritam has given many hits, but like his tunes in "Life in a... Metro", this one will be remembered for breaking the monotony in his sound. There are no foot-tapping numbers or remixes here, but the simplicity that makes this album a winner." Satyajit of Glamsham.com rated the album 4.5 stars out of 5 stars and stated ""Barfi!" is one of the sweetest musical delights of this year, a well nurtured and meticulously conceived album that has its heart and mind at right places. After the thunderous musical success of the recently released "Cocktail", Pritam triumphs again with this album and shows his versatility par consistency in every soundtrack." Shivi of Koimoi gave the album 4.5 out of 5 stars and stated "In simple words, "Barfi!" is excellent music on all counts. Very rarely does one get to hear an album where you can hear a complete soundtrack without skipping tracks; this is one of them. So, just play, enjoy the music and the world of "Barfi!"". Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama rated the album 3.5 out of 5 stars and stated ""Barfi!"s soundtrack is quite good and is easily one of the best quality creations by Pritam. He has totally reinvented himself with this album which defies Bollywood norms and boasts of a sound of its own."
Marketing.
Made on a cost of between 30-35 crore (US$5.46-6.37 million), including spend in prints and advertising, the official trailer of the film was launched on 2 July 2012 featuring all the actors. Having no dialogue with Kapoor's character portraying comedy through gestures and actions, the trailer received immense praise from critics and audiences.
Promotions.
"Barfi!" was promoted at various cities across India. While promoting the film at the Phoenix Mall, Bangalore, excited crowds broke free of the barricades separating them from the cast.
YouTube application.
UTV Motion Pictures also created an YouTube application called "The Flavour of Barfi". The application, designed to promote the film, features Ranbir Kapoor as his character from the movie and allows users to type out actions which Ranbir acts out. The application features two zones: one asks users to change Barfi's mood and the other gives users the chance to watch Barfi flirt.
Release.
Critical reception.
The film received positive reviews. Review aggregator ReviewGang aggregated 7 out of 10 stars based on 11 professional critics. Resham Sengar of Zee News gave the film 5 out of 5 stars and said "All in all, Anurag Basu’s "Barfi!" is a perfect sweet treat for his audience. Like it has been discussed, those film makers who have been portraying the handicapped as dull and boring in their films must take a lesson from "Barfi!". Go and savour it!" Madhureeta Mukherjee of "The Times of India" gave the film a 4/5 rating and said, "Ranbir, in the most challenging performance of his career leaves us 'dumbstruck'. Without use of conventional crutches of cool-catchphrases, dhamaakedar-dialogbaazi, bare-bodies, and other 'items'; he stuns you in every single frame. For Priyanka, there's only one word — Bravo! In a role where she needs to under-emote, she does so brilliantly." Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said, ""Barfi" is akin to a whiff of fresh air. Its foremost triumph is that it leaves you with a powerful emotion: Happiness!" Blessy Chettiar from "DNA India" stated, ""Barfi!" leaves you teary-eyed yet happy." She gave a 4/5 rating. NDTV Movies gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said ""Barfi!" comes as close to being a modern masterpiece as cinematically possible. To miss it would be a crime. To embrace it is to serenade the sublime". Rummana Ahmed of Yahoo! gave the film a positive review and said "If the success of a film lies in not only how much it entertains you while you are watching the film but also in the infinite moments that stay with you long after you have left the theatre, then "Barfi!" is a clear winner". 
Aniruddha Guha of "DNA India" rated the film 4 out of 5 remarking ""Barfi" cannot be missed. It demands patience, but the payoff is incredible". Raja Sen for Rediff.com has given 3.5/5 stars and opined ""Barfi!" is a well-crafted script with an intriguing back-and-forth narrative but it all goes south towards the end." Rachit Gupta of "Filmfare" gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and stated ""Barfi!" is that rare film that can make you smile and make you cry in the same scene. Its technical brilliance is only outdone by its emotional complexity and depth. Pritam's music adds a nice silent-era charm to this already fantastic story, making it an occasion when words simply aren’t enough." Sunaina Kumar of "Tehelka" gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars and said "Anurag Basu is a deft filmmaker, who achieves great form in his craft. It is his writing that lets him down. "Barfi!" leaves you with a sweet aftertaste that does not linger for too long". Vinayak Chakravorty of India Today gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars and said ""Barfi!" is a pleasantly different film, only it isn't an extraordinary one. That's because despite the brilliant characters and setting, the film doesn't have an extraordinary story to tell". Anupama Chopra of "Hindustan Times" gave it 3 out 5 stars and noting "This is a film made with love, bolstered by wonderfully etched vignettes, Ranbir Kapoor's stupendous performance and a gorgeous soundtrack by Pritam. And yet, for me, Barfi was a singularly frustrating experience there was so much to like, but the film never became more than the sum of its parts".
Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave 3 out of 5 stars and said ""Barfi" had the potential to be great cinema, but as it stands it's a respectable film that's still better than a lot else you're likely to see." Conversely, Namrata Joshi of "Outlook" gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and said "Much too crafted and self-consciously gorgeous; feels eminently facile and plastic—tries way too hard to please." 
Rotten Tomatoes has given the film a 83% fresh rating.
Controversies.
Lawsuit.
On 12 September, British radio maker Murphy Radio claimed that their trademark Murphy baby has been used in "Barfi!" without permission. Producer Siddharth Roy Kapur admitted that he'd received the notice from Murphy, but said that there's nothing wrong in the intention, as the brand in question has been shown in a "very positive light".
Allegations in the media.
The film has been accused of plagiarism by media and several blogs, such as Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. Allegedly, scenes were from Hollywood films like "Cops", "The Adventurer", "City Lights", "Singin' in the Rain", "Project A", "The Notebook" and "Benny & Joon". Music director Pritam has also been accused of copying the background music from the French film "Amélie". Basu defended the film by claiming that he was inspired by these films and insisted that the film contains original plot, screenplay, characters and situations. Basu also said that he was inspired by these films and payed homages to Keaton and Chaplin. However, it was alleged that the makers of the movie made no attempts to credit the original sources for the scenes. A few days after the release, several videos were uploaded on YouTube showing side by side comparisons of the copied scenes. Also, its Oscar selection for "Best Foreign Language Film" was criticised because of plagiarism. However, Oscar selection committee chief Manju Borah defended the film by saying ""Barfi!" deserves to be sent outside. The selection was a very open process with three to four rounds of severe discussions and came down to the best film of the final three."
Box office.
Domestic.
"Barfi!" had a strong start at multiplexes all over whereas single screens had lower opening because of limited release. The film grossed on its opening day. Its second day collections were around . The film had an excellent weekend, taking in . In its first week, "Barfi!" collected nett. The film had collected a very nice figure of around despite new release "Heroine" on its eighth day. Barfi! garnered a decent figure of in its second weekend. "Barfi!" had a good second week where it has collected nett. The third week collection of "Barfi!" was extraordinary with a collection of nett. The film raked in in its fourth week. Finally it had grossed in India. The all-India distributor share of the film was .
Overseas.
"Barfi" did well overseas in its weekend opening as it collected around . It just edged out "Raajneeti" as Ranbir Kapoor's biggest opener overseas which had collected . It had collected a nice figure of around $5.3 million in 17 days. "Barfi!" grossed $6.25 million overseas at the end of its run, and it became one of the highest overseas grossing Bollywood film of 2012.
Home media.
Reliance Home Entertainment released the DVD and Blu-Ray of the film on mid-November 2012 across all regions in one-disc pack complying the NTSC format. The DVD and the Blu-Ray discs contained bonus content like "Making of the Movie", "Fatafati - Behind The Scenes" and "Deleted Scenes". The VCD version was also released simultaneously.
