Naomie Melanie Harris (born 6 September 1976) is a British actress. She is best known for her starring role as Selena in "28 Days Later", her supporting turn as Tia Dalma/Calypso in the second and third "Pirates of the Caribbean" films, and as Eve Moneypenny in the 23rd James Bond film, "Skyfall."
Personal life.
Harris was born and brought up in London, and educated there at St Marylebone School. Her mother, Lisselle Kayla, is originally from Jamaica, and her father is from Trinidad. They separated when she was a child, and she was raised by her mother. Her mother worked as a screenwriter on "Eastenders". After graduating in 1998 from Pembroke College, Cambridge with a degree in Social and Political Sciences, Harris trained at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School.
Career.
Harris has appeared in television and film since she was nine, including a stint on the remake of the science fiction series "The Tomorrow People". She became internationally well known in 2002 with her lead performance in Danny Boyle's post-apocalyptic film "28 Days Later", opposite Cillian Murphy. In the same year, she starred in the television adaptation of Zadie Smith's "White Teeth". 
Since then, Harris has been cast in supporting roles in big budget films, such as ', ' and Michael Mann's "Miami Vice." She also did a comic turn in Michael Winterbottom's well-regarded indie ensemble piece, "A Cock and Bull Story", and appeared with Josh Hartnett in the 2008 release of "August". She starred in Channel 4's adaptation of the novel "Poppy Shakespeare" which was first shown on 31 March 2008. She also appeared in BBC's historical drama "Small Island" in December 2009. 
She played Elizabeth Lavenza in Danny Boyle's stage production of Mary Shelley's "Frankenstein" for the National Theatre from 22 February to 2 May 2011. 
She plays the lead role in "The First Grader", directed by Justin Chadwick, and premiered on 18 May 2011 in the Seattle International Film Festival. 
Harris co-starred in the 23rd James Bond film, "Skyfall", playing Eve Moneypenny. She is the first black actress to play Moneypenny.
In 2012, Harris was the voiceover for the Boss Nuit Pour Femme advert starring actress Gwyneth Paltrow.
Harris will portray Winnie Mandela in the upcoming biopic "Long Walk to Freedom," based on the novel of the same name opposite actor Idris Elba.
