Brandon Bruce Lee (February 1, 1965 – March 31, 1993) was an American actor and martial artist. He was the son of martial arts film star Bruce Lee, and the grandson of Cantonese opera singer Lee Hoi-Chuen.
Early life.
Brandon Lee was born in Oakland, California, the son of martial artist and actor Bruce Lee and Linda Emery. A week after his birth, his grandfather Lee Hoi-Chuen died. The family moved to Los Angeles, California when he was three months old. When offers for film roles became limited for his father, he and his family moved back to Hong Kong in 1971. 
When Brandon was eight, his father died suddenly from cerebral edema. After his father's death, his family (including his younger sister, Shannon Lee, born April 19, 1969) moved back to the United States. They lived briefly in his mother's hometown of Seattle, Washington, and then in Los Angeles, where Lee grew up in the affluent area of Rolling Hills.
He attended high school at Chadwick School, but was asked to leave for insubordination—more specifically, driving down the school's hill backwards, only three months before graduating. It is not known when exactly, but he did briefly attend Bishop Montgomery High School, located in Torrance. He received his GED in 1983 at the age of 18, and then went to Emerson College in Boston, Massachusetts where he majored in theater. After one year, Lee moved to New York City where he took acting lessons at the famed Lee Strasberg Theatre and Film Institute and was part of the American New Theatre group founded by his friend John Lee Hancock. The bulk of Lee's martial arts instruction came from his father's top students, and best friends Dan Inosanto and Richard Bustillo.
Career.
Lee returned to Los Angeles in 1985, where he worked for Ruddy Morgan Productions as a script reader. He was asked to audition for a role by casting director Lyn Stalmaster and got his first acting role in "", a feature-length television movie which was a follow-up to the 1970s television series "Kung Fu". The film aired on ABC on February 1, 1986 which was also Lee's 21st birthday. In "Kung Fu: The Movie", Lee played Chung Wang, the suspected son of Kwai Chang Caine (David Carradine). Lee's real life father was originally considered to play the leading role in the "Kung Fu" TV series.
Lee got his first leading film role later that year in the Hong Kong action crime thriller "Legacy of Rage" in which he starred alongside Michael Wong, Regina Kent and Mang Hoi (Look-alike of film star Yuen Biao). It also featured a cameo appearance by Bolo Yeung who appeared in his father's film, "Enter the Dragon". Made in Cantonese and directed by Ronny Yu, it was the only film Lee made in Hong Kong. He was also nominated for a Hong Kong Film Award in this role.
In 1987, Lee starred in the unsold television pilot "" which aired on "CBS Summer Playhouse" and was another follow-up to the "Kung Fu" TV series. In this film the story moved to the present day, and centered on the story of Johnny Caine (Lee), the great-grandson of Kwai Chang Caine (David Carradine).
In 1988, Lee made a guest appearance alongside Pat Morita in an episode of the short-lived American television series "Ohara" playing a villainous character named Kenji. In the summer of 1988, Lee also started filming his first English-language B-grade action film, "Laser Mission"; it was filmed cheaply in South Africa, and was eventually released on the European market in 1990.
In 1992, Lee landed the lead role of Eric Draven, in the movie adaptation of "The Crow", a popular underground comic book. About his character, an undead rock musician avenging his murder and that of his fiancée, Lee said, "He has something he has to do and he is forced to put aside his own pain long enough to go do it". It was Lee's last film. Filming began on February 1, 1993, which was his 28th birthday.
Personal life.
In 1990, Lee met Eliza "Lisa" Hutton at director Renny Harlin's office, located at the headquarters of 20th Century Fox. Hutton was working as a personal assistant to Harlin, and later became a story editor for Stillwater Productions, in 1991. Lee and Hutton moved in together in early 1991 and became engaged in October 1992.
They were due to be married in Ensenada, Mexico on April 17, 1993, a week after Lee was to complete filming on "The Crow". At the time of Lee's death, Hutton was working as a casting assistant and was on set of "The Crow" so much that she was later credited with being Lee's on-set assistant. After his death, Hutton petitioned to have gun safety regulations tightened on film sets. "The Crow" is dedicated to the couple.
Death.
Brandon Lee died of a fatal gunshot wound on March 31, 1993 after an accidental shooting on set of "The Crow." During filming, a blank cartridge was fired from a gun barrel in which a bullet of a real cartridge was lodged. The bullet struck Lee. He was rushed to the New Hanover Regional Medical Center in Wilmington, NC where he underwent 6 hours of surgery. However, attempts to save him were unsuccessful, and Lee was pronounced dead at 1:03pm on March 31, 1993 at 28 years old. The shooting was ruled an accident.
In the scene in which Lee was shot, Lee’s character walks into his apartment and discovers his fiancée being beaten and raped by thugs. Actor Michael Massee's character fires a handgun at Lee as he walks into the room. Proper blank cartridges were used during the fatal scene, however due to a mix up during earlier filming of gun close ups, a bullet had become lodged in the barrel without anyone noticing. Dummy cartridges had been improperly prepared and then accidentally fired, the primer charge driving the bullet part-way into the barrel, resulting in a squib load. In the fatal scene the explosive charge of the blank propelled the bullet lodged in the barrel as if the gun had been loaded with a live round, resulting in the fatal accident.
Lee's body was flown to Jacksonville, North Carolina, where an autopsy was performed. He was then flown to Seattle, Washington, where he was buried next to his father at Lakeview Cemetery, Seattle in a plot that Linda Lee Cadwell had originally reserved for herself. A private funeral took place in Seattle on April 3, 1993. Only close family and friends were permitted to attend, including Lee's immediate family as well as fiancée Eliza Hutton's parents and younger sister, who flew in from Missouri. The following day, 250 of Lee's family, friends and business associates attended a memorial service in Los Angeles, held at the house of actress Polly Bergen.
The gravestone, designed by North Snohomish County sculptor Kirk McLean, is a tribute to Lee and Hutton. Its two twisting rectangles of charcoal granite join at the bottom and pull apart at the top. "It represents Eliza and Brandon, the two of them, and how the tragedy of his death separated their mortal life together", said his mother, Linda Lee Cadwell, who described her son, like his father before him, as a poetic, romantic person.
Legacy.
After Lee's death, his fiancée Eliza Hutton and his mother supported director Alex Proyas' decision to complete "The Crow". At the time of Lee's death, only eight days were left before completion of the movie. A majority of the film had already been completed with Lee and only a few scenes remained to be done. To complete the film, stunt double Chad Stahelski, who was a friend of Lee's at Inosanto Academy, served as a stand-in; special effects were used to give him Lee's face. Another stunt double Jeff Cadiente was also used to complete Brandon's parts for the movie.
"The Crow" was released in May 1994 and became a box office hit, grossing over $50 million in the U.S., and retaining a loyal cult following many years after its release. The film is dedicated to Brandon and Eliza.
The quotation is not attributed to Bowles on his tombstone. The interview can be seen on VHS, DVD and Blu-ray releases of "The Crow".
At the time of his death, his father's biopic "" was ready for release. The film was released two months after Lee's death, with a dedication to his memory in the end credits. In the film, his father was portrayed by actor Jason Scott Lee (no relation).
Seven years after Lee's death, a direct-to-video Swedish film titled "Sex, Lögner & Videovåld" (Sex, Lies & Video Violence) was released in which Lee had a very brief cameo appearance. Lee had filmed his cameo appearance in 1992 at the time he was promoting "Rapid Fire" in Sweden, but the film was delayed for seven years before finally being released in 2000. It, too, was dedicated to Lee during the end credits.
