This is a list of Xbox 360 games that include co-operative gameplay.
Xbox 360 games list.
Arcade titles.
Arcade titles are available for download from Xbox Live Arcade. Most of these titles have a monetary cost.
'Splosion Man.
Official website
Retail titles.
Retail titles are those titles sold at retail stores or retail web sites. They are provided on DVD media, and are usually packaged in a plastic DVD case.
Call of Duty: World at War.
Call of Duty: World at War is a first-person shooter video game developed by Treyarch and published by Activision for Microsoft Windows, PlayStation 3, Wii, Xbox 360, Nintendo DS, and PlayStation 2. It is the fifth installment in the "Call of Duty" video game series, excluding spin-offs. The game is set in the Pacific theater and Eastern front of World War II. The game is scheduled to ship in North America on November 11, 2008, in Europe on November 14, 2008.
Call of Duty: Black Ops.
- 2 Players Split-screen
- 4 Players Split-screen dead ops arcade
- 2-4 players Systeme link
- 2-4 players Online
Dead Island.
This game offers system link co-op, and online co-op. 1-4 Players
Dungeon Siege III.
2 Player co-op
Online: 2-4 Co-op
Dynasty Warriors 5 Empires.
2 player co-op - local Xbox
Dynasty Warriors 6.
2 player co-operative in all game modes, split screen
Local co-op only
Dynasty Warriors 7.
2 player split screen
Fable III.
2 players co-op offline
F.E.A.R. 3.
2 player Split screen Co-op 
2 player online co-op
Gears of War 3.
4 player co-op locally or Live limited to two players on one screen. Can be played locally and with Live at the same time.
Halo 3.
"Halo 3"s story centers on the interstellar war between 26th century humanity, led by the United Nations Space Command, and a collection of alien races known as the Covenant. The player assumes the role of the Master Chief, a cybernetically enhanced supersoldier, as he wages war in defense of humanity, assisted by human Marines as well as allied alien Elites led by the Arbiter. The game features vehicles, weapons, and gameplay not present in previous titles of the series, as well as the addition of saved gameplay films, file sharing, and the Forge map editor; a utility which allows the player to perform modifications to levels. Overall, the game was well received by critics, with the Forge and multiplayer offerings singled out as strong features, as well as the customization of the player armor; on Game Rankings, "Halo 3" ranks as the sixth highest rated Xbox 360 game to date.
Halo 3: ODST.
"Halo 3: ODST" the sequel/expansion of Halo 3 focuses on a character known as "The Rookie" an ODST (Orbital Drop Shock Trooper) who lands in New Mombasa and is separated from his squad and must look for clues to find them, finding "beacons" which allows him to view flashbacks of his friends recorded on their equipment. On his mission he meets the covenant, a group of aliens bent on destroying the human race.
Halo Reach.
"Halo Reach" The game takes place in the year 2552, where humanity is locked in a war with the alien Covenant on the human colony of Reach weeks prior to the events of Halo: Combat Evolved. Players control Noble 6, a member of an elite supersoldier squad, during the battle for the world of Reach. As the Covenant begin their assault on the planet, the UNSC begin their heroic yet ultimately futile effort to halt the brutal alien invaders.
Rage.
Includes a separate local co-op campaign (Legends of the wasteland) of 9 exclusive maps. Playable at Normal or Nightmare difficulty.
Rock Band.
Four players can play any mode offline, but online players can only perform songs in quickplay.
Rock Band 2.
Up to four player career and quickplay modes, online and offline.
Rock Band 3.
Up to six player career and quickplay modes, online and offline.
Sacred 2: Fallen Angel.
2-players share-screen or Xbox live
Samurai Warriors.
Co-operative in all modes.
2-Player splitscreen.
Character selection is self-based.
Samurai Warriors 2 Empires.
Similar to Dynasty Warriors only set in feudal Japan rather than Ancient China.
co-op splitscreen 1-2 players
Character selection is story-based.
Saints Row 2.
Online/System link 2 Player co-op
The Simpsons Game.
Description: The Simpsons Game is a video game based on the animated television series "The Simpsons" and the 2007 film "The Simpsons Movie", made for the Wii, PlayStation 3, Xbox 360, PlayStation 2, Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable. Each version has an exclusive cover art. It is a third-person action game featuring an original storyline written by Tim Long, Matt Selman and Matt Warburton. The plot is self referential in nature, with the family discovering that they are forced to participate in another Simpsons video game. Similar to the show, the game pokes fun at popular culture, other video games and EA, its developer.
- co-op: 2 player (Same Screen - full story mode)
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon Advanced Warfighter.
Being a tactical shooter, similar to games like "America's Army", "Advanced Warfighter" places emphasis on using cover effectively in order to stay alive, together with sound strategic co-ordination to successfully complete mission objectives. "Advanced Warfighter" will allow new strategic situations to be planned and performed using original features. One such feature is the "Integrated Warfighter System". This system is based upon the Future Force Warrior program. Previously, in 2005, the XM8, a weapon designed in mind of the program and featured as the main battle rifle in game, was cancelled while still in its testing stage, making its induction into military service highly unlikely.
Tom Clancy's Ghost Recon Advanced Warfighter 2.
Toy Story 3 Xbox
Tom Clancy's HAWX.
Tom Clancy’s HAWX lets you become a pilot of the future; it is an awe-inspiring game primed to revolutionize the way you think about combat in the sky. Cutting-edge technology, devastating firepower, and intense dogfights bestow this new title a deserving place in the prestigious Tom Clancy franchise.
Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell: Conviction.
An investigation into his daughter's death unwittingly leads former agent Sam Fisher to discover he's been betrayed by his former agency, Third Echelon. Now a renegade, Fisher finds himself in a race against time to thwart a deadly terrorist plot that threatens millions.
Uniting revolutionary gameplay enhancements with a high-octane, no-holds-barred storyline, Tom Clancy's Splinter Cell Conviction arms you to the teeth with all the high-tech weaponry and lethal skills of an elite operative and invites you to enter a dangerous world where justice means making your own rules.
DENIABLE OPS MISSIONS
Tom Clancy’s Splinter Cell: Double Agent.
Originally the game was set for a March 2006 release, but Ubisoft moved the release date to September 2006 in order to have more development time. Ubisoft then released their fiscal quarter results for Q1 2006 and announced that Splinter Cell Double Agent would be put back at least one month in order to boost Q3 2006 income.
Too Human.
The player takes on the role of Baldur, one of the Aesir. In the ancient past, the Norse Gods truly existed, although only in the form of cybernetically enhanced humans. Baldur, son of Odin, is one of these gods and it is his duty to protect the human race from an onslaught of an advancing machine presence determined to eradicate all human life.
Unreal Tournament 3.
The latest edition. Fully online co-operative splitscreen and campaign.
Up!
Drop in and drop out co-op story.
Viva Pinata Trouble In Paradise.
Players build and maintain piñata gardens. The second player has access to all tools, actions and activities, but he or she also can collect magic by helping. Player two can spend magic by tinkering items, healing a sick piñata or filling a piñata candiosity meter.
Warriors Orochi.
Similar to Dynasty Warriors and Samurai Warriors. In fact this is a combination of both titles with all officers from both series.
Warriors Orochi 2.
Sequel to Warriors Orochi. Unique characters added that were not in Dynasty Warriors or Samurai Warriors. Has an original storyline and several modes of play.
Backwards Compatible original Xbox games.
Retail Titles.
Doom 3.
"Doom 3" is set in the year 2145 in a fictional Union Aerospace Corporation (UAC) research center on Mars. In the game, the player takes control of a UAC security replacement marine as he fights to survive a mysterious invasion of inter-dimensional demons. In the process, the marine learns more about the nature of the shadowy research being conducted within the massive base, as well as information on its main instigator, Dr. Malcolm Betruger.
Lord of the Rings : Third Age.
Main article : 
