Student of the Year is a 2012 Indian romantic comedy film directed by Karan Johar and produced by Hiroo Yash Johar under the banner of Dharma Productions and Gauri Khan under the banner of Red Chillies Entertainment. It features newcomers Sidharth Malhotra, Alia Bhatt and Varun Dhawan in the lead roles with Rishi Kapoor, Sana Saeed, Ronit Roy, Ram Kapoor and Farida Jalal in supporting ones. The movie also features Boman Irani, Kajol, Farah Khan and Vaibhavi Merchant in guest appearances.
"Student of the Year" was released on 19 October 2012 in over 1400 screens across India and garnered positive to mixed reviews from critics and good box office collections. Boxofficeindia.com declared it a 'semi hit' after its three-week run.
Plot.
The plot begins with the dean Yogindra Vashisht (Rishi Kapoor) being hospitalized and students from his favorite batch re-uniting to meet him. The story is henceforth told through them reminiscing their past in St. Teresa College. 
The two main characters, Rohan "Ro" Nanda (Varun Dhawan), the son of a business tycoon, Ashok Nanda(Ram Kapoor), grapples with a complex relationship with his father and knows that winning the Student Of the Year trophy will bag him the approval that he subconsciously craves for. Abhimanyu "Abhi" Singh (Sidharth Malhotra) comes from a middle-class family, is there on a scholarship, and wants to achieve great heights of success and prosperity; the first step to which will be the Student of the Year trophy. When the two main protagonists with distinct backgrounds and clear goals clash with each other in the locker room, football field and the canteen, there is no question in anyone's mind that the preset equations of the St. Teresa's campus are about to change.
When Abhi and Rohan’s rivalry takes an unexpected turn to friendship, neither pre-empts the complications that would brew. Things are further knotted up when Shanaya Singhania (Alia Bhatt), the most popular girl on the campus, enters the equation. While Shanaya and Rohan are childhood sweethearts, Abhi’s attraction for his best friend’s girlfriend and Shanaya’s quiet reciprocation causes a rift in their friendship that would have a long lasting impact. Tanya, lover of Rohan, brings Abhi and Shanaya together and Rohan apart from Shanaya. Shruti, Shanaya's best friend, makes these relationships more clear. Looming large over the various friendships in the campus is the Student Of The Year trophy and Dean Yogendra Vasisht’s emphasis on success and victory. Towards the end of the term, Abhi is caught kissing Shanaya by Rohan, and the two fight this out. The foes-turned-friends-turned foes, Abhi and Rohan, are ready for a face-off and battle lines are drawn through the length and breadth of the campus, with only one goal in everyone’s eyes --– the Student Of The Year trophy. As new ambitions are born and old loyalties fall by the wayside, each segment of the Student Of The Year competition manages to tear apart both the participants and the spectators to redefine the choices of the three protagonists.
In the end, it is seen that Shanaya has married Abhi. It is revealed that Abhi let Rohan win because Rohan's father could be brought down that way. Rohan did not accept the trophy on the prize distribution for this reason. Even later, Rohan and Abhi are shown in the stadium going for a race again for fun. The competition did not put a full stop to their friendship.
Production.
Development.
On 5 January 2011, Karan Johar uploaded the first look poster of the new film on the micro-blogging website Twitter. "Student of the Year" marks the debuts of Alia Bhatt, the daughter of filmmaker Mahesh Bhatt, Varun Dhawan, the son of director David Dhawan, Siddharth Malhotra, Boman Irani's son Kayoze Irani and "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" fame Sana Saeed (role of "Anjali" as the daughter of Shah Rukh Khan and Rani Mukerji).
Malhotra and Dhawan had previously worked as assistant directors under Johar during the making of the 2010 film "My Name Is Khan". Rishi Kapoor played a gay dean.
The first official trailer was released on 2 August 2012. Karan Johar later tweeted saying that the film will be released on 19 October 2012.
Filming.
On 16 August 2011, director Karan Johar took the Mahurat shot, and famous Mumbai socialite Parmeshwar Godrej rolled the cameras. Some parts of the movie were shot in Kashmir and Dehradun (Forest Research Institute, Dehradun). The external view of the school was taken from Kasiga School, Dehradun whose name was changed to St. Teresa. Rob Miller of ReelSports, who had worked with Shahrukh Khan on "Chak De India", was hired to direct the sports action in "Student of the Year".
Marketing.
The film targeted viewers with contest-based marketing. Stressing ‘competition’ which would make up for a significant part of the movie, contests such as 'Nano Student of the Year', ‘The Buddy of the Year’ and ‘FedEx International Student of the Year’ were launched targeting students across the country. 
Tata Motors, on-ground promotion partner for the movie, launched the ‘Nano Student of the Year’ contest for all college students in India. In the first round, students were judged on four parameters namely academics, culture, sports and social life. The top eight finalists would compete for the ‘Nano Student of the Year’ title. The contest has been running across India since mid-September 2012. 
The production house recently tied up with FedEx Express announcing a special ‘FedEx Student Offer’ and launch of ‘FedEx International Student of the Year’ campaign. It was aimed at individuals in India applying for higher education abroad. "Student of the Year" was promoted across non-fiction properties such as "Kaun Banega Crorepati" on Sony Entertainment Television and "Jhalak Dikhla Jaa" and "Bigg Boss" on Colors. Radio stations such as Red FM, Radio City, Big FM were been used for the promotion of the film and its music.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack is composed by Vishal-Shekhar with the lyrics penned by Anvita Dutt Guptan, Sayeed Quadri and Javed Akhtar.
Critical reception.
The music album of "Student of the Year" received positive critical response.
Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave the album 4/5 stars, saying that ""Student Of The Year" is a winner all the way with Vishal Shekhar (yet again) justifying their stance of doing a few films but lending quality sound to it. They create the kind of score which totally compliments the mood of the campus setting without straying even once." IANS of CNN-IBN gave the album 4/5 stars, concluding that "The soundtrack of "Student Of The Year" is a good mix with very minor flaws that can surely be ignored to enjoy the music that perfectly describes the mood of the movie." Satyajit of Yahoo! gave the album 3.5/5 stars, stating that ""Student Of The Year" is complete youthful musical entertainment, an album that brings all the positive elements of a typical Karan Johar entertainer. Vishal Shekhar delivers a potential winner this time."
Release.
Critical reception.
Upon release,"Student Of The Year" received positive to mixed reviews from critics. 
Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave 4/5 stars, saying that ""Student Of The Year" is a love story that traverses the trodden path. But KJo is an artisan with intellect and taste and he ensures that the script is spruced up and modernized with such elan that it doesn't offend the spectator's wisdom or intelligence. The accomplished director takes on familiar material and gives it an entirely new twirl. This is escapist cinema at its best! On the whole, "Student Of The Year" is amongst Karan Johar's most accomplished works. The youth brigade would love it and those who have already past that age would want to revisit those days. This one's entertainment, entertainment and entertainment at its best. Clearly, KJo has a winner on hands, yet again!" Madhureeta Mukherjee of "The Times of India" gave the film 3.5/5 stars, stating that ""Student Of The Year" takes you back to your books and sinks you in true-blue Bollywood syllabus, following the 'formula' - Two boys, one girl, one glorious trophy and lots of testosterone. It is larger-than-life, colorful, lavish, beautifully shot and directed. With medleys, dance, drama and everything good-looking (from cast to couches, dorms to discos)."
Rajeev Masand of "IBNLive" gave it 3 out of 5 stars and wrote, "Nitpickings aside, this is a breezy, enjoyable film by a director who knows his craft." He remarked, "If fun is what you’re seeking, you won't be disappointed." Giving the film 3 out of 5 stars, Anupama Chopra of "Hindustan Times" wrote, "Karan Johar's forte is excess. He creates fantastical worlds brimming with beautiful people and expensive things and yet anchors them in high emotion. His films work as both designer porn and soap opera." She also praised the performance of the cast. Sukanya Verma of "Rediff" gave 3/5 stars, commenting that ""Student Of The Year" is no "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" but Karan Johar makes it look good." Rubina A Khan of "The First Post" gave the film 3/5 stars, stating that ""Student Of The Year" is not KJo's finest work. Sure, it’s got all the elements of finesse and expansive production values that his films are known for, but he has also been very pivotal in directing and producing films with engaging stories in the past." Kanika Sikka of "DNA India" gave 2.5/5 stars, concluding that ""Student Of The Year" is not something you would want to miss if the surreal setting with bubble gum romance is your calling. The performances make this film a great watch." Saibal Chatterjee of "NDTV" gave the film 2.5/5 stars, commenting that ""Student Of The Year" definitely isn't the film of the year. But if you like your entertainment to be served up with glitzy but pulpy garnishing, pirouette your way to the nearest screen by all means." Ananya Bhattacharya of "Zee News" gave the film 2/5 stars, saying that ""Student Of The Year" is worth a watch only for the debutantes. They have really pulled off a tough task of playing praiseworthy roles in a film which suffers from the lack-of-a-story syndrome."
Controversy.
The song ‘Radha’ has stirred up a legal controversy regarding the use of an “objectionable” term against a Hindu deity. The Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class-Mumbai, Santosh Prasad Shukla issued an order to register a case against filmmaker Karan Johar, singer Shreya Ghoshal, producer Gauri Khan, music directors Vishal Shekhar, singer Udit Narayan, lyricist Anvita Dutta, and Sony Music Company among others for using objectionable words against a Hindu deity. The Indore police lodged the case in compliance with a magisterial court’s order on a private complaint by an NGO, Shrivision Social Empowerment and Welfare Association. The NGO had approached the court with a private complaint last month, alleging that the song in the film refers to the mythological figure Radha as sexy. BJP leader Sushma Swaraj was also not happy with the "Radha.." song and told that it hurts Hindu beliefs while she was addressing a function of RSS.
Box office.
India.
"Student of the Year" had a good opening at multiplexes while little lower at single screens due to limited release where it had collected on its opening day. The film showed a little growth on its second day and collected nett. "Student of the Year" collected a decent figure of around at the end of its first weekend. It did very well and collected nett in its first week. The film had a moderate second weekend where it earned around nett. "Student of the Year" had a drop in its second and third week where it had collected and respectively to make a total of in three weeks. 
As per the latest updates, "Student of the Year" stands at an all India collection of after four weeks run at the box office.
Overseas.
"Student Of The Year" released in 300 screens and collected $1.25 million, which was termed "below the mark" as Dharma Productions is considered one of the big brands of Hindi cinema. It collected around $1.85 million in ten days. The film fell in the second week in most markets. "Student of the Year" closed on around $2.25 million in overseas markets, at the end of theatrical run.
Home Media.
A two disc DVD set was released on 24 December 2012.
