Vicky Donor is a 2012 Bollywood romantic comedy film directed by Shoojit Sircar and produced by actor John Abraham. The film stars Ayushmann Khurrana, Yami Gautam and Annu Kapoor in the lead roles. 
It released on April 20, 2012 in around 750 screens across India, and received positive response worldwide. The film opened strongly at the box office and was declared a "Super Hit" by Box Office India. The storyline is based on the concept of sperm donation and infertility.
Plot.
The story is about Dr. Baldev Chaddha (Annu Kapoor), a fertility expert, who runs a fertility clinic and a sperm bank in Daryaganj, Delhi, that guarantees high quality and specialized sperm for the couples without issue. Unfortunately, he has more failed cases to his credit than successes. A healthy and high-performing donor is therefore need of the hour. While searching for his 'Indian Alexander', Chaddha bumps into Vicky Arora (Ayushmann Khurrana). Vicky is the only son of his widowed mother Dolly, who runs a small parlour from their home in Lajpat Nagar. He provides no financial support to her.
As luck would have it, a small brawl in the colony brings Chaddha and Vicky face to face, where Chaddha concludes that Vicky could be the donor he has been looking for. From here on, Chaddha's days and nights are spent in convincing Vicky to become a donor until he finally gives in. Vicky falls in love with Ashima Roy (Yami Gautam), a Bengali who works in a bank. Despite initial rivalry between Vicky and Ashima's families due to conflicting cultures, they eventually convince their families and get happily married. It is discovered in the progress that Ashima is infertile and Vicky, with a heavy heart, takes better care of her. Soon their world comes crashing down because of Vicky's past as a sperm donor, which Ashima can not digest. She moves back to her father's house at Kolkata. For the 25th anniversary of Chaddha's clinic, Vicky convinces Ashima to attend. On the day, all the children who were born out of Vicky's sperm are present (Dr. Chaddha says that there are total 53 children from Vicky's sperm), and Ashima realises that Vicky was responsible for the happiness brought to the parents of these children. In the end, they adopt a child who was sired by Vicky but whose foster parents have since died in an accident. Vicky and Ashima reunite and live happily.
Also, Dr. Chaddha convinces Vicky to donate his sperm for one last time.
Production.
Themes and development.
"Vicky Donor" deals with the concept of sperm donation and infertility. When questioned about the risky subject matter, Abraham responded "Basically, "Vicky Donor" is a romantic comedy. But the concept is set against the background of sperm donation." Abraham hoped that the film could shed light on a serious issue still considered "taboo" in Indian society. Sircar said, "I want to take a light-hearted look at the taboo attached to infertility and artificial insemination". Before filming began, Sircar researched upon the plot themes for three years. Juhi Chaturvedi, who wrote film's screenplay based on her own idea, had previously stayed in Lajpat Nagar as a student at College of Arts, Delhi. As the script went through several drafts, she also met a couple who run a noted fertility clinic in Mumbai.
Production.
Despite the usual trend, Abraham did not take up the leading role in the film: "It was a conscious decision to not act in my first production because I believe producing a film is about creating quality content that I believe in." Director Sircar suggested Khurrana, a video jockey and television host, for the role of Vicky; he was considered because he was popular among the youth. I can read and write in it too." Khurrana turned down three film projects to play the lead in "Vicky Donor". To prepare for the role, he met several medical experts and donors to understand the concept of sperm donation; a major medical consultant specializing in the field was later inducted as a medical adviser for the film. Additionally, Khurrana studied acting and attended workshops with N.K. Sharma in Delhi. It was later reported that Abraham would perform an "item number" in the film. Commenting on the lead's performance, Abraham said "I am glad I cast Ayushmann in the lead. He's a complete natural, has all the trappings of a fine actor and has delivered a super performance. It doesn't seem like "Vicky Donor" is his first film." It was reported that the film's production crew would feature "the best technicians from Los Angeles", and acclaimed action choreographer J J Perry. Incidentally, Ayushmann who plays the lead role, successfully performed a task on the reality show "MTV Roadies: Season 2", which was sperm donation.
Reception.
Critical reception.
"Vicky Donor" received overwhelmingly positive reviews from various top critics of India. Blessy Chettiar of "DNA India" rated it with 4 stars and said – "Run to the nearest theatre and surrender yourself to the charm of Vicky and his team. This “Aryaputra” provides only good quality entertainment." Writing for FilmiTadka, Janhavi Patel gave it 4 out of 5 stars and wrote in her review – ""Vicky Donor" is one of the funniest movies in recent times and the most enjoyable cinematic experience you will have in a long time. It proves that an adult comedy can be made with class, ingenuity, and finesse. You can easily watch this twice!". Madhureeta Mukherjee of "The Times of India" gave "Vicky Donor" 3.5 stars and said – "It takes a man to make a film like this, literally. Kudos to John Abraham for his brave maiden production. Thankfully, this sperm hits bullseye." Mathures Paul of the "The Statesman" gave the film 3.5 stars and wrote, ""Vicky Donor" is an admirable movie that is at once simple, emotional, daring and in your face."
Box office.
India.
The film had an excellent opening at the box office worldwide and collected on first day in India. "Vicky Donor" showed good growth on Saturday as all India collections jumped around 35–40% and the film collected around nett taking its two day business to nett. The film got tough competition from "Housefull 2" and "Hate Story" in its first week of theatrical run in India. "Vicky Donor" is the 3rd small-budgetted film of 2012 after "Paan Singh Tomar" and "Kahaani" to receive such an acceptance by critics, multiplex goers and urban audience. It grossed nett on Sunday. "Vicky Donor" had a decent 3-day weekend as it grossed around nett over its first weekend. It had a good first week of around nett. "Vicky Donor" had an excellent second week collecting around nett taking its two week total to around nett. "Vicky Donor" continued its strong run into the third week and totally grossed and was declared a Super Hit.
Overseas.
The film had a reasonably wide release with close to 125 prints and grossed a decent $350,000 overseas in 4 days. It has done well in North America and decently in other markets. It was declared a "semi hit" in overseas markets.
Grosses are as followings:</ref>
Sequel and Remakes.
After the major critical and commercial success of the film, producer John Abraham announced that he was encouraged by the response of "Vicky Donor", and has therefore laid a sequel on the cards, which is expected to go on floors in mid 2013. Also, Indian actor Siddharth bought the remake rights of the film for the Tamil and Telugu version. Dileep has bought the remake rights as well, for the Malayalam version.
Awards.
Juhi Chaturvedi was Awarded the IRDS Film award for social concern for her story 
Ayushman Khurana won the Filmfare Award for Best Playback (Male) Singer and the Critic's Award for The Best Actor.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack of the film has been composed by Abhishek-Akshay, Bann, Rochak Kohli Ayushmann Khurrana. The album was released on April 9, 2012.
Vicky Donor album tracks are worth listening and contain rawness.The album received high positive reviews from critics and audience and the song Pani Da Rang was a high critical and commercial success especially among the youth and was ranked 8th a, song top 100 songs of 2012 and won Filmfare Award for Best Male Playback Singer at 58th Filmfare Awards.
