Hart of Dixie is an American comedy-drama television series that premiered on The CW on September 26, 2011. The series, created by Leila Gerstein, stars Rachel Bilson as Dr. Zoe Hart, who after her dreams of becoming a heart surgeon fall apart, accepts an offer to work in a small medical practice in Bluebell, Alabama.
Synopsis.
Season 1.
Fast-talking New Yorker and brand new doctor Zoe Hart has it all figured out—after graduating top of her class from medical school, she'll follow in her father's footsteps and become a cardio-thoracic surgeon. But when her dreams fall apart, Zoe decides to accept an offer from a stranger, Dr. Harley Wilkes, to work with him at his small practice in Bluebell, Alabama. Zoe arrives in this small Gulf Coast town only to find that Harley has passed away and left his half of the medical practice to her in his will.
She quickly finds that Southern hospitality isn't always so hospitable—the other doctor in town, Brick Breeland, is less than pleased to be sharing the practice with this young outsider, and his daughter, Lemon, is a Southern belle whose sweet disposition turns sour when she meets Zoe. Zoe's only allies are the mayor, former football star Lavon Hayes, her bad-boy neighbor Wade Kinsella, and handsome lawyer George Tucker – who just happens to be Lemon's fiance. Zoe is out of her element and ready to pack her bags, but a surprise visit by her snobby New York mother leads to Zoe's decision to stay in Bluebell for a while, discovering small-town life and a side of herself she didn't know was there.
Season 2.
The second season opens with Zoe confused over her conflicting feelings for both George and Wade. Zoe decides that George is not ready for a relationship and so starts seeing Wade.
Production.
On February 1, 2011, it was announced that The CW had ordered a pilot for "Hart of Dixie". On May 17, the network officially picked up "Hart of Dixie" to series, set to air in fall 2011. The series marks the second time executive producer, Josh Schwartz, and series star, Rachel Bilson, have worked together on television. The first time the duo worked together was on the Fox teen drama "The O.C.", created by Schwartz. The show's executive producer, Josh Schwartz, compared the show to WB classics such as "Felicity", "Everwood", and "Gilmore Girls".
With the reveal of The CW's fall 2011 schedule, it was announced that "Hart of Dixie" would air on Monday at 9:00 pm Eastern/8:00 pm Central, following "Gossip Girl". It premiered on Monday, September 26, 2011. On October 12, 2011 the series was picked up for a full season, which will consist of twenty-two episodes. Along with pick-up for all other CW dramas, Mark Pedowitz said "We believe in the creative strength of these dramas, and by giving them back nine orders we can give our audience the chance to enjoy complete seasons of all three of them." On May 11, 2012, The CW renewed the show for a second season, which premiered on October 2, 2012.
Casting.
On February 8, 2011, TV Line reported that Rachel Bilson was nearing a deal to star in the series. Her role was later confirmed by The CW in a press release. Soon after, Wilson Bethel joined the cast as Wade Kinsella, Zoe's "gorgeous bad-boy" neighbor. Scott Porter was later cast as good-looking lawyer George Tucker, a potential love-interest for Bilson's character.
On May 20, 2011, it was announced that Nancy Travis would not continue with the series due to her commitments with the 20th Century Fox-produced ABC sitcom "Last Man Standing". Travis was written out after the first two episodes. Meredith Monroe appeared in one episode as Lemon's estranged mother.JoBeth Williams appeared in two episodes as Candice Hart, the mother of Bilson's character.
Reception.
Critical reception.
The show has received mixed reviews including a 43 out of 100 from Metacritic.
TVGuide.com described the show as ""Southern Exposure"" and, in a later review, stated that the actors are better than the "cutesy" material, although Bilson is not convincing as a heart surgeon. Both TVGuide.com and Robert Bianco of "USA Today" stated that the show is potentially offensive to the South. Bianco also wrote that the show is shallow and far-fetched, with Bilson giving an unconvincing performance, such as acting surprised when calling herself a doctor. Tim Goodman of "The Hollywood Reporter" stated that the series is predictable and superficial, but "surprisingly touching". Goodman and Brian Lowry of "Variety" stated that Bilson does not look like a doctor, with Goodman writing that she looked too much "like a high-priced call girl" and Lowry writing that she looked like she belonged in "Barbie's medical dream house."
Writing for "The New York Times", critic Neil Genzlinger wrote, "...the premiere, at least, doesn’t find a convincing way to balance the clashing strands: the city-mouse disorientation, the medical emergencies, the girlfights, the daddy issues, the young-pretty-and-available stuff." "Los Angeles Times" reviewer Mary McNamara described the show as, "a stack of familiar scenarios stitched together to form a pretty if not terribly substantial quilt." TVLine described the show as ""Everwood"-esque". TVLine later said: "Beautifully filmed with warm, cozy tones, the Southern setting utterly envelops the glowing Bilson", adding that Porter's appearance "wins us over and makes you forget that clunky intro" and despite the "rom-coms clichés, the pilot is super-efficient at introducing us to those who will be the key players in Zoe’s story, laying the framework for storytelling places to go." "Tv Times" magazine gave "Hart of Dixie" its lowest score of 2011–2012: 12 out of 100.
International broadcasts.
! Country
! Network(s)
! Series premiere
! Timeslot
