Richard "Ricky" Lynn Stenhouse, Jr. (born October 2, 1987) is an American racing driver in NASCAR. He is a rookie competitor in the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, driving the #17 Best Buy / Zest / Fifth Third Bank Ford Fusion for Roush Fenway Racing in the Sprint Cup Series. Stenhouse was the 2010 Nationwide Series Rookie of the Year and won back-to-back Nationwide Series championships in 2011 and 2012 driving the #6 Ford Mustang.
Career.
Early career.
Stenhouse began racing stock cars in ARCA in 2008 for Roush Fenway Racing. On May 10, 2008, in only his sixth race in a stock car, Stenhouse, Jr. won his first ARCA RE/MAX Series event at the Drive Smart! Buckle Up Kentucky 150 at Kentucky Speedway in Sparta, Kentucky. He had two wins in 21 races and finished fourth in the season ranking as a rookie.
NASCAR.
For 2009, he began competing in partial schedule in the Nationwide Series at events that conflicted with the Sprint Cup schedule. He had his first Top 10 finish at Kentucky Speedway when he finished ninth. At the following race in Milwaukee, he led 46 laps in the later stages of the race and finished fifth.
2010 was an up and down year for Stenhouse. After crashing out of four out of the first ten races of the season, Stenhouse was replaced by Brian Ickler for three races and Billy Johnson drove at Watkins Glen. After taking on veteran Mike Kelly as crew chief, Stenhouse immediately responded with a third place finish at Daytona. He proceeded to take seven top tens and was locked in a tight battle for Rookie of the Year (ROTY) with Brian Scott. With Scott struggling after his release from Turner Motorsports, Stenhouse took the ROTY award after a fourth place finish at Homestead.
On May 22, 2011, Stenhouse held off charges from Carl Edwards and Brad Keselowski for the final 18 laps to claim his first win in the John Deere Dealers 250 at Iowa Speedway, his 51st start in the Nationwide Series.
Stenhouse made his Sprint Cup Series debut at the 2011 Coca-Cola 600 substituting for fellow Roush teammate Trevor Bayne. Ricky finished 11th in the Wood Brothers Racing entry.
Stenhouse had dominated the Kroger 200 Nationwide Series race at Lucas Oil Raceway before being passed by Brad Keselowski late in the race. Stenhouse took his second Nationwide win at Iowa in August, again holding off teammate Carl Edwards, but in a more bizarre fashion as Stenhouse's engine blew coming off of turn 4. Edwards subsequently rear ended his teammate, pushing him across the line to the win.
At the end of the 2011 season, having scored sixteen top-five finishes, Stenhouse won the Nationwide Series championship by 45 points over Elliot Sadler.
Stenhouse drove the No. 6 Sprint Cup Series car for Roush Fenway Racing in the 2012 Daytona 500, finishing 20th.
In the Nationwide Series the previous day, Stenhouse had been caught up in a 10-car wreck on the final lap of the series' season-opening event; a week later he finished 3rd at Phoenix, while a week after that Stenhouse won his first race of 2012 at Las Vegas, winning the Sam's Town 300, holding off Mark Martin to take the checkered flag; he would win races at Texas Motor Speedway and Iowa Speedway before suffering a run of bad luck starting at Charlotte Motor Speedway. Stenhouse would score 3 more victories at Atlanta, Charlotte, and a miraculous victory in Kansas, coming back from a 2-lap deficit when he was tagged in a wreck with Joey Logano before leader Kyle Busch ran out gas heading into the final turn. A late caution extended the race by six laps, and it ran the fuel tanks dry of several cars at the front of the field.
Read More: http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/2012/racing/10/20/kansas-nationwide-ricky-stenhouse-jr.ap/index.html#ixzz2CdYNuJFX
. He once again held off Sadler to take his second consecutive Nationwide Series championship.
On June 26, 2012, Roush Fenway Racing announced that Stenhouse will drive the No. 17 car in the Sprint Cup Series full-time for 2013, replacing Matt Kenseth. Trevor Bayne is expected to replace Stenhouse in the Nationwide No. 6 car for 2013.
To prepare for the 2013 season, Ricky Stenhouse Jr. has run in the AAA 400 at Dover International Speedway where he finished 12th, the Bank of America 500 at Charlotte Motor Speedway where he finished 35th because of engines problems; but he was running near the front of the field. He lastly ran in the Ford 400 at Homestead-Miami Speedway in which bad luck struck again-he cut a tire and smacked the wall, similar to what happened to Marcos Ambrose two races before, in Texas. In all of these races he is going to run in the No. 6 car of Roush Fenway Racing sponsored by Cargill, Best Buy, and Fifth Third Bank respectively.
Personal life.
On January 25, 2013, Danica Patrick said she was dating the two-time Nationwide Champion, NASCAR competitor, and rival for 2013 Rookie of the Year..
