Shahid Kapoor (born 25 February 1981) is an Indian actor who appears in Bollywood films. He is also a trained dancer. 
Starting off his career by working in music videos and advertisements, Kapoor made his Bollywood debut as a background dancer in Subhash Ghai's "Taal" (1999). Four years later, he made his acting debut in "Ishq Vishk" (2003) and won a Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut for his performance. Following through with films like "Fida" (2004) and "Shikhar" (2005), he had his first major commercial success with Sooraj R. Barjatya's "Vivah" (2006), his biggest commercial success, and followed it up with "Jab We Met" (2007) and "Kaminey" (2009), both of which earned him Best Actor nominations at the Filmfare ceremony.
Early life.
Kapoor was born to actor Pankaj Kapoor and actor/classical dancer Neelima Azeem on 25 February 1981. Kapoor's parents divorced when he was 3. After the divorce, he lived with his mother and maternal grandparents in Junaghad. He shared a good relationship with his father and stepmother Supriya Pathak. As far as his religious affiliation is concerned, Kapoor has stated in an interview that while his father is a Punjabi Hindu and his mother is a Muslim, both his parents have taught him that he "should look at all religions without hatred and have compassion for every human being whatever his religion may be," saying that he believes that "there is one God up above." 
As a child, he studied in Rajhans Vidyalaya, Mumbai. He has three half siblings: a sister named Sana and brothers named Ruhaan and Ishaan Khattar; Ishaan acted with him in the movie "Vaah! Life Ho To Aisi" (2005). His maternal grandfather was Anwar Azeem, a noted Marxist journalist and author from Bihar. His great great grandfather was the film director, screenwriter, Urdu novelist and journalist Khwaja Ahmad Abbas more popularly known as K. A. Abbas. His mother Neelima is the daughter of Anwar Azeem, one of the greatest Urdu writers. K.A. Abbas in turn was the grandson of Hali, the chief protégé of Urdu poet, Ghalib.
Career.
Early career, until 2005.
Before starting off his career as an actor, Kapoor worked in several music videos and ads, including the Pepsi commercial with Shahrukh Khan, Kajol and Rani Mukerji post "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" (1998) and the music video "Aankhon Me Tera Hi Chehra" by the Aryans along with Hrishitaa Bhatt. While doing so, he decided to join the Shiamak Davar Institute for the Performing Arts (SDIPA), where he was later seen in Subhash Ghai's film "Taal" (1999) as a background dancer in the song "Kahin Aag Lage Lag Jawe" along with actress Aishwarya Rai.
In 2003, Kapoor played his first leading role as Rajiv Mathur, a carefree young man in Ken Ghosh's moderately successful love story "Ishq Vishk". Appearing opposite Amrita Rao and Shenaz Treasurywala, the film was well received by audiences and Kapoor's performance earned him a Filmfare Best Male Debut Award. Film critic Taran Adarsh from "indiaFM" wrote, "Shahid Kapoor is an actor to watch. He has all the qualities to hit the top slot. Not only is he good looking, but he is an amazing performer as well. Very original as a performer , the youngster has handled the dramatic and emotional moments with flourish. He is an exceptional dancer as well. All he needs to do is pick and choose his forthcoming assignments with care, so that the journey to the top slot is minus hiccups."
The following year, Kapoor joined once again with director Ken Ghosh in the thriller "Fida", where he co-starred alongside Kareena Kapoor and Fardeen Khan. The film failed to do well at the box office, yet Kapoor's performance was praised. "The Tribune" concluded, "...Shahid Kapoor shines in his role. He looks fresh. As an impulsive emotional and innocent guy, who is sucked into crime because of these very qualities, he manages to evoke your sympathies." He then appeared in the romantic comedy "Dil Maange More" opposite Soha Ali Khan, Tulip Joshi, and Ayesha Takia. His performance opened to mixed reviews; Rediff.com wrote that "Shahid tends to imitate Shahrukh Khan a lot. He does it well in some scenes, overdoes it in others..."
Featuring in three more films in 2005, success continued to elude Kapoor. However, his performance as Jaidev Vardhan, a man who is sucked into the world of money and greed in John M. Matthan's drama "Shikhar" was critically acclaimed, earning Kapoor his first Star Screen Award for Best Actor nomination. According to "IndiaFM", "Shahid Kapoor is only improving with every film. He matches up to Ajay in almost all sequences."
Breakthrough, 2006–09.
In 2006, Kapoor starred in "36 China Town". Revolving around the story of seven individuals and a murder, the film became a moderate success despite receiving mixed reviews from critics. Shortly after the release of the film, Kapoor's second release of the year, Priyadarshan's comedy "Chup Chup Ke", followed. The film became a moderate success at the box office.
Kapoor's last release of 2006 was Sooraj R. Barjatya's romantic drama "Vivah", a film depicting the journey of two individuals from engagement to marriage. Co-starring alongside Amrita Rao, the film was received favourably by most critics and became one of the highest grossing films of the year as well as Kapoor's second biggest commercial success to date. Kapoor's performance earned his second consecutive nomination for "Best Actor" at the Star Screen Awards. Taran Adarsh wrote, "Shahid Kapoor performs like never before. If he was super-cool in "Ishq Vishk" and showed flashes of brilliance in "Fida", you've to watch him in "Vivah" to see his growth as a tremendous actor. He is exceptional in emotional sequences."
During the summer of 2006, Kapoor embarked on his first world tour, the "Rockstars Concert", along with Bollywood stars, Salman Khan, Kareena Kapoor, John Abraham, Esha Deol, Mallika Sherawat and Zayed Khan.
In 2007, Kapoor appeared in two movies. His first release was Ahmed Khan's "Fool and Final". The film received negative reviews and failed to do well at the box office; Kapoor's performance in the film did not receive positive reviews. His next release, Imtiaz Ali's comedy-romance "Jab We Met", opposite Kareena Kapoor, became one of the biggest hits of the year. The film tells the story of two people with two very different personalities meeting each other on a train and how they fall in love eventually. Kapoor portrayed the character of Aditya Kashyap, a dejected young industrialist full of angst and despair. The film was well-received by critics and Kapoor's performance earned him several nominations for Best Actor at a number of award ceremonies, including Filmfare. Rajeev Masand from "CNN-IBN" noted, "Despite the risk of being overshadowed by Kareena, his co-star in the film, Shahid Kapur leaves an indelible impression with a performance that is understated and mature, and indeed the perfect foil to Kareena's boisterousness." Kapoor then appeared in the Aziz Mirza-directed film, "Kismat Konnection" (2008), opposite Vidya Balan. Upon release, the film under-performed at the box office.
In 2009, Kapoor portrayed the dual role of twins Charlie and Guddu in the caper thriller, "Kaminey". Directed by Vishal Bhardwaj, the film was a critical and commercial success and received mostly positive reviews. Kapoor's performance was also critically acclaimed. Rajeev Masand from "CNN-IBN" wrote, "Shahid Kapur rises to the challenge of creating two entirely different characters out of Charlie and Guddu, and delivers a credible performance as each. Breaking out of his chocolate-boy image, he gives evidence of his potential when trusted with well-written roles." Later in the year, Kapoor appeared alongside Rani Mukerji in Anurag Singh's romantic comedy "Dil Bole Hadippa!", which failed to do well at the Indian box office.
Recent work, 2010-present.
In 2010, Kapoor appeared in Ken Ghosh's film "Chance Pe Dance" opposite Genelia D'Souza, in which he portrayed the role of a struggling Bollywood actor. The movie received poor review from critics, but Kapoor's performance was well received. He then starred in Ahmed Khan's "Paathshala" in a extended cameo alongside Ayesha Takia and Nana Patekar. This was then followed by Yash Raj Films "Badmaash Company" which was released on 7 May 2010 and opened mixed to positive reviews and was an above average success at the box office and his performance in the film was received well too. His last release of the year was the long delayed Satish Kaushik's "Milenge Milenge". 
In 2011, Kapoor appeared opposite Sonam Kapoor in "Mausam" (2011), a movie directed and written by Pankaj Kapoor. The film received mixed to positive response from critics, however his performance was generally well received. Critic Taran Adarsh wrote, "Shahid gives his all to this role, submitting himself to his director-father to mould him the way he chooses to. It won't be erroneous to state that Shahid surpasses all his previous performances, including the one in "Kaminey", with this film. The film also marks the coming of age of this actor." 
In June 2012, Kapoor appeared in Kunal Kohli's "Teri Meri Kahaani". The film was released on June 22, 2012, to mixed to positive reviews from top critics. However, Kapoor's performance was generally well received. Taran Adarsh of BollywoodHungama gave a positive review to Kapoor's performance stating, "Not many actors get the opportunity to portray three diverse roles in a single movie. But Shahid carries each of those parts with refinement, besides looking debonair in each character. There is no quizzing his performing abilities either. He pulls the act with effortlessness and panache. As a matter of fact, whenever Shahid has attempted something diverse, the results have been luminous. From playing a musician in Bollywood to a compulsive flirt in Punjab to the unflustered and trendy youngster settled in U.K., Shahid does an exceptional job. Among the three characters, his take as Javed is sure to win him accolades." Sonia Chopra of Sify.com noted, "Shahid Kapoor is so good in the film, he’s sure to increase his fan-following several fold. He’s excellent in each of the stories, and one can imagine viewers debating on where he was the best." Madhureeta Mukherjee of Times Of India also gave a positive review and said, "Shahid Kapoor is best as the badnaam shayar Javed. He uses his boyish charm effectively, dancing like the wind (in Uff and Humse Pyar Karle Tu), and cheekily winning women in every janam. Shahid seduces the audience with his style and shayari, sparking life into this cliche-riddled kahaani." However, despite the positive critical acclaim, the film failed to do well at the Indian box office, although was a moderate success in the overseas markets.
As of August 2012, Kapoor is also set to start filming for Bejoy Nambiar's next film. It has also been confirmed that Kapoor will feature in Prabhu Deva's next film, "Namak", opposite Sonakshi Sinha, which is expected to go on floors in early 2013 and will release later that year. Kapoor has also signed a Bollywood masala entertainer, tentatively titled "Phata Poster Nikla Hero" opposite Ileana D'Cruz. The film, to be directed by Rajkumar Santoshi and produced by Ramesh Taurani's "Tips Music Films". It is expected to go on floors from November and will release next year.
Personal life.
Kapoor identifies himself as a vegetarian. While filming "Fida" (2004), he began dating Kareena Kapoor. They separated during the filming of "Jab We Met" (2007). According to him, they remained on good terms, with him saying, "I wish her all the happiness in the world. I have great respect for her. She is a wonderful girl."
