Isla Lang Fisher (; born 3 February 1976) is an actress who began her acting career on Australian television. She was born to Scottish parents and raised in Australia. She appeared on the short-lived soap opera "Paradise Beach" before playing Shannon Reed on the soap opera "Home and Away". She has since been known for her comedic roles in "Scooby-Doo" (2002), "Wedding Crashers" (2005), "Hot Rod" (2007), "Definitely, Maybe" (2008), "Confessions of a Shopaholic" (2009), "Rango" (2011), and "Bachelorette" (2012).
Early life.
Fisher was born in Muscat, Oman, to Scottish parents who, at the time, resided in Oman due to her father's employment as a banker for the United Nations. While she was still in her early years, her family moved to Bathgate, Scotland, and when she was six years old, moved once again to Perth, Australia, where she was brought up. She has four brothers, and says that she had a "great" upbringing in Perth with a "very outdoorsy life". She attended Methodist Ladies' College and also Walliston Primary School. She also appeared in lead roles in school productions, such as "Little Shop of Horrors".
Career.
She began appearing in commercials on Australian television at the age of nine, before going on to win roles in popular children's television shows "Bay City" and "Paradise Beach". At the age of 18, with the help of her mother, she published two teen novels, "Bewitched" and "Seduced by Fame", an in a 2005 interview, Fisher admitted that had she not been successful as an actress she would probably have been a full-time writer. From 1994 to 1997 she played the role of Shannon Reed on the Australian soap opera "Home and Away". In 1996, she won a Logie Award nomination for Most Popular Actress for her role. After leaving the soap, Fisher enrolled at L'École Internationale de Théâtre Jacques Lecoq, a theatre and arts training school in Paris and went on to appear in pantomime in the United Kingdom. She also toured with Darren Day in the musical "Summer Holiday" and appeared in the London theatre production "Così". In 2001, Fisher was cast as Kim in the German horror film "Swimming Pool".
In 2002 she had a part in the film version of "Scooby-Doo" as Mary Jane, Shaggy's love interest who is allergic to dogs. She wore a blonde wig for portraying her role because Sarah Michelle Gellar was supposed to be the only redhead in the film. The following year, she portrayed the character Kristy in the Australian comedy "The Wannabes". Subsequently, Fisher was taken on by an American agent. A larger role in "Wedding Crashers" (2005), alongside Vince Vaughn and Owen Wilson, won her the Breakthrough Performance Award at the MTV Movie Awards. While promoting "Wedding Crashers", she was officially crowned the 1000th guest on Australian talk show "Rove" on 2 August 2005. She entered the set ahead of Owen Wilson, winning the title by two metres.
In 2006, Fisher starred as Becca, a Manhattan party host, in the relationship drama "London" co-starring Jessica Biel, Chris Evans, and Jason Statham. She played the role of Katie in the romantic comedy "Wedding Daze" with Jason Biggs. In 2007, she appeared in "The Lookout", a thriller film co-starring Joseph Gordon-Levitt and Matthew Goode, and "Hot Rod", opposite Andy Samberg. She was scheduled to appear in "The Simpsons Movie", although her appearance was cut from the final version. In 2008, she starred in the critically acclaimed romantic comedy film "Definitely, Maybe", with Ryan Reynolds, Elizabeth Banks, Rachel Weisz, and Abigail Breslin, and had a voice role in "Horton Hears a Who!" Fisher has also co-written a script entitled "Groupies" with Amy Poehler, as well as another project entitled "The Cookie Queen". She starred in the movie adaptation of the book "Confessions of a Shopaholic", which opened on 13 February 2009. In the film, Fisher played a college graduate who works as a financial journalist in New York City to support her shopping addiction. "Confessions of a Shopaholic" suffered critically but eventually opened at No.4 grossing $15,054,000 on its opening weekend. Fisher received her third Teen Choice Award nomination.
Fisher has spoken out against the lack of opportunities for comediennes in Hollywood. In 2010, she starred in the black comedy "Burke and Hare". Fisher then voiced the role of Beans in "Rango", a computer-animated Western film released in March 2011. In the movie, Johnny Depp and her "Definitely, Maybe" co-star Abigail Breslin also provide voice-over roles.
In another voice-over role, Fisher voiced the character of Tooth (the Tooth Fairy) in the animated film "Rise of the Guardians", which was released in 2012.
Personal life.
Fisher first met English comedian Sacha Baron Cohen in 2002 at a party in Sydney, Australia. The couple became engaged in 2004, and wed on 15 March 2010 in Paris, France. The couple have two daughters: Olive (born October 17, 2007) and Elula Lottie Miriam (born August 2010).
Before marrying Baron Cohen, Fisher converted to Judaism, saying, "I will definitely have a Jewish wedding just to be with Sacha. I would do anything – move into any religion – to be united in marriage with him. We have a future together, and religion comes second to love as far as we are concerned." She completed her conversion in early 2007, after three years of study. She took the Hebrew name Ayala (איילה), the Hebrew word for Doe, and has described herself as keeping Shabbat.
Fisher has said that her "sensibility is Australian" and that she has a "laid-back attitude to life" that she feels is "very Australian." Her mother and siblings live in Athens, Greece, while her father divides his time between Frankfurt, Germany and Nicaragua.
