The Script are an Irish alternative rock band from Dublin formed in 2001. Based in London after signing to Sony Label Group imprint Phonogenic, the band released their eponymous debut album in August 2008, featuring the hit songs "The Man Who Can't Be Moved" and "Breakeven". The album debuted at number one in Ireland and the UK. Their second album, "Science & Faith", was released in September 2010, and contains the hit songs "For the First Time" and "Nothing". The album debuted at number one in Ireland and the UK, and number three on the US "Billboard" 200. Their third album "#3" was released in the UK on 10 September 2012, charting at number 2 in its first week.
Their music has been featured in popular television programs such as "90210", "Ghost Whisperer", "The Hills", "Waterloo Road", "EastEnders", "Made in Chelsea" and "The Vampire Diaries". Frontman Danny O'Donoghue is also a coach on "The Voice UK".
In 2009 Industry Victoria's Secret chose "The Man Who Can't Be Moved" as the theme for its annual parade "The Victoria's Secret Fashion Show 2009" for the opening segment and the Enchanted Forest segment with Heidi Klum.
Biography.
Danny O'Donoghue and Mark Sheehan have known each other since they were small children, as they both grew up in the city of Dublin. "At that time, MTV only came on in Dublin after midnight, it was the fuzzy channel, and for my generation urban culture was just a wave through us all," explains Sheehan. "It wasn't about gangs and guns; it was fashion and fun, singing and dancing." 
Mark and Danny were formerly part of a band called mytown, which had formed in 1996. Striking up a songwriting and production partnership, O'Donoghue and Sheehan's talent was recognised early, and, to their astonishment, they found themselves invited to Canada to collaborate with some of their production heroes, including such legends of modern R&B as Dallas Austin, Montell Jordan and Teddy Riley. They were in the US for a few years and got a record deal until the company dropped them. They stayed in the US and worked there as producers, but
later moved back to Dublin, where they recruited drummer Glen Power for their new band The Script. Power learned to play drums when he was just eight and he had been playing sessions from the age of fifteen, using the money to work on a solo project in his home, but that went on hold when his collaboration with Sheehan and O'Donoghue produced three songs in one week. The band signed to Phonogenic in 2005, and released an EP on Last.FM. The band's influences include a diverse group of artists that include U2, Coldplay, The Police, The Neptunes, Timbaland, and Van Morrison.
Danny and Mark started making demos for other artists, but when they met drummer Glen Power, the objective changed. The pair had never heard Power play, but they made a connection that motivated Sheehan to invite Glen on a working holiday to Los Angeles. In one week, the trio produced three songs. "It was like I found my home playing with these guys," says Glen. "I had never had a chance with any other band to express myself with such freedom." "Individually, we all had our own talents, but together it just went to another level," according to Danny. 
In the beginning years of the band, Mark Sheehan's mother fell terminally ill, causing a lot of stress on the band and members, but it also had a positive effect on Sheehan's writing. With such strong emotional tension, the songwriter found new lyrics every day. Sheehan said that "That was the time when it finally came home to me how important music was to me, 'cause in my darkest moments that's what got me through." After Sheehan's mother's death, ten months after her diagnosis, Danny's father died four months later of an aneurysm. Even with such trying moments in their early years, the band was able to rise out of it, albeit with somewhat bleak lyrics in several songs, as commented by Danny when referencing "We Cry": "There is not a lot of hope in the song, cause not everybody's life is full of hope. There's not always roses at the end."
2008–10: "The Script".
The Script performed "We Cry" for the first time on BalconyTV in Dublin on 13 September 2007. The band claimed that BalconyTV was the "first TV they ever did" and credited Michael Hunter as the "push we needed to propel us" when they won Best Band at the DanishTV Music Video Awards 2009 in the Pepper Club Dublin on 20 June 2008. At the awards the band said the award was their "first ever". The Script released their debut single "We Cry" on 14 April 2008. "We Cry" received "Single of the Day" on RTÉ 2FM, Today FM and by Jo Whiley on BBC Radio 1, where many radio presenters heavily supported the band. The single peaked at number 15 on the UK Singles Chart, giving the band their first top 20 single. The track also performed well on the Irish Singles Chart, peaking at number 9 and giving the band their first top ten single in their home country. The Script also performed 'We Cry' on one of the CW's TV series, 90210.
Their second single, "The Man Who Can't Be Moved", was released on 15 September 2008. The single reached number 2 in Ireland, Denmark, and the UK. The band released their debut album, "The Script", on 11 August 2008. Following the success of "The Man Who Can't Be Moved", the album entered the UK Albums Chart at number one with sales of 20,240 copies where it stayed for eleven weeks. The album spent three weeks in the top ten and was the eighteenth best selling album in the UK of 2008. The album also entered the Irish Albums Chart at number one, holding the top spot for five weeks. It had, as of January 2009, spent 2 weeks in the top 10. The Irish office of Sony BMG music presented the group with their first multi-platinum disc for over 600,000 sales of their debut album, "The Script".
The band's third single, "Breakeven", was released in Ireland and UK on the 21 November 2008 and 29 December 2008 respectively. The single was an instant success on the Irish Singles Chart. After entering the chart at number forty, it spent one week before entering the top ten at number ten, giving The Script their third top ten single in Russia. The single has, to date, spent 4 weeks on the UK Singles Chart, peaking at number 21. The band's fourth single "Talk You Down" was released in March 2009.
On 9 November The Script received an award at the World Music Awards for 'Best Selling Irish Act' of 2008 and on 19 February 2010, they won 'Best Live Performance' at the Meteor Ireland Music Awards. The band has confirmed that they plan to write a track for Leona Lewis's second album. In December 2008, the band were confirmed to be supporting Take That at their concert at Croke Park on 13 June 2009. The band played at the Cheerio's Childline concert on the opening night of Dublin's 02. They played among big stars including Enrique Iglesias and Anastacia. 
On 7 April 2009 the band was confirmed to be supporting U2 on their third concert at Croke Park, which took place on 27 July 2009. On 29 April 2009, the band announced that their next single would be Before The Worst, to be released on 15 June 2009. On 17, 18 and 21 July 2009, The Script opened for Paul McCartney at the historic first concerts at New York's Citi Field and for U2 at Dublin's Croke Park.
The band's bonus track and B-side "Live Like We're Dying" was re-recorded by American Idol 2009 winner Kris Allen as the first single off his self-titled album. Allen's version of "Live Like We're Dying" was digitally released for download on 21 September 2009.
On 2 December 2009 the band's single "The Man Who Can't Be Moved" was featured as a remix on the Victoria's Secret Fashion Show during the Enchanted Forest segment.
On 16 April 2010, their first U.S. single "Breakeven" was certified Platinum by the RIAA (the Recording Industry Association of America), selling over one million copies in the U.S. and has since peaked at No. 12 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 in the spring of 2010. The band performed a headline tour in the United States that kicked off in San Diego on 11 October 2010 at the House of Blues and ended on 7 November 2010 at the House of Blues in Boston, Massachusetts. On 21 May 2010, they appeared live on NBC's "Today Show" as part of the show's outdoor Toyota Concert Series
2010–11: "Science & Faith".
The Script announced a new album and single on their website on Monday, 19 July 2010. The first single from album "Science & Faith", "For the First Time", was released in the UK on 20 August 2010 and the album followed on 13 September 2010. In the United States, "For the First Time" was released on iTunes on 8 November 2010, with "Science & Faith" was released on 18 January 2011. The song was first released in the United States on AOL Music on 29 September 2010. "For the First Time" has entered the UK charts at No. 5 and moved up to No. 4 the following week and entered the Irish charts at No. 1. The music video features Bono's daughter Eve Hewson. "Science & Faith" entered the Irish Album Chart and the UK album chart at No. 1.
The Script recorded their album in London, and vocalist Danny O'Donoghue says that the economic crisis in Ireland is "a microcosm for the rest of the world." He talks about people being stripped of everything that they own and how it inspired the band to write the songs for the new album. Danny says, "We're dealing with complex emotions in the simplest of ways, that's what we battle with in these songs." The subject matter might sound bleak at first, but "Science & Faith" is about optimism. "With Irish people, no matter how bad things get, you always pick yourself up and carry on." 
On Friday, 24 September at 9:00am tickets for The Script's three nights at The O2 Dublin, two nights at The Odyssey, Belfast & two at The INEC, Killarney went on sale and sold out in less than 40 minutes, with over 60,000 tickets sold. On 1 October at 9:00am tickets for The Script arena tour in March 2011 went on sale. The tickets for all 12 arenas around the UK sold out in 5 days. They also announced that they would play a "Homecoming" concert at the Aviva Stadium in Dublin. This is part of the Science & Faith Tour and will be their biggest headline show to date.
The Script also took part in Children in Need 2010. The Script will be participating in the VH1 Best Cruise Ever and sailing to Cozumel 28 April-2 May 2011. The Script took part in BRMB's live 2010 with acts such as The Saturdays, Mark Ronson and Mcfly. The Script were nominated for Best International Act at the 2011 Brit Awards. The Script announced that they will perform at: Pinkpop festival, V festival, Oxegen, Isle of Wight Festival, T in the park, Thetford Forest Show, iTunes Festival, Skanderborg Festival, Sudoeste Festival, Tennents ViTal.
The Script also played to the biggest indoor crowd of 18,300 people at The Coca-Cola Dome in Johannesburg, South Africa on 24 June 2011.
They later went on to play their official biggest crowd ever on 2 July 2011 in Dublin's Aviva Stadium, and performed to a sold-out crowd of 50,000 people. The Coronas and Tinie Tempah were support acts on the night.
2011-13: "#3".
The band announced via their official Twitter account on 2 June that the title of their third album would be called "#3". It was released in the UK on 10 September 2012 and in the United States on 9 October 2012. The Script's members revealed "Hall of Fame" would be the lead single, which debuted on radio on 23 July. It was recorded in Los Angeles, Studio 3, and released on iTunes on 21 August. The single features will.i.am, whom Danny works alongside on The Voice UK. Other tracks include "Six Degrees of Separation", and "If You Could See Me Now", an emotional tribute to Danny’s late father and guitarist Mark Sheehan’s mother, who died within months of each other during the work on the first album. In a recent interview, Danny commented: "He describes them as a kind of musical therapy but admits the tribute to their parents in particular chokes him up and brings tears to his eyes. Mark cannot bring himself to even play the track in public and has to leave the room whenever it is played over the studio’s speakers. As you can tell the music means an awful lot to them, which perhaps is one reason they've done so well. Because it comes from the heart."
"I haven’t played it for anybody and I need a minute with that song,’ Mark admits. ‘I can’t even tell you if it is a good song or not. It’s a page from my diary, I produced and wrote it but I have to walk away from it. It is just a weird one. It is a touchy subject for me – I lost both my parents quite young and it was a real dark point in my life. Like Danny said, it is something I have never talked about until now. I don’t know if we will ever find the right moment to play that live at all. I can’t even picture playing it live because it is so personal."
On 16 September 2012, The Script achieved their first UK number one with their single "Hall of Fame" in its second week after being released, it stayed there for two weeks.
On 5 October 2012, The Script kicked off the Major League Baseball Postseason by playing a free concert at the MLB Fan Cave in New York City.
The Script is nominated for Best International band at Brits Awards 2013.
Line-up.
Danny O'Donoghue - Vocals, keys</ref>
Awards and Nominations.
In 2009,The Script won an EBBA Award. Every year the European Border Breakers Awards (EBBA) recognise the success of ten emerging artists or groups who reached audiences outside their own countries with their first internationally released album in the past year.
