Marco Antonio Rubio (born May 28, 1971) is the junior United States Senator from Florida, serving since January 2011. A member of the Republican Party, he previously served as Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives (2007–2009).
A Cuban American native of Miami, Florida, Rubio is a graduate of the University of Florida and the University of Miami Law School. In the late 1990s, he served as a City Commissioner for West Miami and was elected to the Florida House of Representatives in 2000, representing the 111th House district. He was elected Speaker in November 2006.
Rubio announced a run for U.S. Senate in May 2009 after incumbent Republican Mel Martinez resigned. Initially trailing by double-digits against the incumbent Republican Governor Charlie Crist, Rubio eventually surpassed him in polling for the Republican nomination. Rubio won the Republican nomination after Crist opted instead for an independent run. In a three-way split against Crist and Democratic candidate Kendrick Meek, Rubio won the general election in November 2010 with 48.9 percent of the vote.
The term "crown prince of the Tea Party movement" has been used both as praise and ridicule, although Rubio has no direct connection to that movement. In June 2012 it was reported that Mitt Romney was vetting Rubio as a possible running mate, but Romney ultimately selected Paul Ryan. Rubio gave the Republican response to President Barack Obama's 2013 State of the Union Address.
Early life, education, and early political career.
Rubio was born in Miami, Florida, the second son and third child of Mario Rubio and Oria Garcia. His parents were Cubans who had immigrated to the United States in 1956 and were naturalized as U.S. citizens in 1975. Rubio's maternal grandfather, Pedro Victor Garcia, also immigrated legally to the U.S. in 1956, but returned to Cuba to find work in 1959. When he returned to the U.S. in 1962 without a visa, U.S. embassies in Cuba being closed, an immigration judge ordered him deported. U.S. immigration authorities ultimately used their discretion to allow him to remain in the U.S. without a visa. The Associated Press concludes that Garcia may have been undocumented for four years until 1966.
Rubio's family was Roman Catholic, though from age 8 to age 11, he and his family attended The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints while they lived in Las Vegas. He received his first communion as a Catholic in 1984, before moving back to Miami with his family a year later. He was confirmed and married in the Catholic Church.
Rubio attended South Miami Senior High School and graduated in 1989. He then attended Tarkio College for one year on a football scholarship from 1989 to 1990, before enrolling at Santa Fe Community College (now Santa Fe College). He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of Florida in 1993, and his J.D. degree "cum laude" from the University of Miami School of Law in 1996. Rubio stated that his education resulted in $100,000 of student loans, which he paid off in 2012. 
While studying law, he interned for U.S. Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen. He served as City Commissioner for West Miami.
Florida House of Representatives.
Elections.
Rubio was elected at the age of 28 to the Florida House of Representatives, representing Miami in Florida's 111th House District. A special election was called to fill Representative Carlos Valdes' seat as he ran for an open Florida State Senate seat. Rubio placed second in the Republican primary on December 14, 1999, but won the run-off election by 64 votes. He defeated Democrat Anastasia Garcia with 72% of the vote in a January 25, 2000 special election. In November 2000, he won re-election unopposed. In 2002, he won re-election to a second full term unopposed. In 2004, he won re-election to a third full term with 66% of the vote. In 2006, he won re-election to a fourth full term unopposed.
Tenure.
Rubio was named "Freshman of the Year" by the Florida Petroleum Marketers Association.
He is the author of the book "100 Innovative Ideas for Florida's Future", which includes information that Rubio compiled while traveling around the state and talking with citizens. This was done through what Rubio calls "Idearaisers". Many of the issues that he pushed for in his first year as speaker came from ideas in this book. In 2007, Marco Rubio championed a major overhaul of the Florida tax system, arguing it would reduce property taxes and decrease the size of government.
During his tenure serving as Speaker of the Florida House, Rubio shared his residence with another Florida State Representative, David Rivera. The two men co-owned a home together in Tallahassee, which later fell into foreclosure after deferring months of mortgage payments. This issue surfaced in June 2010, during Rubio's run for the US Senate but was considered resolved according to Rubio's spokesman.
In December 2002, Rubio was appointed House Majority Leader by Speaker Johnnie Byrd. In November 2003, Rubio clinched the Speakership after State Representatives Dennis Baxley, Jeff Kottkamp, and Dennis A. Ross dropped out. He became the first Cuban American to become Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives.
In 2010, the IRS investigated Rubio for using his Republican Party credit card to charge personal expenses while he was Florida's House Speaker. Of the over $100,000 charged by Rubio, he reimbursed the Party for about $16,000, which he identified as personal expenses.
U.S. Senate.
2010 election.
On May 5, 2009, Rubio announced on his website that he planned to run for the United States Senate seat being vacated by Mel Martinez, who had resigned and been replaced by George LeMieux. Prior to the announcement, he had been meeting with fundraisers and supporters throughout the state. Initially trailing by double-digits against the incumbent Governor of his own party, Charlie Crist, Rubio eventually surpassed Crist in polling for the Republican nomination.
On April 28, 2010, Crist announced he would be running as an independent, effectively ceding the Republican nomination to Rubio. Several of Crist's top fundraisers, as well as Republican leadership, refused to support Crist after Rubio won the Republican nomination for the Senate.
On November 2, 2010, Marco Rubio won the general election with 49 percent of the vote to Crist's 30% and Democrat Kendrick Meek's 20%. Following his victory in the elections, Rubio soon became the subject of speculation as a potential Republican candidate for the 2012 presidential election. Rubio stated shortly after taking office that he had no interest in running for president or vice president in 2012.
Tenure.
Upon taking office, Rubio hired Cesar Conda, former lobbyist and policy adviser to Vice President Dick Cheney as his chief of staff. Rubio co-sponsored a resolution, which was passed, to declare September as National Spinal Cord Injury Awareness Month. Rubio offered an amendment, co-sponsored by Joe Manchin, to allow employers to be exempted from newly mandated coverage for contraception based on religious or moral grounds, but it was not adopted in the Senate.
Rubio was chosen to deliver the Republican response to President Obama’s 2013 State of the Union Address. It would mark the first time the response was delivered in English and Spanish. Economist Paul Krugman and blogger Mike Konczal criticized Rubio for blaming government actions as the main cause of the 2008 housing crisis. Rubio's attempt to draw a strong line against the looming defense sequestration was undercut by fellow Republican senator Rand Paul's additional response to Obama's speech that called for the sequester to be carried out.
Budget and the economy.
Rubio voted against the 2012 Fiscal Cliff Resolutions in the hopes of maintaining principles with the party. Although he has received criticism for this position and is said to be alienating members of the Republican party, he remains resolute in his goals to keep taxes lowered. He has been accused by some of being too extreme within the party and could potentially cause a divide. Whereas Paul Ryan is seen as more of a political pragmatist in his support for the resolution to gain popular support, Rubio prefers his principled stances. Rubio rose to prominence through his base due to his pledge for fiscal responsibility and determination on not raising taxes.
Univision controversy.
On July 11, 2011, the Hispanic television station Univision aired a story about the 1989 cocaine trafficking conviction of Orlando Cicilia, Rubio's brother-in-law. Then, in October the "Miami Herald" reported that Rubio was blackmailed by Univision before the station ran the story. The article said that Univision told Rubio they would air the story unless Rubio agreed to an interview on their political show "Al Punto." Univision said that they would never have blackmailed Rubio on a conference call, especially with multiple employees and two attorneys present.
Immigration.
In January 2013, Senator Rubio proposed a plan providing a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants currently living in the United States. Rubio’s multistep plan includes fines, back taxes, background checks, and a lengthy probationary period. His proposal contrasts with the Republican party’s long-held view that offering citizenship to undocumented immigrants is virtually the same as amnesty. 
In 2012 he urged his party to compromise on the DREAM Act to keep from alienating Hispanic voters from the Republican party.
Political positions.
Rubio generally holds conservative views on fiscal and social issues. He supports an initiative to limit federal spending growth to the per capita inflation rate. He fervently opposes raising the debt limit, as he already believes it is too high and seeks to promote fiscal responsibility. He supports initiatives to balance the federal budget. Rubio supports Social Security reform to bring the program closer out of a deficit. He believes the program should have the age for benefits pushed back to account for Americans living longer. He has stated his support of federal R&D funding and space exploration funding to promote technological innovation, which he sees as critical to the development to the economy. He has goals of eliminating property taxes, or at least limiting them, and replacing them with consumption taxes. He supports extending the Bush tax cuts and believes no taxes should be raised during a recession. He also opposes the Capital Gains tax, stating that it is double taxation. Rubio supports a flat rate federal tax. Though largely supporting the Violence Against Women Act, Rubio voted against the 2013 extension of the act because of some new provisions within the bill.
He has expressed sentiments that radical Islamist terrorists pose the greatest threat to the United States and that these radicals intend to impose their beliefs on the world. He voted 'yes' on extending the Patriot Act's roving wire taps. He was rated B+ by the NRA for his stance on gun control, indicating his pro-gun policies. Rubio identifies as pro-life but recognizes women's right is the law. He strongly opposes Roe v. Wade and has stated that the "right to life is a fundamental one that trumps virtually any other right I can imagine". He also does not believe right to privacy should apply on the issue of abortion, as determined in Roe v. Wade. He opposes federal funding for abortion and embryonic stem cell research. Rubio opposes same-sex marriage.
Personal life.
Rubio married Jeanette Dousdebes, a former bank teller and Miami Dolphins cheerleader, in 1998. She is of Colombian descent, together they have four children. Rubio and his family live in West Miami, Florida. Rubio attends Christ Fellowship, a non-denominational church affiliated with the Southern Baptist Convention in West Kendall, Florida, as well as Catholic services. After leaving the Florida House of Representatives due to term limits in January 2009, Rubio started his own law firm. In February, he declared himself a candidate for U.S. Senate in the 2010 election cycle. In an interview in 2012, Rubio said: "I'm a Roman Catholic. I'm theologically in line with the Roman Catholic Church. I believe in the authority of the church, but I also have tremendous respect for my brothers and sisters in other Christian faiths. I recognize, as the Catholic Church does, that there are excellent teachings of the Word throughout other denominations. The elements of salvation are found in these churches as well."
"Son of exiles".
In October 2011, the "St. Petersburg Times" and "The Washington Post" reported that Rubio's previous statements that his parents were forced to leave Cuba in 1959, after Fidel Castro came to power, were incorrect as they had in fact left Cuba in 1956 during the dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista. According to "The Washington Post", Rubio's "embellishments" resonate with many voters in Florida, who would not be as impressed by his family being economic migrants seeking a better life in the U.S. instead of political refugees from a communist regime.
Rubio responded: "The real essence of my family's story is not about the date my parents first entered the United States. Or whether they traveled back and forth between the two nations. Or even the date they left Fidel Castro's Cuba forever and permanently settled here. The essence of my family story is why they came to America in the first place; and why they had to stay."
