Kourtney Mary Kardashian (born April 18, 1979) is an American socialite, television personality and fashion designer. She gained fame as a cast member of "Keeping Up with the Kardashians", "Kourtney and Kim Take New York" and "Kourtney and Khloe Take Miami". She is the oldest child of Kris Jenner and defense attorney Robert Kardashian and the sister of reality television personalities Khloé Kardashian, Kim Kardashian, and Rob Kardashian.
Early life.
Kourtney Mary Kardashian was born in Los Angeles, California. She is the oldest child of attorney Robert Kardashian and Kris Jenner (née Houghton) and the sister of Kim, Khloé, and Rob Kardashian. She grew up in Los Angeles, California. She is of Armenian descent on her father's side and Scottish and Dutch on her mother's. 
In 1991, when Kardashian was 11 years old, her parents divorced and her mother, Kris, married former Olympian Bruce Jenner. Kardashian gained four stepsiblings; Burton "Burt", Brandon, Brody and Cassandra Lyn "Casey" Jenner. She is also half sister of Kendall and Kylie Jenner. Her father, Robert, who was on O. J. Simpson’s legal team during his 1995 murder trial, died on September 30, 2003 from esophageal cancer. 
Kardashian attended the Roman Catholic all-girls school, Marymount High School in Los Angeles. Following graduation, she left California, moving to Dallas, Texas, where she attended Southern Methodist University for two years. She then moved to Tucson, Arizona and attended the University of Arizona, graduating with a degree in Theatre Arts and a minor in Spanish. Her classmates included Nicole Richie and Luke Walton.
Career.
Television career.
Kardashian first became known to reality television audiences on the 2004 series, "", on which she earned money for charity. She then became a cast member on "Keeping Up with the Kardashians", which depicts the lives of her extended family. She and her sister Khloé starred in their own spinoff reality show, "Kourtney and Khloé Take Miami", the first season of which documented their opening of the Miami D-A-S-H location in 2009. In January 2011, "Kourtney and Kim Take New York" premiered, which documents hers and sister Kim's opening their third D-A-S-H store, in New York.
Kardashian made her acting debut with a guest appearance on the ABC soap "One Life to Live" on March 28, 2011, appearing as attorney Kassandra Kavanaugh. Kardashian, who had grown up watching the soap opera and credited her appearance as a "lifelong dream", had reservations about her acting debut, stating: "I'd thought I'd have two lines. But my script is so long ... I'm not an actress." Her performance, however, was not met with positive reviews from critics. 
In September 2012, she and younger sister Kim created another spinoff reality television series, "Kourtney and Kim Take Miami" which will air beginning January 2013. It will also feature their mother Kris Jenner and sister Khloé Kardashian.
Business ventures.
Kourtney and her mother opened children's clothing boutiques called Smooch in the Los Angeles area and New York City; the boutiques carry the brand Crib Rock Couture. With sisters Kim and Khloe, Kardashian co-owns and operates D-A-S-H, a clothing boutique in Los Angeles, Miami, and New York City.
Kardashian has a number of endorsement contracts with her sisters Khloe and Kim. They are spokeswomen for the diet supplement Quick Trim. In March 2012, Kardashian and her sisters Kim and Khloe were named in a $5 million class action lawsuit against QuickTrim, the weight loss supplement they endorse. The complaint, filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, accuses the Kardashians (along with QuickTrim’s manufacturer, Windmill Health Products; the retailer GNC; and others in the sales and marketing chain) of false and deceptive marketing of the diet aid. The plaintiffs, hailing from several states, brought claims under their respective states’ consumer protection laws.
Kardashian also represents the skincare line "PerfectSkin" with her sisters, which was developed by Dr. Ron DiSalvo for Perfect Science Labs. The three sisters also released a jewelry line for Virgins, Saints, and Angels. The 20 piece collection debuted in March 2010. The jewelry is reflective of the Kardashians' Armenian heritage.
In the spring of 2010, she and her sisters released a clothing line for Bebe. In August 2010, Kardashian announced that she and her sisters were working on another clothing line called K-Dash, sold on QVC.
Kardashian and her sisters created a sunless tanner called Kardashian Glamour Tan in 2010. Kardashian wrote the book "Kardashian Konfidential" with her sisters Kim and Khloe; it was released in November 2010.
Personal life.
Kardashian and partner Scott Disick have two children: son Mason Dash Disick (born 2009) and daughter Penelope Scotland Disick (born 2012).
