The Amazing Spider-Man 2 is an upcoming American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Spider-Man, directed by Marc Webb and released by Columbia Pictures. It is a sequel to the 2012 film "The Amazing Spider-Man". The studio announced the sequel to "The Amazing Spider-Man" in 2011. The company hired James Vanderbilt to write the screenplay and Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci to re-write it. Andrew Garfield, Jamie Foxx, Emma Stone, Dane DeHaan, Shailene Woodley, Paul Giamatti, Colm Feore, and Sally Field are set to star. The film is scheduled to be released on May 2, 2014 in 2D and 3D.
Premise.
For Peter Parker, life is busy. Between taking out the bad guys as Spider-Man and spending time with the person he loves, Gwen Stacy, high school graduation can’t come quickly enough. Peter hasn’t forgotten about the promise he made to Gwen’s father to protect her by staying away, but that’s a promise he just can’t keep. Things will change for Peter when a new villain, Electro, emerges, an old friend, Harry Osborn, returns, and Peter uncovers new clues about his past.
Cast.
Felicity Jones and Colm Feore have also been cast in unspecified roles.
Production.
Development.
Producer Matt Tolmach, stated that there "will be more than one and at the very least three." The first sequel is set for release on May 2, 2014. The sequel's villain was teased in the 2012 film. Webb stated that the origin story would further unfold in the second episode. In June 2012, Webb said he was unsure whether he would return, though it was confirmed on September 28, 2012, that he would return to direct the sequel. He claimed he "wanted to create a universe that not only can withstand but anticipate future storylines" while also "working in and of itself for one movie." Andrew Garfield had also expressed hope to reprise his role, and in September 2012 it was confirmed that he would do so. Actor J. K. Simmons has also said he would like to reprise his role as J. Jonah Jameson from Sam Raimi's "Spider-Man" trilogy if the studio offers it to him. Emma Stone was later confirmed to be reprising her role as Gwen Stacy, having signed a contract for two "Amazing Spider-Man" sequels, more or less. On October 10, 2012, it was announced that Shailene Woodley was offered the role of Mary Jane Watson. Electro was announced as the next villain, with Jamie Foxx being offered the role, Foxx later confirmed that he was cast as the character and during an interview on MTV, he explains that the redesign of the character will be more grounded and his depiction details. On December 3, 2012, Marc Webb revealed that Dane DeHaan was chosen to play Harry Osborn. Also, according to Webb, it is confirmed that actor Martin Sheen will return as Ben Parker in the film, but with not yet any confirmed role to make. Paul Giamatti was also confirmed to play the Rhino on February 5, 2013 and Felicity Jones has confirmed her involvement with the movie under an undisclosed role.
Filming.
On February 4, 2013, Marc Webb posted on his Twitter account that principal photography had begun. He also confirmed that the sequel is being shot on film instead of digital. Sony revealed this would be the first "Spider-Man" film to be entirely filmed in New York.
