Brandi Glanville (born November 16, 1972) is an American television personality and former fashion model. She is best known for joining the second season of "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills".
Early life and Modeling.
Glanville was born on November 16, 1972 to parents Guy and Judith Ann Glanville and raised in Sacramento, CA. She has an older sister, Tricia, and a younger brother, Michael.
At the age of 16, Glanville moved to Paris, France and began modeling. Glanville was signed by Elite Model Management to work in Europe, Los Angeles and New York. By the next year, she was taking part in Paris runway shows. During a 17-year modeling career, she appeared in the pages of "Glamour" and "Cosmopolitan" and worked for design couture houses including Chanel, Giorgio Armani, and Gucci.
Personal life.
Glanville married actor Eddie Cibrian, known primarily for his work on TV series including "The Young and The Restless", "Third Watch", "CSI: Miami" and "The Playboy Club", on May 12, 2001. The couple have two sons together, Mason Edward (born June 8, 2003) and Jake Austin (born April 7, 2007).
In early 2009, reports surfaced that Cibrian was having an affair with married country singer LeAnn Rimes, his costar in "Northern Lights". Though Glanville initially stood by her husband in public and attended counseling with him, Cibrian and Rimes took their relationship public in August 2009, one week after Rimes separated from her husband. 
Eddie Cibrian also carried on affair with a waitress as well.
Glanville then left Cibrian and they filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. Their divorce was finalized on September 30, 2010.
The Real Housewives.
In 2011, Glanville was introduced by Adrienne Maloof in the second season of Bravo's "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills". She joined the series as a "Friend of the Housewives" in the fourth episode of season two. Adrienne introduced her to the cast at a party because "Brandi's going through a divorce and I wanted to show her a good time." The meeting got off to a rocky start: Lisa Vanderpump was immediately suspicious of Glanville because of Glanville's association with Vanderpump's enemy and former houseguest Cedric Martinez; others ridiculed Glanville for showing up to a charity event wearing a high wedge-heeled shoe while on crutches.
In the seventh episode, the relationship between Glanville and the Richards sisters spiraled out of control after Kyle and her sister, Kim, made fun of her, mentioned that one of Glanville's sons had urinated on Adrienne's lawn, and hid Glanville's crutches. Brandi then responded to the growing tension by making an accusation about Kim Richards. 
In the fourteenth episode, Glanville invited the women to a friend's beach house for a night of fun. The night takes an unexpected turn when Taylor Armstrong gets into a confrontation with the other guests and Glanville asks Armstrong to leave her party.
Glanville also appeared in the three-part reunion. During the reunion it was known that Lisa Vanderpump, Camille Grammer, and Brandi were friends.
When Camille was announced to not be returning for season three, it was rumored that Glanville would take her place as an official Housewife, and on April 29, 2012, it was reported this was in fact true. In October 2012 it was announced Brandi was an "official Housewife" for Season 3 to air in November.
Season 3 commences with pre-existing tension between Adrienne and Brandi as well as between Adrienne and Lisa. 
In the sixth episode, Kyle Richards perplexed by the tension since Adrienne introduced Brandi to the group and often played peacemaker, asks Brandi point blank where does the conflict between Adrienne and Brandi originate from. In attempt to shed light on the conflict and perhaps a side of Adrienne, Brandi reveals some very 'personal' information about Adrienne. Bravo edits out the content, leaving viewers to google online to determine what was said via gossip sites. Adrienne finds out during Mauricio's office grand opening party. An explosive verbal confrontation occurs between Adrienne, her husband Paul, and Brandi. 
In the seventh episode of season 3, during a dinner party Kyle Richards hosted, Brandi expresses remorse over revealing personal information about Adrienne. The dinner party guests offer advice from various perspectives how to resolve this conflict. A dominant advice was for Brandi to send flowers to Adrienne. Brandi was uncomfortable with the suggestion for she needed more time to pass and that this conflict is more complex than the group realizes. 
In the ninth episode of season 3, Brandi finds out she is being sued by Adrienne. She announces this to the rest of the group during restaurant dinner party. The group discusses Adrienne use of a lawsuit, when in season 2 she had personally disapproved of such behavior when stating that 'Friends don't sue friends.' when responding to Russell serving a lawsuit to Camille for statements Camille made. A verbal confrontation occurs between Mauricio and Brandi about how Brandi should first initiate reconciliation even though she is being sued. Then Mauricio and Ken debate back and forth regarding Brandi's motive to reveal the information in the first place. Lisa chimes and cites when Adrienne made disparaging untrue statements about Lisa during the Season 2 reunion. The fight then continues back and forth with Mauricio and Brandi. Mauricio is unconvinced that Brandi has made attempts at reconciliation.
In the tenth episode, Adrienne wants Brandi to attempt reconciliation. But in previous episodes, Brandi stated she has attempted.
In the eleventh episode, Brandi hosts Night School 4 Girls class in Las Vegas.
Book.
Glanville was offered a book deal in 2012 by Gallery Books, a division of Simon & Shuster. 
"“Drinking and Tweeting: And Other Brandi Blunders”" will be released February 12, 2013. The book title is a play on her use of Twitter. Glanville, at the time of editing, has a twitter following of over 240,000 followers.
The book itself is a humorous memoir regarding a very public break-up, surviving infidelity - mixed with social media, and moving on in the aftermath.
