Emilia Clarke (born 1987) is an English actress, who is best known for portraying Daenerys Targaryen in the HBO medieval-fantasy series, "Game of Thrones".
Early life.
Clarke was born in London, England and grew up in Berkshire. Clarke's father is a theatre sound engineer, her mother is a business woman, and her brother is studying politics. Clarke's interest in acting began at the age of three after seeing the musical "Show Boat" on which her father was working at the time. She was educated at St Edward's (2000–2005) and Rye St Antony before studying at Drama Centre London where she graduated in 2009.
Career.
Clarke's early work includes two plays at St. Edwards, ten plays at Drama Centre London, the 2009 Company of Angels production of "Sense", and a 2009 commercial for Samaritans. Her first television roles were Saskia Mayer in a 2009 episode of "Doctors" and Savannah in SyFy's 2010 movie "Triassic Attack".
The actress's big break came when she was cast as Daenerys Targaryen in the HBO medieval fantasy series "Game of Thrones" which is based on the book series "A Song of Ice and Fire" by George R. R. Martin. She was cast as a replacement to fellow British actress Tamzin Merchant who dropped out of the pilot for undisclosed reasons. The show debuted in April 2011 to positive reviews and was quickly picked up by the network for a second season. Clarke won the 2011 EWwy Award for "Best Supporting Actress in a Drama" for her role as Daenerys.
Clarke will appear in a new documentary feature in 2013 titled "Spike Island", named after the location of The Stone Roses' seminal 1990 gig.
Emilia Clarke is set to play the lead role of Holly Golightly in a Broadway production of Truman Capote's "Breakfast at Tiffany's" that is currently in production. The play is slated to begin performances in February 2013.
Personal life.
, Clarke was reported to be dating Seth MacFarlane; Gossip Cop also reported that Clarke and MacFarlane were casually seeing each other, but that their relationship was not exclusive. However, the relationship was not commented on by either of the pair nor their PR teams, and in November 2012, MacFarlane mentioned on Twitter that he is a "single guy". MacFarlane accompanied Clarke to the after-party thrown by HBO following the 70th Golden Globe Awards on 13 January 2013, and Deadline.com referred to Clarke as his girlfriend.
