Benjamin Edward "Ben" Stiller (born November 30, 1965) is an American comedian, actor, voice actor, screenwriter, film director, and producer. He is the son of veteran comedians and actors Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara.
After beginning his acting career with a play, Stiller wrote several mockumentaries, and was offered his own show entitled "The Ben Stiller Show", which he produced and hosted for its entire run: 13 episodes. Having previously acted in television, he began acting in films; he made his directorial debut with "Reality Bites". Throughout his career he has written, starred in, directed, and/or produced over 50 films including "Zoolander", "There's Something About Mary", "Meet the Parents", ', "Tropic Thunder", the "Madagascar" series, "Night at the Museum", and the sequel '. In addition, he has had multiple cameos in music videos, television shows, and films.
Stiller is a member of the comedic acting brotherhood colloquially known as the Frat Pack. His films have grossed more than $2.1 billion in Canada and the United States, with an average of $73 million per film. Throughout his career, he has received several awards and honors including an Emmy Award, several MTV Movie Awards, and a Teen Choice Award.
Early life.
Stiller was born in New York City. His father, Jerry Stiller, is from a Jewish family that immigrated from Poland and Galicia, in Eastern Europe. The family celebrated both Hanukkah and Christmas, and Stiller had a Bar Mitzvah. He has said that he is "half Jewish and half Irish Catholic." Stiller's parents frequently took him on the sets of their appearances, including "The Mike Douglas Show" when he was six. He stated in an interview that he considered his childhood unusual: "In some ways, it was a show-business upbringing—a lot of traveling, a lot of late nights—not what you'd call traditional." His sister, actress Amy Stiller, has made appearances in many of his productions, including "Reality Bites", "", and "Zoolander".
Stiller displayed an early interest in filmmaking, and made Super 8 movies with his sister and friends. At ten years old, he made his acting debut as a guest on his mother's television series, "Kate McShane". In the late 1970s, he performed with the New York City troupe NYC's First All Children's Theater, playing several roles, including the title role in "Clever Jack and the Magic Beanstalk." After being inspired by the television show "Second City Television" while in high school, Stiller realized that he wanted to get involved with sketch comedy.
Stiller attended the The Cathedral School of St. John the Divine and graduated from the Calhoun School in New York in 1983. He started performing on the cabaret circuit as opening act to the cabaret siren Jadin Wong. Stiller then enrolled as a film student at the University of California, Los Angeles. After nine months, Stiller left school to move back to New York City. He made his way through acting classes, auditioning and trying to find an agent.
Acting career.
Early work.
When he was approximately 15, Stiller obtained a small part with one line on the television soap opera "Guiding Light", although in an interview he characterized his performance as poor. He was later cast in a role in the 1986 Broadway revival of John Guare's "The House of Blue Leaves", alongside John Mahoney; the production would garner four Tony Awards. During its run, Stiller produced a satirical mockumentary whose principal was fellow actor Mahoney. His comedic work was well received by the cast and crew of the play, and he followed up with a 10 minute short called "The Hustler of Money", a parody of the Martin Scorsese film "The Color of Money". The film featured him in a send-up of Tom Cruise's character and Mahoney in the Paul Newman role, only this time as a bowling hustler instead of a pool shark. The short got the attention of "Saturday Night Live", which aired it in 1987, and two years later offered him a spot as a writer. In the meantime, he also had a bit part in Steven Spielberg's "Empire of the Sun".
In 1989, Stiller wrote and appeared on "Saturday Night Live" as a featured performer. However, since the show did not want him to make more short films, he left after four episodes. He then put together "Elvis Stories", a short film about a fictitious tabloid focused on recent sightings of Elvis Presley. The film starred friends and co-stars John Cusack, Jeremy Piven, Mike Myers, Andy Dick, and Jeff Kahn. The film was considered a success, and led him to develop another film titled "Back to Brooklyn" for MTV.
"The Ben Stiller Show".
Decision makers at MTV were so impressed with "Back to Brooklyn" that they offered Stiller a 13-episode show in the experimental "vid-com" format. Titled "The Ben Stiller Show", this series mixed comedy sketches with music videos and parodied various television shows, music stars, and films. It starred Stiller, along with main writer Jeff Khan and Harry O'Reilly, with occasional appearances by his parents Jerry Stiller and Anne Meara, and sister Amy Stiller.
Although the show was canceled after its first season, it led to another show titled "The Ben Stiller Show", on the Fox Network in 1992. "The Ben Stiller Show" aired 12 episodes on Fox, with a 13th unaired episode broadcast by Comedy Central in a later revival. Among the principal writers on "The Ben Stiller Show" were Stiller and Judd Apatow, with the show featuring the ensemble cast of Stiller, Janeane Garofalo, Andy Dick, and Bob Odenkirk. Both Denise Richards and Jeanne Tripplehorn appeared as extras in various episodes. Throughout its short run, "The Ben Stiller Show" frequently appeared at the bottom of the ratings, even as it garnered critical acclaim and eventually won the Emmy for "Outstanding Individual Achievement in Writing in a Variety or Music Program" post-humously.
Directorial debut.
After a few minor film roles in the early 1990s, such as "Stella", "Highway to Hell", and a cameo in "The Nutt House", Stiller devoted his time to writing, fundraising, recruiting cast members, starring in, and directing "Reality Bites". The film was produced by Danny DeVito, who later directed Stiller's 2003 film "Duplex" and produced the 2004 film "Along Came Polly". "Reality Bites" debuted as the highest-grossing film in its opening weekend and received mixed reviews.
Stiller joined his parents in the family film "Heavyweights" (1995), in which he played two roles, and then had a brief uncredited role in Adam Sandler's "Happy Gilmore" (1996). Next, he had lead roles in "If Lucy Fell" and "Flirting with Disaster", before tackling his next directorial effort with "The Cable Guy", which starred Jim Carrey. Stiller once again was featured in his own film, as twins. The film received mixed reviews, but was noted for paying the highest salary for an actor up to that point, as Jim Carrey received $20 million for his work in the film. The film also connected Stiller with future Frat Pack members Jack Black and Owen Wilson.
Also in 1996, MTV invited Stiller to host the VH1 Fashion Awards. Along with SNL writer Drake Sather, Stiller developed a short film for the awards about a male model known as Derek Zoolander. It was so well received that Stiller developed another short film about the character for the 1997 VH1 Fashion Awards and finally remade the skit into a film.
Comedy career.
In 1998, Stiller put aside his directing ambitions to star in the surprise hit with a long-lasting cult following, the Farrelly Brothers' "There's Something About Mary", alongside Cameron Diaz, which accelerated Stiller's acting career, remembered well for a classic scene where his character, Ted, "washes-the-pipes", or masturbates right before his first date with Mary (Cameron Diaz). That year, he also starred in several dramas, including "Zero Effect", "Your Friends & Neighbors", and "Permanent Midnight". Stiller was invited to take part in hosting the Music Video awards, for which he developed a parody of the Backstreet Boys and performed a sketch with his father, commenting on his current career.
In 1999, he starred in three films, including "Mystery Men", where he played a superhero wannabe called Mr. Furious. He returned to directing with a new spoof television series for Fox titled "Heat Vision and Jack", starring Jack Black, however, the show was not picked up by Fox after its pilot episode and the series was cancelled.
2000 would be a better year for Stiller, as he starred in three more films, including one of his most recognizable roles, a male nurse named Greg Focker in "Meet the Parents", opposite Robert De Niro. The film was well received by critics, grossed over $330 million worldwide, and spawned two sequels. Also in 2000, MTV again invited Stiller to make another short film, and he developed "Mission: Improbable", a spoof of Tom Cruise's role in "" and other films.
In 2001, Stiller would direct his third feature film, "Zoolander", which focused on the character Derek Zoolander (played by Stiller) that he developed for the VH1 Fashion Awards. The film featured multiple cameos from a variety of celebrities including Donald Trump, Paris Hilton, Lenny Kravitz, Heidi Klum, and David Bowie, among others. The film was banned in Malaysia (as the plot centered on an assassination attempt of a Malaysian prime minister) while shots of the World Trade Center were digitally removed and hidden for the film's release after the September 11 terrorist attacks.
After Stiller worked with Owen Wilson in "Zoolander", they joined together again for "The Royal Tenenbaums". Over the next two years, Stiller continued with the lackluster box office film "Duplex" and several cameos in "Orange County" and "Nobody Knows Anything!". He also guest-starred on several television shows, including an appearance in an episode of the television series "King Of Queens" in a flashback as the father of the character Arthur (played by Jerry Stiller). He also made a guest appearance on World Wrestling Entertainment's WWE Raw.
In 2004, Stiller appeared in six different films, all of which were comedies, and include some of his highest grossing films. They include "Starsky & Hutch", "Envy", ', an uncredited cameo in ', "Along Came Polly", and "Meet the Fockers". While the critically panned "Envy" only grossed $14.5 million worldwide, his most successful film of the year was "Meet the Fockers", which grossed over $516.6 million worldwide. In 2005, Stiller would begin his first attempt at a computer-animated film with "Madagascar", which performed so well at the box office that it resulted in a released in 2008 and in 2012.
In 2006, Stiller had cameo roles in "School for Scoundrels", and "Tenacious D in The Pick of Destiny", for which he served as executive producer. In December, Stiller starred in the lead role of "Night at the Museum". Although not a critical favorite, it earned over $115 million in ten days. In 2007, Stiller starred alongside Malin Åkerman in the romantic comedy "The Heartbreak Kid". The film earned over $100 million worldwide despite receiving mostly negative reviews. "Tropic Thunder", a film he directed, co-wrote, and co-produced, and in which he starred with Robert Downey Jr. and Jack Black, was released on August 13, 2008. In May 2009, he starred with Amy Adams in the sequel "". In 2010, Stiller made a brief cameo in Joaquin Phoenix's mockumentary "I'm Still Here" and played the lead role in the comedy-drama "Greenberg". Stiller again portrayed 'Greg' Focker in the critically panned yet successful "Little Fockers", the second sequel to "Meet the Parents". Stiller had planned to voice a character in "Megamind", but later dropped out while still remaining a producer.
In 2011, Stiller starred with Eddie Murphy and Alan Alda in "Tower Heist", about a group of maintenance workers planning a heist in a residential skyscraper. Filming began in November 2010.
"Frat Pack".
Stiller is the "acknowledged leader" of the Frat Pack, a core group of actors that has worked together in multiple films. The group includes Jack Black, Will Ferrell, Vince Vaughn, Owen Wilson, Luke Wilson, and Steve Carell. Stiller has been acknowledged as the leader of the group due to his multiple cameos and for his consistent use of the other members in roles in films which he produces and directs. He has appeared the most with Owen Wilson -- in eleven films. Of the 35 primary films that are considered Frat Pack films, Stiller has been involved with 20, in some capacity. He is also the only member of this group to have appeared in a Brat Pack film ("Fresh Horses").
Personal life.
Stiller dated several actresses during his early television and film career, including Jeanne Tripplehorn, Calista Flockhart, and Amanda Peet. In May 2000, Stiller married Christine Taylor, whom he met while filming a never-broadcast television pilot for the Fox Broadcasting network called "Heat Vision and Jack", which starred Jack Black.
The couple appeared onscreen together in "Zoolander", ', and "Tropic Thunder". Both he and his wife reside in New York City. The couple have 2 children, a daughter, Ella Olivia, born April 9, 2002, and a son, Quinlin Dempsey, born July 10, 2005. Quinn Dempsey shared the role of his father's character, Alex, as a cub, with another boy named Declan Swift, in '.
Stiller is a supporter of the Democratic Party and donated money to John Kerry's 2004 U.S. Presidential campaign. In February 2007, Stiller attended a fundraiser for Barack Obama and later donated to the 2008 U.S. Presidential campaigns of Democrats Obama, John Edwards, and Hillary Clinton. Stiller is also a supporter of several charities including Declare Yourself, the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation, and the Starlight Starbright Children's Foundation. In 2010, Stiller joined Jennifer Aniston, Courteney Cox, Robin Williams, and other Hollywood stars in "The Cove PSA: My Friend is... ", an effort to stop the slaughter of dolphins and protect the Japanese population from the toxic levels of mercury found in dolphin meat.
Stiller frequently does impersonations of many of his favorite performers, including Bono, Tom Cruise, Bruce Springsteen, and David Blaine. In an interview with "Parade", he commented that Robert Klein, George Carlin, and Jimmie Walker were inspirations for his comedy career. Stiller is also a self-professed Trekkie and appeared in the television special "Star Trek: 30 Years and Beyond" to express his love of the show, as well as a comedy roast for William Shatner. He frequently references the show in his work, and named his production company Red Hour Productions after the original "Star Trek" episode "The Return of the Archons".
