Matthew Steven "Matt" LeBlanc (born July 25, 1967) is an American actor, best known for his role as Joey Tribbiani on the NBC sitcom "Friends" and its spin-off "Joey". In 2011, LeBlanc began starring as a fictional version of himself in "Episodes", a BBC Two/Showtime television series created by "Friends" co-creator David Crane and Jeffrey Klarik. LeBlanc won a Golden Globe award for his work on "Episodes", after being nominated three times for his work as Joey Tribbiani on "Friends".
Early life.
LeBlanc was born in Newton, Massachusetts. His mother, Patricia, was an office manager, and his father, Paul LeBlanc, was a mechanic. His mother was of Italian descent and his father was of French-Canadian ancestry.
Career.
In 1988, he landed his first regular TV role on the drama "TV 101" which ran for one season. In 1990 he starred in Jon Bon Jovi's music video "Miracle," from "Young Guns II" sound track. In 1991 he starred in the music video for the Alanis Morissette single "Walk Away". He also appeared in the last seconds of the music video for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers' "Into the Great Wide Open" in which he is seen playing the trumpet. In 1991, he went on to star in a spin-off of "Married... with Children" titled "Top of the Heap". The Fox series lasted seven episodes airing in April and May 1991. In 1994, he starred in Bob Seger's "Night Moves" music video.
LeBlanc found success in the role of Joey Tribbiani on "Friends", and went on to play this character for twelve years — ten seasons of "Friends" and two seasons of "Joey". "Friends" was successful and LeBlanc, along with his co-stars, gained wide recognition among viewers.
LeBlanc has appeared in the films "Ed" (1996), "Lost in Space" (1998), "Charlie's Angels" (2000), and "All the Queen's Men" (2001).
In 2000, LeBlanc starred in Bon Jovi's music video "Say It Isn't So".
Matt LeBlanc's production company, Fort Hill Productions, co-produced the made-for-TV movie, "The Prince" in 2006.
In 2011, LeBlanc began appearing as a fictional version of himself in "Episodes", a BBC/Showtime television series about a British television series that is remade for an American audience. The series is written by "Friends" co-creator David Crane and his partner Jeffrey Klarik. LeBlanc won the 2012 Golden Globe for Best Actor in a TV Series Comedy for his performance. The second season of "Episodes" began airing on BBC Two on 11 May 2012.
In February 2012, LeBlanc appeared in the second episode of the eighteenth series of "Top Gear", where he set the fastest time of 1:42.1 in the Kia Cee'd, narrowly beating previous holder Rowan Atkinson by 0.1 seconds.. He also appeared in Series 19 Episode 4 to race the New Kia Cee'd, so the time could be compared to the old model.
Personal life.
In May 2003, LeBlanc married Melissa McKnight, a former model. McKnight and LeBlanc had been introduced in 1997 by her friend Kelly Phillips, wife of actor Lou Diamond Phillips, and LeBlanc proposed to her a year later. Their daughter Marina, born in 2004, began suffering seizures at age eight months, which affected her motor skills. By the time she was two years old, however, the condition, thought to be a form of dysplasia, had largely receded.
In June 2005, LeBlanc admitted to "careless and irresponsible" behavior with a stripper during a motorcycle trip to Canada. LeBlanc and McKnight separated on January 1, 2006. By that time, LeBlanc was involved in a relationship with actress Andrea Anders. In March of that year, LeBlanc filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences. The divorce became final on October 6, 2006.
