Adrien Broner (Born 28 July 1989) is a American Professional boxer, based in Cincinnati, USA. Broner is a two time world champion. He is the former WBO Super Featherweight champion and current WBC lightweight champion of the world. He is currently rated as the number one lightweight in the world. He is currently ranked #6 Pound For Pound by The Ring Magazine. 
Amateur career.
Broner had a successful amateur career with a record of 300-18.
Professional career.
Super Featherweight.
Broner turned professional on 31 May 2009 and scored three consecutive first round knockouts against Allante Davis, David Warren Huffman and Ramon Flores. In Broner's fourth fight he faced Terrance Jett at the MGM Grand in Las Vegas on the undercard of the Ricky Hatton vs Paulie Malignaggi fight. Broner defeated Jett with a stoppage in the sixth round. In Broner's fifth professional fight and final of 2008, he faced Scott Furney on the undercard of Oscar De La Hoya vs Manny Pacquiao fight. Broner stopped Furney in the first round bringing his record to 5(5)-0-0.
In January 2009 he was forced to go the distance with Jose Alfredo Lugo, at the Staples Center on the undercard of Shane Mosley vs Antonio Margarito. Broner returned to the ring in March scoring a unanimous decision over Eric Ricker. Three weeks later Broner stopped Angel Rodriguez in the fourth round. In his eighth fight Broner stepped up to eight rounds in a hard fought fight with Fernando Quintero, pulling out a majority decision. In June at the Staples Center Broner met Australian William Kickett, scoring a sixth round knockout. On the Juan Díaz vs Paul Malignaggi undercard in Houston Broner make short work of Edgar Portillo, victory coming via stoppage in the first round. Broner defeated Henry White Jr via KO in September and finished his busy year against Tommy Atencio. Broner stopped Atencio in the first round, for the sixth time in thirteen fights. Broner then had a fourth round stoppage victory over Roberto Acevedo. Broner fought 4 more times in 2010 against Rafael Lora, Carlos Claudio, Guillermo Sanchez, and Ilido Julio, stopping all of them.
Broner vs. De Leon.
Broner took his first major step up in competition in a disputed decision against Daniel Ponce De Leon on March 5, 2011. Broner started off the fight slow, having trouble getting through Ponce De Leon's tight guard and unable to figure him out the first 4 rounds of the fight. As the fight progressed into the middle rounds, Broner found his timing and was able to open up more on Ponce De Leon, seemingly controlling the pace and action of the middle rounds. The late rounds in the fight were close, with both fighters having their moments, and none really standing out or winning the majority of the late rounds. Broner was awarded the Unanimous Decision victory by the scores of 96-94, 96-94, and 99-91, with a large portion of analysts and commentators thinking the fight should have been scored a draw. The compubox stats had Ponce De Leon landing 127 of 592 (21%) on total punches, to 126 of 351 (36%) for Broner. In power punches, compubox had Ponce De Leon landing 119 of 392 (30%), to 101 of 243 (42%) for Broner. After the fight, Ponce De Leon said he definitely would like a rematch with Broner at some point. Lederman had Leon winning the fight by two rounds 96-94 with broner sweeping the 4 middle rounds and losing the rest. Jones Jr. Laughed at the decision and the commentators asked if Tony Crebs was watching the first 3 rounds of the fight as Crebs had awarded 9 of 10 rounds to Broner. Boxingwatchers scored the fight 97-93 Leon. http://www.boxingwatchers.com/2011-articles/march/ponce-de-leon-vs-broner-round-by-round.html
Broner's next fight was on HBO's Boxing After Dark show from Guadalajara, Mexico, Adrien Broner took on Top 10 Super Featherweight contender Jason Litzau in a fight scheduled for ten rounds. Broner landed combos on the ropes late in the first, with a straight right, left hook and then a right uppercut hurting the Minnesotan badly. He crumpled, and the ref leaped in, seeing he was out. The official end came at 2:58 of the first round.
Super Featherweight Title.
Having no luck in getting Ricky Burns, the former WBO super featherweight champion, to fight him on November 26, 2011, Broner fought contender Vicente Martin Rodriguez on the undercard of the Saul Alvarez vs. Kermit Cintron fight card on HBO as part of a double header. He defeated Rodriguez by knockout in the third round, to win the vacant WBO Super Featherweight World title.
Broner made a successful first defense of his WBO belt against Top 10 Super Featherweight contender and mandatory challenger Eloy Perez on a Feb. 25, 2012 HBO-televised card.
with a knockout victory. Broner controlled the pace and action from start to finish, beating Perez to the punch and walking him down with ease. The fight ended when Broner landed a straight hand on Perez, followed by another right hand as Perez was going down.
Broner's next scheduled fight was to be on July 21, 2012 at the U.S. Bank Arena in Cincinnati, against Super Featherweight contender Vicente Escobedo. However, at weigh-in for the fight on July 20, Broner was 133 1/2 pounds, well over the 130-pound limit for the Super Featherweight class, and was automatically stripped of his title. The fight went on as scheduled and Broner won by 5th round TKO when Escobedo's corner threw in the towel.
Lightweight.
Broner vs. DeMarco.
Broner's next fight was scheduled for November 17, 2012 in Atlantic City at Boardwalk Hall, and was aired on HBO. The fight marked Broner's debut in the Lightweight division. The opponent was the WBC Lightweight champion and "Ring" No. 1 ranked Lightweight, Antonio DeMarco. Broner started the fight off boxing DeMarco, working behind his jab and using his shoulder roll defense to frustrate DeMarco. In the early rounds, Broner was able to hit DeMarco with his quick counter left hook several times. By the 4th round, Broner and DeMarco decided to stand toe-to-toe in the center of the ring and trade punches. It was Broner who got the better of the inside fight though, with his speed and quick combination punching taking it's toll on DeMarco. By the 6th round, DeMarco had cut and his face swollen in several places, as he still opted to stand toe-to-toe with Broner, with Broner barely missing his right uppercuts and working the body of DeMarco as well. Then, in the 8th round, Broner opened up another fast combination which hurt DeMarco and than a swinging left uppercut sent DeMarco to the canvas for the first time in his career. DeMarco's corner stopped the fight right after the knockdown, giving Broner his 2nd world title in as many weight classes.
CompuBox had Broner landing 241 of his 451 total punches, in what was a dominating performance. After the fight, Broner said he'd be interested in fighting Mexican legend Juan Manuel Márquez and current WBO Lightweight Champion Ricky Burns. Broner is set to make his first title defense on February 16, 2013 at Boardwalk Hall in Atlantic City. Having no luck at getting fellow Lightweight champion Ricky Burns to fight him in February, Broner is set to fight "Ring" No. 6 ranked Lightweight, Gavin Rees.
Broner stopped Rees in 5 rounds, after Rees' corner threw in the towel at the end of the round. Rees had some success early, landing jabs and body shots, while Broner stayed patient in his shoulder roll defense. By round 3, Broner was in complete control, hitting Rees with his counter left hook at will, as well as hitting Rees at will on the inside. In the 4th round, Broner sent Rees to the canvas with a quick right uppercut, and landed more blistering combinations as the round ended. In the 5th, after a brief clinch between the two, they separated and Broner landed a hard left body shot on Rees, dropping Rees to a knee. Broner ended the round teeing off on Rees, with Rees' trainer throwing in the towel from the corner. CompuBox had Broner landing 48% of his punches in the fight, as well as ending the fight landing 40 of 57 into the final round.
