Emily Erin Deschanel (; born October 11, 1976) is an American actress, television producer, and film producer. She is best known for her role as Dr. Temperance "Bones" Brennan in the comedy-crime drama series "Bones".
Early life.
Deschanel was born in Los Angeles, California, the daughter of Academy Award–nominated cinematographer and director Caleb Deschanel and actress Mary Jo Deschanel (née Weir). She is the older sister of actress, model, songwriter, and musician Zooey Deschanel. She is of French, Swiss, Dutch, English, and Irish descent. Her grandfather was from Oullins, Rhône.
Deschanel attended Harvard-Westlake and Crossroads School in Los Angeles before graduating from Boston University's Professional Actors Training Program with a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Theater.
Career.
Deschanel made her feature film debut in 1994's "It Could Happen to You". Her next notable role was in Stephen King's "Rose Red" in 2002. She then appeared in "Cold Mountain", "The Alamo", and "Glory Road" and was named one of "six actresses to watch" by "Interview Magazine" in 2004. 
In 2005 Emily Deschanel was chosen for the role of Dr. Temperance Brennan on Fox's "Bones", a series based on the real-life forensic anthropologist Kathy Reichs. She has been playing this role in "Bones" for seven years; Season 8 premiered on September 17, 2012. For her performance she received a 2006 Satellite Award nomination and a 2007 Teen Choice Award nomination. Deschanel has served as co-producer since the start of the show's third season, and as producer since the middle of the show's fourth season along with co-star David Boreanaz.
Deschanel, with Alyson Hannigan, Jaime King, Minka Kelly, and Katharine McPhee made a video slumber party featured on FunnyorDie.com to promote regular breast cancer screenings for the organization Stand Up 2 Cancer. In recent years, her passion for animal welfare has led her to providing the narration for "My Child Is a Monkey" and serving as an associate producer on the documentary film "How I Became an Elephant". Deschanel ranked number 32 in The 2012 Hot 100 on AfterEllen.
Personal life.
Deschanel is a vegan and a committed supporter of animal rights causes. She can be seen in an "Access Hollywood" video at the book launch event of Karen Dawn's "Thanking the Monkey: Rethinking the Way We Treat Animals", discussing how vegetarian and vegan diets help the environment, and a video on the homepage of the book's website talking about the importance of animal rights.
Deschanel married actor and writer David Hornsby on September 25, 2010 during a small private ceremony in the Pacific Palisades area of Los Angeles. The couple's first child, Henry Lamar Hornsby, was born on September 21, 2011.
