Thaddeus Stevens (April 4, 1792 – August 11, 1868), of Pennsylvania, was a leader of the Radical Republican faction of the Republican Party and a fierce opponent of slavery. He was one of the most influential members in the history of Congress. As chairman of the powerful House Ways and Means Committee, Stevens, a witty, sarcastic speaker and flamboyant party leader, dominated the House from 1861 until his death. He wrote much of the financial legislation that paid for the American Civil War. Stevens and Senator Charles Sumner were the prime leaders of the Radical Republicans during the war and Reconstruction era. 
Scholarly views of Stevens have swung sharply since his death as interpretations of Reconstruction have changed. Historians of the Dunning School (1890s–1940s) held Stevens responsible for demanding harsh treatment of the white South and violating American traditions of republicanism, depicting Stevens as a villain for his advocacy of harsh measures in the South such as disfranchising all ex-Confederates. This highly negative characterization held sway into the 1950s. The rise of the neo-abolitionist school in the 1950s led to a strong positive appreciation of Stevens' work on civil rights for Freedmen. A recent biographer characterizes him as, "The Great Commoner, savior of free public education in Pennsylvania, national Republican leader in the struggles against slavery in the United States and intrepid mainstay of the attempt to secure racial justice for the Freedmen during Reconstruction, the only member of the House of Representatives ever to have been known as the 'dictator' of Congress."
Early life.
Stevens was born in Danville, Vermont, on April 4, 1792. His parents had arrived there from Methuen, Massachusetts around 1786. Thaddeus was the second of four children and was named to honor Polish patriot Tadeusz Kościuszko. He suffered from many hardships during his childhood, including a club foot. The fate of his father, Joshua Stevens, an alcoholic, profligate shoemaker who was unable to hold a steady job, is uncertain. He may have died at home, abandoned the family, or been killed in the War of 1812; in any case, he left his wife, Sally (Morrill) Stevens, and four small sons in dire poverty. Having completed his course of study at Peacham Academy, Stevens entered Dartmouth College as a sophomore in 1811, and graduated in 1814; before doing so, he spent one term and part of another at the University of Vermont. He then moved to York, Pennsylvania, where he taught school and studied law. After admission to the bar, he established a successful law practice, first in Gettysburg in 1816, then in Lancaster, in 1842. He later took on several young lawyers, among them Edward McPherson, who later became his protégé and ardent supporter in Congress.
Personal life.
Stevens never married, though there were rumors about his 23-year relationship (1845–68) with his widowed quadroon housekeeper, Lydia Hamilton Smith (1813-1884). Thomas Frederick Woodley's 1937 biography of Stevens, "The Great Leveler", examines Smith's interest in Mary Todd Lincoln and her friendship with Elizabeth Keckley, Mrs. Lincoln's dressmaker. Smith patterned her hair and dresses on Mrs. Lincoln. Carl Sandburg described Smith as "a comely quadroon with Caucasian features and a skin of light-gold tint, a Roman Catholic communicant with Irish eyes ... quiet, discreet, retiring, reputed for poise and personal dignity." Smith had two sons, William and Isaac, by her late husband, Jacob Smith, and she and Stevens raised the latter's nephews, whom he adopted in the 1840s.
During her time with Stevens—neighbors considered her his common law wife, and she was frequently called "Mrs. Stevens" by people who knew her, according to Sandburg—she invested in real estate and other businesses and owned a prosperous boarding house. No evidence exists as to the exact nature of the relationship between Stevens and Smith. In the one brief surviving letter from Stevens to her, Stevens addresses her as Mrs. Lydia Smith. Letters to Stevens from other family members show Smith was a friend to them and have "frequent warm and cordial references" to her.
When Stevens died, Smith was at his bedside, along with his nephews Simon and Thaddeus Stevens Jr., two African American nuns, and several other individuals. Under Stevens's will, Smith was allowed to choose between a lump sum of $5,000 or a $500 annual allowance; she was also allowed to take any furniture in his house. With the inheritance, she purchased Stevens's house, where she had lived for many years, and the adjoining lot.
Political life.
At first, Stevens belonged to the Federalist Party, but switched to the Anti-Masonic Party, then to the Whig Party, and finally to the Republican Party. In 1833, he was elected on the Anti-Masonic ticket to the Pennsylvania House of Representatives, where he served intermittently until 1842. He introduced legislation to curb secret societies, to provide more funds to Pennsylvania's colleges, and to put a constitutional limit on state debt. He refused to sign the new state constitution of 1838 because it did not give the right to vote to black citizens. He also came to the defense of a new state law, passed on April 1, 1834, providing free public schools. Newly elected members of the Pennsylvania State Senate tried to repeal the public education act, while the lower house tried to preserve it. Although Stevens had been reelected with instructions to favor repeal, in a great speech, he defended free public education and persuaded the Pennsylvania Assembly to vote 2–1 in favor of keeping the new law.
Stevens devoted most of his enormous energies to the destruction of what he considered the Slave Power—the conspiracy he saw of slave owners to seize control of the federal government and block the progress of liberty. In 1848, while still a Whig party member, Stevens was elected to serve in the House of Representatives. He served in congress from 1849 to 1853, and then from 1859 until his death in 1868.
He defended and supported Native Americans, Seventh-day Adventists, Mormons, Jews, Chinese, and women. However, the defense of runaway or fugitive slaves gradually began to consume the greatest amount of his time, until the abolition of slavery became his primary political and personal focus. He was actively involved in the Underground Railroad, assisting runaway slaves in getting to Canada. An Underground Railroad site has been discovered under his office in Lancaster, Pennsylvania.
During the American Civil War Stevens was one of the three or four most powerful men in Congress, using his slashing oratorical powers, his chairmanship of the Ways and Means Committee, and above all his single-minded devotion to victory. His power grew during Reconstruction as he dominated the House and helped to draft both the Fourteenth Amendment and the Reconstruction Act in 1867.
Radical Republicanism.
In July 1861 Congress passed the Crittenden-Johnson Resolution stating the limited war aim of restoring the Union while preserving slavery; Stevens helped repeal it in December. In August 1861, he supported the Confiscation Act, which said owners would forfeit any slaves they allowed to help the Confederate war effort. By December he was the first congressional leader pushing for emancipation as a tool to weaken the rebellion. He called for total war on January 22, 1862: 
Woodburn 178-179</ref>
Stevens led the Radical Republican faction in their battle against the bankers over the issuance of money during the Civil War. Stevens made various speeches in Congress in favor of President Lincoln and Henry Carey's "Greenback" system, interest-free currency in the form of fiat government-issued United States notes that would in effect threaten the bankers' profits in being able to issue and control the currency through fractional reserve loans. Stevens warned that a debt-based monetary system controlled by for-profit banks would lead to the eventual bankruptcy of the people, saying ""the Government and not the banks should have the benefit from creating the medium of exchange,"" yet after Lincoln's assassination the Radical Republicans lost this battle, and a National banking monopoly emerged in the years after.
Stevens was so outspoken in his condemnation of the Confederacy that Major General Jubal Early of the Army of Northern Virginia made a point of burning much of his iron business, at modern-day Caledonia State Park, to the ground during the Gettysburg Campaign. Early claimed that this action was in direct retaliation for Stevens' perceived support of similar actions by the Union Army in the South.
Stevens was the leader of the Radical Republicans, a varied group, though his own views were not shared by them all. His support for the confiscation of the leading planters' estates found little support even among Radicals and had no chance of passage. His theory of Reconstruction was equally outspoken. Known as the "conquered provinces" idea, it asserted that the Confederacy had in practical fact created a separate nation, however illegal doing so under the Constitution might be. They could therefore be treated as if they were a foreign nation that had been conquered, permitting the United States full power to remake southern society as it saw fit. (At the same time, Stevens's theory meant that Confederate leaders could not be tried for treason, because they had not made war on their own country, and Stevens himself was prepared to act as defense counsel for Jefferson Davis, if the occasion arose.) W. W. Holden, the Republican governor of North Carolina, later wrote that in December 1866 Stevens told him, "it would be best for the South to remain ten years longer under military rule, and that during this time we would have Territorial Governors, with Territorial Legislatures, and the government at Washington would pay our general expenses as territories, and educate our children, white and colored." Stevens took alarm at President Johnson's Reconstruction program almost at once, partly because it permitted new governments to be elected on an exclusively white suffrage, but also because of his intense disapproval of a Reconstruction initiated by executive authority: Stevens was a fierce defender of Congressional prerogatives. 
In the 39th Congress, Stevens served on the Joint Committee on Reconstruction, but found moderate members of his party predominating. In the House, he called for a reconstruction in which leading Confederates would be deprived of the vote and former slaves, at least the adult males among them, would be enfranchised. He found the Fourteenth Amendment's final provisions, with a limited disqualification from office for some former Confederates, deeply disappointing, but accepted it as the best terms possible. After the 1866 elections, Stevens pressed for a long probation period for the Confederate states, under military oversight, until they had been changed enough to be safe for readmission to Congress, but the so-called Military Reconstruction Acts of February and March, 1867, fell short of his wishes and set up a mechanism by which those states might be eligible for readmission within months. All the same, Stevens is credited with playing a central role in negotiating the course of Reconstruction. The key actions of 1866-67, says McKitrick, reflected the "Spirit of Thaddeus Stevens," although a couple of Senators had more power on specific issues. Accused of treason by President Johnson, convinced that Johnson was using all his executive powers to block a successful implementation of the Reconstruction Acts, Stevens was among the first Republicans to call for the president's impeachment -- and with very little success. Only when Andrew Johnson tried to force his Secretary of War, Edwin M. Stanton, out of office did moderate Republicans join the Radicals in voting through articles of impeachment. Stevens proposed and passed the resolution for the impeachment of Andrew Johnson in February 1868. He served on the panel of managers that prosecuted the case before the Senate, but Johnson was acquitted on May 16, 1868 by a single vote. Stevens knew the game was lost, but he continued to present impeachment resolution in the following few months. 
By that time, Stevens feared that Reconstruction would fail. When the Republican national platform failed to endorse universal suffrage, he called it "lame and cowardly." His one regret, he told a newspaper interviewer, was that he had lived so long and so uselessly. His last efforts in Congress came in helping pass the appropriation to pay for William Henry Seward's purchase of Alaska. Though the two men differed sharply on Reconstruction, they worked together well on foreign policy matters.
Death.
Thaddeus Stevens died at midnight on August 11, 1868, in Washington, D.C., less than three months after the acquittal of Johnson by the Senate. Stevens' coffin lay in state inside the Capitol Rotunda, flanked by a Black honor guard (the Butler Zouaves from the District of Columbia). Twenty thousand people, one half of whom were African American, attended his funeral in Lancaster, PA. He chose to be buried in the Shreiner-Concord Cemetery, because it was the only cemetery that would accept people without regard to race. 
"I repose in this quiet and secluded spot, not from any natural preference for solitude, but finding other cemeteries limited as to race, by charter rules, I have chosen this that I might illustrate in my death the principles which I advocated through a long life, equality of man before his Creator." 
Stevens' monument is at the intersection of North Mulberry and West Chestnut streets in Lancaster..
Legacy.
Stevens dreamed of a socially just world, where unearned privilege did not exist. He believed from his personal experience that being different or having a different perspective can enrich society. He believed that differences among people should not be feared or oppressed but celebrated.
In his will he left $50,000 to establish Stevens, a school for the relief and refuge of homeless, indigent orphans.
"They shall be carefully educated in the various branches of English education and all industrial trades and pursuits. No preference shall be shown on account of race or color in their admission or treatment. Neither poor Germans, Irish, or Mahometan, nor any others on account of their race or religion of their parents, shall be excluded. They shall be fed at the same table."
This original bequest has now evolved into Thaddeus Stevens College of Technology. The college continually strives to provide underprivileged individuals with opportunities and to create an environment in which individual differences are valued and nurtured.
In Washington, D.C., the Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School was built in 1868 as one of the first publicly funded schools for black children. President Jimmy Carter's daughter, Amy Carter, attended the school.
Stevens County, Kansas and the Thaddeus Stevens School in Lyndon Center, Vermont were named for Stevens.
Locations named in honor of Thaddeus Stevens in Pennsylvania include the community of Stevens, Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School in New Castle, Stevens School in York, Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School in the Chartiers neighborhood of Pittsburgh (built in 1940 with architectural details by Charles Bradley Warren), Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School in Chambersburg, Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School in Williamsport, and Stevens High School in Lancaster. Also, Thaddeus Stevens Elementary School which was in Penn Hills, Pennsylvania, during the 1940s and ’50s until it was torn down and the Thaddeus Stevens School of Practice in Philadelphia on Spring Garden Street.
Buildings associated with Stevens are currently being restored by the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster, Pennsylvania, with an eye toward focusing on the establishment of a $20 million museum. These include his home, law offices, and a nearby tavern. The effort also celebrates the contributions of his housekeeper, Lydia Hamilton Smith, who was involved in the underground railroad.
Cinematic portrayals.
Austin Stoneman, the naive and fanatical congressman in D.W. Griffith’s 1915 film "The Birth of a Nation", was modeled on Stevens. Additionally, he was portrayed as a villain in "The Clansman", the second novel in the trilogy upon which "Birth of a Nation" was based. He was also portrayed (by Lionel Barrymore) as a villain and fanatic in "Tennessee Johnson", the 1942 MGM film about the life of President Andrew Johnson. 
In Steven Spielberg’s 2012 film "Lincoln," Stevens is played by Tommy Lee Jones and portrayed as a fierce and courageous abolitionist. The performance garnered much critical acclaim and accolades for Jones, who has been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor.
External links.
 .
