The Middle (aka the middle.) is an American sitcom television series, airing on ABC since September 30, 2009. }</ref> The series features Frances "Frankie" Heck (Patricia Heaton), a working-class, Midwestern woman and her husband Mike Heck (Neil Flynn), who reside in the small fictional town of Orson, Indiana. They are the parents of three children, Axl (Charlie McDermott), Sue (Eden Sher), and Brick (Atticus Shaffer). The series was picked up for a full season of 24 episodes after airing just two episodes.
The third season premiered with a one-hour episode on September 21, 2011. On May 10, 2012, ABC renewed the show for a fourth season, which premiered with a one-hour special on September 26, 2012. It was nominated for one 2012 Emmy Award, for "Outstanding Makeup for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic)".
Premise.
The series features a middle-class family of five (the Hecks) living in flyover country in middle America in a mid-sized city in the American midwest state of Indiana. It is narrated by Frankie Heck, the wife and mother, an expressive under-performing salesperson at a used-car dealership and later a dental student. Her stoic husband Mike manages a local quarry and serves as a stabilizing influence in the family. They have three children: oldest son Axl, an under-motivated and cynical teenager, who does well in sports but not in academics; daughter Sue (the middle child), an enthusiastic young teen, but chronically unsuccessful and socially awkward; and son Brick (the youngest), an intelligent but introverted compulsive reader with behavioral problems and ongoing quirks.
See page "List of The Middle episodes".
Cast.
Recurring characters.
In May 2010, Whoopi Goldberg guest-starred as Jane Marsh (Sue's guidance counselor) in "The Guidance Counselor" episode.
Development and production.
The series was originally developed in the 2006–07 development cycle and was to star Ricki Lake as Frankie. Atticus Shaffer was the only actor to retain his role when the show was re-developed. The series was created by Eileen Heisler and DeAnn Heline and the pilot was directed by Julie Anne Robinson. On October 8, 2009, the show was picked up for a full season. On January 12, 2010, ABC Entertainment President Steve McPherson announced that he was renewing "The Middle" for a second season. After airing its third season, "The Middle" was renewed for a fourth season, along with other Wednesday comedies like "Modern Family" and "Suburgatory".
Reception.
Critical reception.
The show has received positive reviews from critics. It holds a score of 71 on the review aggregator website Metacritic as of April 1, 2011. Critics praise the show's realistic look at the middle class, its good timing, writing, and acting, with Robert Bianco of "USA Today" saying, "...This series seems to more assuredly offer a first-class version of what so many viewers say they want: a humorous, heartfelt, realistic look at middle-class, middle-America family life." The praise has been, so far, consistent, with "Entertainment Weekly"'s Ken Tucker saying that, in season two, "The Middle" continues to be "...a rock-solid show, the saga of a family struggling to keep their heads above the choppy economic waters..." In the 2009–2010 season, "The Middle" ranked number six on Metacritic's "Best Reviewed New Network Show" list. Airing behind the quickly cancelled "Hank" during its first season, ratings were not impressive at first. At the beginning of the 2010/2011 season, ABC moved the show to 8:00pm and ratings increased substantially, with the show usually ranking second in its time slot to CBS's "Survivor".
Awards and nominations.
In 2011, the series received a Gracie Award for Outstanding Comedy. The 1st Critics' Choice Television Awards nominated the series for Best Comedy Series, Patricia Heaton for Best Actress in a Comedy Series and Eden Sher for Best Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series.
Ratings.
The season 3 episode "Halloween II" was the most watched episode so far, viewed by 10.16 million viewers.
Syndication.
On March 6, 2012, it was announced that ABC Family obtained the rights to "The Middle", and will begin airing the series in the fall of 2013. Hallmark Channel also acquired "The Middle" for syndication to begin airing in March 2014.
