Michael Ray Nguyen-Stevenson (born November 19, 1989), known by his stage name Tyga (an acronym for Thank You God Always), is an American rapper signed to Young Money Entertainment, Cash Money Records and Universal Republic Records. He first received recognition with his debut single "Coconut Juice", featuring his cousin Travie McCoy. Since then he has signed to Young Money and released his major label debut "". The album included the chart topping singles "Faded", "Far Away" and "Make It Nasty". He plans to release his third studio album in March 2013 entitled "Hotel California".
Early life.
Michael Ray Nguyen-Stevenson was born on November 19, 1989, in the Los Angeles area, and is of Vietnamese and Jamaican descent . He grew up in Compton listening to Fabolous, Lil Wayne, Cam'ron and Eminem among others. He started rapping when his cousin (Travie McCoy) found him in a trainer store and Tyga offered his mixtape which he had made.
On December 3, 2012, debate arose concerning Tyga's upbringing. Tyga claimed to have been brought up in a low socioeconomic area of Compton, which contradicts his claims in 2008 on the television show "Bustas". On this show he claimed he grew up in a 'well-to-do' house in the Valley (California), where his parents drove a Range Rover and CL600 Mercedes Benz. He also claimed that he attained his nickname from his mother calling him 'Tiger Woods'. There has been speculation that his claims on the show were satirical and not to be taken seriously, and the veracity of his statements has been a subject of heated debate. Tyga responded to the leak of the video by twitter: "When u 14 an ambitious u don't give a f*k about anything. Scripted tv isn't that what we all live for.Hahahaha,"
Career.
2008–10: "No Introduction" and mixtapes.
"No Introduction" was the first independent album by American rapper Tyga. It was released on June 10, 2008, on Decaydance Records. One of the songs from this album, "Diamond Life", was used in the video game "", and on "Madden NFL 2009", as well as in the 2009 movie "Fighting".
Tyga released many mixtapes. His 2007 debut mixtape, Young On Probation, garnered him enough attention to sign a record deal with Young Money Entertainment. He created "Fan of a Fan" with Chris Brown and producers DJ Ill Will and DJ Rockstar. It features other artists such as Bow Wow, Lil Wayne, and Kevin McCall featured in several tracks. Four tracks ("Holla at Me", "G Shit", "No Bullshit" and "Deuces") are also accompanied by a music video. The track "Deuces" was released as the debut single of the mixtape and, as of August 26, 2010, has reached number 14 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 and number 1 on the "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. The track has also been nominated for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration at the 53rd Grammy Awards. The track, among others, was on the tracklist of Chris Brown's fourth studio album, "F.A.M.E.". Tyga also told MTV in an interview that the production of the mixtape took just short of a week.
2011–12: "Careless World: Rise of the Last King".
"Careless World: Rise of the Last King" was his second studio album. The album was released on February 21, 2012 on Young Money Entertainment, Cash Money Records, and Universal Republic Records. "Careless World: Rise of the Last King" is a move to the rapping style he featured in the collaboration album "We Are Young Money" rather me than the poppy dance element shown on "No Introduction". Tyga stated that the album shows he has grown up but still relates to the kids. Tyga released a new mixtape #BitchImTheShit in preparation for the album.
The first official single, "Far Away", was released on May 17, 2011 and peaked at 86 on the Billboard Hot 100. The second official single, "Still Got It", was released on October 4, 2011. It peaked at 89 on the Billboard Hot 100. The third official single, "Rack City", was released on December 6, 2011. It was originally listed on Tyga's "Well Done 2" mixtape, and was added to the album after it gained commercial success. It debuted at number 91 on the Billboard Hot 100, and has peaked at number 8 since then. The fourth official single, "Faded", was released on January 13, 2012. It peaked on the Hot 100 at #33.
Tyga's sixth single, "Do My Dance" which features 2 Chainz was released on October 2, 2012 and peaked at #79 on the Billboard Hot 100. He has released various mixtapes such as well-acclaimed "#BitchImTheShit" and "Well Done 3".
The same year Tyga also directed an adult film, "Rack City: The XXX Movie", starring Skin Diamond and Jada Fire; he also signed the soundtrack, that include the hits "Rack City" and "Faded" together with several original songs, and appeared in the film, in a non-sex role.
2012–present: "Hotel California".
Tyga's third studio album is titled "Hotel California" and it will be released in March 19, 2013. The first single was released on December 25, and is titled, "Dope". The song has a notable feature from rapper Rick Ross. Before the single dropped Tyga released a nine track mixtape under the name 187. "187" the mixtape was released on November 30, 2012. It features remixes to songs such as; 2 Chainz's "I'm Different", Meek Mill's "Young & Gettin' It" and GOOD Music's "Clique", among others and new material. Tyga will also release a second Fan of a Fan mixtape with singer Chris Brown. On episode three of Tyga's tour vlog Tyga confirmed four features on the upcoming album. Set to be featured on the album are Rick Ross, Nicki Minaj, Chris Brown, and Wiz Khalifa.
