Cheryl Ann Cole (née Tweedy; born 30 June 1983) is an English recording artist, songwriter, dancer and model. She rose to fame in late 2002 when she auditioned for the reality television show "" on ITV. The programme announced that Cole had won a place as a member of the girl group, Girls Aloud. She has been part of the group ever since, and during that time it has achieved 20 top-ten singles (including four number one singles) in the UK and six platinum albums (two of which went to number one) and earned five BRIT Award nominations from 2005 to 2010. In 2009, Girls Aloud won "Best Single" with their song "The Promise". In 2009, Girls Aloud announced their musical hiatus.
Cole embarked on a solo career and released her first solo studio album "3 Words" (2009) through Polydor records, "3 Words" saw the release of three successful singles, the lead single from the album "Fight for This Love" debuted at number one on the UK charts becoming the best selling single of the year. "3 Words" and "Parachute" both peaked within the top five of the UK charts. 2010 saw the release of Cole's second studio album "Messy Little Raindrops", which produced two singles, the first being "Promise This" which went straight to number one. Cole released her third solo album "A Million Lights" on 18 June 2012, with lead single "Call My Name" being released on 11 June 2012, the single became Cole's third number one single. During her solo career Cole has earned three BRIT Award nominations.
Cole has become a recognised and photographed style icon; referred to as a fashionista by the press. She has been photographed for the covers of "British Vogue", "Elle" and "Harper's Bazaar", while also becoming the new face of cosmetic company L'Oréal. Cole was married to England footballer Ashley Cole from July 2006 until September 2010, when she divorced him following the announcement of their separation earlier that year. Cole became a judge on "The X Factor" in 2008, becoming the winning judge twice out of the three series she judged. In 2011, Cole left the UK version of "The X Factor" to judge the American version. However, Cole was sacked from the show. Cole's net worth was estimated at £15 million in April 2012.
Biography.
1983–2001: Early life and career beginnings.
Cole was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, Tyneside, and grew up on council estates in the districts of Walker and then neighbouring Heaton. She is the fourth of five children of Joan Callaghan, and the first of her two children born to her second lover Garry Tweedy following the collapse of her marriage to the father of her three other children. Cole's parents were together for more than a decade but never married each other; they separated when she was eleven years old. She has a brother, Garry (born in Newcastle in 1987), and three elder maternal half-siblings: Joseph, Gillian and Andrew.
As a small child in about 1990, she appeared in a television advert for British Gas.
As she was interested in dancing from an early age, Cole started sequence dancing at the age of four, before joining The Royal Ballet's summer school at the age of nine. She won modelling competitions, including the titles of Boots Group's "bonniest baby", Mothercare's Happy Faces Portrait competition, "Best Looking Girl of Newcastle", The "Evening Chronicle"'s "Little Miss and Mister", and "Most Attractive Girl" at the MetroCentre. She then appearing in a second British Gas adverts, an SCS furniture store advert, and an Eldon Square Christmas advert with younger brother Garry as well as appearing in dance recitals on some television shows. She attended Walker Comprehensive School in Newcastle between September 1994 and July 1999, and left at 16 with few qualifications. During her time there, she was suspended twice: once for fighting with another pupil and again for swearing on a bus. After leaving school in 1999, she took a job as a waitress in a restaurant.
2002–08: Girls Aloud and marriage.
Cole auditioned for the reality television show "Popstars The Rivals" in 2002 with the song "Have You Ever". Several thousand applicants attended auditions across the UK in hope of being selected. Ten girls and ten boys were chosen as finalists by judges Pete Waterman, Louis Walsh and Geri Halliwell. These finalists then took to the stage, participating in weekly Saturday night live performances which alternated weekly between the girls and boys. Each week, the contestant polling the fewest phone votes was eliminated, until the final line-ups of the groups emerged. Cole joined Nadine Coyle, Sarah Harding, Nicola Roberts, and Kimberley Walsh to form the new girl group Girls Aloud, as determined by a public vote administered through the show on 30 November 2002.
The group's debut single "Sound of the Underground" peaked at number one on the UK Singles Chart, becoming the 2002 Christmas number one. Girls Aloud hold the record for the shortest time between formation and reaching number one. The group released their debut album "Sound of the Underground" in May 2003, which entered the charts at number two and was certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) later the same year. Since 2003, Girls Aloud have released twenty additional singles, with all but one charting within the top ten, and 15 reaching top five positions. Their singles "I'll Stand by You", "Walk This Way", and "The Promise" have charted at number one. Two of their albums have reached the top of the UK Albums Chart: their greatest hits album "The Sound of Girls Aloud" and 2008's "Out of Control", both of which entered the chart at number one, with over one million copies of the former being sold. All five of their studio albums have been certified platinum by the BPI. They have been nominated for five Brit Awards, and in 2009 won "Best British Single" at that year's Brit Awards for "The Promise". The group has sold ten million records worldwide. Girls Aloud have become one of the few UK reality television acts to achieve continued success, and had amassed a fortune of £25 million by May 2009. The 2007 edition of Guinness World Records listed them as "Most Successful Reality TV Group", while they also hold the record for "Most Consecutive Top Ten Entries in the UK by a Female Group" in the 2008 edition.
On 11 January 2003, Cole was involved in an altercation with a nightclub toilet attendant and was subsequently charged with assault and racially aggravated assault over the incident. She was subsequently cleared of the racially aggravated assault charge but found guilty of assault occasioning actual bodily harm at her trial on 20 October, and sentenced to 120 hours of community service. She was also ordered to pay her victim £500 in compensation, as well as £3,000 prosecution costs. Judge Richard Howard said: "This was an unpleasant piece of drunken violence which caused Sophie Amogbokpa pain and suffering." 
Cole began dating England and Chelsea footballer Ashley Cole in September 2004, announcing their engagement after he proposed in Dubai in June 2005. The couple were married at a ceremony at Barnet, North West London on 15 July 2006. They signed an exclusive deal with "OK!", reportedly worth £1 million, regarding the rights of the photographs. In January 2008, a hairdresser named Aimee Walton alleged in "The Sun" that she had engaged in drunken extramarital sex with Ashley Cole. Subsequently, glamour model Brooke Healy claimed that she had spent the night and had sexual relations with Ashley Cole in December 2006. The couple, however, reconciled.
2008–10: X Factor, "3 Words" and commercial breakthrough.
In June 2008, it was announced Cole would replace Sharon Osbourne as a judge for the fifth series of "The X Factor" alongside Dannii Minogue, Simon Cowell and Louis Walsh. Cole was given the girls category (made up of female contestants between 16 and 25) and subsequently ended up as the victorious judge when Alexandra Burke was crowned the fifth winner of "The X Factor" on 13 December 2008. Cole returned for the sixth series in 2009 and was given the boys category (made up of male contestants aged 16 to 25). Cole emerged as the winning judge for a second consecutive year after Joe McElderry was crowned the sixth winner of "The X Factor". Simon Cowell, creator of "The X Factor", said, "I knew she was going to be good because she speaks like normal people speak. People can relate to that. And I think that is the best sign of a judge." Cowell has referred to Cole as "one of the best I've ever worked with." Cole was interviewed during an episode of the fourth series of "Piers Morgan's Life Stories". The show, which aired on 23 October 2010, drew an audience of 7.2 million: the highest figure in the chat show's history. As a member of Girls Aloud, Cole has also appeared in the fly on the wall documentary ', the E4 documentary series ', an episode of "Ghosthunting With...", and a one-off variety show entitled "The Girls Aloud Party".
In March 2009, Cole climbed Mount Kilimanjaro in aid of Comic Relief. The trek raised £3.4 million for the charity. Between 3 February and 23 March 2009, Cole raised money for Comic Relief by providing the voice for the BT Speaking Clock.
Cole's first solo performance was on American rapper will.i.am's "Heartbreaker" in 2008. She was picked to appear as a dancer in the video after taking streetdancing classes during the filming of the ITV2 series "The Passions of Girls Aloud", in which the members of the band achieve something they had always wanted to do, other than sing. She was later asked, by will.i.am, to sing additional vocals on the track. In April 2009, Cole started working on solo material. Her debut album, "3 Words", was released in the UK on 26 October 2009. 
In July 2009, Girls Aloud announced they would take a year-long hiatus in the pursuit of solo projects, but would reunite for a new studio album in 2010. In August 2010, bandmate Nicola Roberts revealed that she wasn't anticipating a reunion of the band until 2012.
Cole was reunited with will.i.am for the album, in addition to collaborating with Fraser T Smith, Syience, Danish production team Soulshock & Karlin, singer-songwriter Taio Cruz, Wayne Wilkins, and Steve Kipner. Recorded in Los Angeles and London, Cole mainly collaborated with will.i.am of the Black Eyed Peas, the executive producer of "3 Words". It crosses from contemporary R&B, dance pop, house and a more general pop sound. Cruz was asked to write two songs for Cole, the first of which, "Break Your Heart", was written specially for Cole but Polydor label boss Ferdy Unger-Hamilton felt the song was too similar to Heartbreaker, the track Cole did with Will.i.am. When asked about the album's title Cole revealed she had already contemplated an album title which contained the phrase "3 Words" before the title track was recorded. She had considered titles like "Three Syllables", although the strongest contender was "Unveiled" as Cole "felt like she didn't have any protection without the girls Aloud" and because it correlated with the veil on the album cover. The album begins with its title track, a duet with will.i.am and Cole's favourite song on the album. She said the song was "totally different from anything I've done Girls Aloud or liked before" and took its inspiration from Cole's newly acquired love for dance music on the charts, especially David Guetta & Kelly Rowland's "When Love Takes Over".
"3 Words" spent two weeks at number one. On 6 November 2009, BPI certified the album Platinum, denoting shipments of over 300,000 units. It later tripled this feat. The first single from the album, "Fight for This Love", was written by Andre Merritt, Steve Kipner and Wayne Wilkins, and produced by Steve Kipner and Wayne Wilkins. According to Cole, it was released as the lead single because she "connected with the song so well". Following a performance on "The X Factor" live results show, "Fight for This Love" became the fourth best-selling single of 2009 in the UK. It charted at number one on both the Irish and UK Singles Chart. In 2010, "Fight For This Love" went to number one in Denmark, Norway and Hungary. "Fight for This Love" gained positive to mixed reviews. Ruth Harrison from 'Female First' was impressed by the song after initially being worried that Cole would not be able to cope going solo. She said "Whilst it does sound just a little big Girls Aloud-y, we still love it, and can see it being a huge hit on the club circuit up and down the country ... we think this is going to send her well on her way to global superstardom." The single was later certified silver in the UK. Cole's second single "3 Words", which features will.i.am, went to number 4 in the UK and seven in Ireland. In 2010, the single was released in Australia and charted at number 5 and was certified platinum. The third single, "Parachute", charted in the top five in both the UK and Ireland. The single was certified silver in the UK. From May to July 2010, Cole was the opening act for The Black Eyed Peas at the British shows (as well as some European dates) of The E.N.D. World Tour. Chris Johnson of the "Daily Mail" wrote, "she was supposed to be the support act. But as it turned out, Cheryl Cole ended up being the main event".
Cole was given a one-off television programme for ITV1 titled "Cheryl Cole's Night In", which aired on 19 December 2009. The programme, hosted by Holly Willoughby, featured music and interviews with Cole and some of her favourite performers. Alexandra Burke, Rihanna, Will Young, Snow Patrol and will.i.am made appearances. Cole told the press, "I couldn't be happier that ITV have asked me to round off the year with my own show, working with some of my favourite artists". The programme attracted 5 million viewers on its first airing, substantially less than the 8.1 million viewers that "Strictly Come Dancing" received during the same time slot.
In late 2009, Cole became the new face of L'Oréal. However, her recent advertising campaign promoting the L'Oréal Elvive shampoo and conditioner range attracted criticism amid claims that she had deliberately deceived persons wishing to buy the product, since it shows Cole with hair extensions.
2010–11: "Messy Little Raindrops" and personal struggles.
In March 2010, Cole stated that she had begun working on a follow up album to "3 Words", which she hoped to release "later on in the year". Cole's second solo album, titled "Messy Little Raindrops", was released on 1 November 2010. The album's first single, "Promise This", was released on 24 October 2010 and became her second number-one hit in the UK. "Promise This" is an up-tempo dance-pop song written by American songwriter Priscilla Hamilton, British music producer Wayne Wilkins, who was responsible for Cole's debut single "Fight for This Love", and Christopher Jackson. The album was largely produced by Wayne Wilkins. The album also features guest vocals from August Rigo, Dizzee Rascal, Travie McCoy, and will.i.am. Cole started recording sessions for her second album in February 2010 though in an interview on "" she admitted that some of the songs submitted for the record dated back to "3 Words" (2009). "Messy Little Raindrops" has received generally mixed reviews from music critics. A predominantly positive review came from Jon O'Brien of Allmusic who awarded it four out of five stars. Cole made a high-profile appearance on "Piers Morgan's Life Stories", in which she discussed her marriage and divorce with Ashley Cole and her life-threatening battle with malaria.
In early February 2010, news broke that Cole's husband had cheated on her with five more women. On 23 February, Cole announced she was separating from her husband. On 26 May 2010, Cole filed for divorce at London's High Court citing "unreasonable behaviour" of estranged husband Ashley as the reason for their break-up. She was granted a decree nisi on 3 September. In October of that year, Cole stated in an interview with "The Guardian" that she would continue to use her married name, saying that changing it back would make her seem "ashamed" of her marriage.
On 3 July 2010, Cole was admitted to hospital with suspected acute malaria after a visit to Tanzania. During an "X Factor" photoshoot in Cardiff, Cole has said that she noticed her lips were blue.
Cole returned for the seventh series of "The X Factor" in 2010 to mentor the girls category once again. In this series, Cole faced intense scrutiny from the public and the media after she rejected popular contestant Gamu Nhengu to go through to the live shows in favour of Cher Lloyd and Katie Waissel, even though both had fluffed their performances at judges' houses. Cole also received more criticism after she refused to vote for an act in the fifth week, which resulted in claims that the show was fixed. This series would also mark the first that Cole was not the winning mentor, after a contestant in her category, Rebecca Ferguson, lost out to Matt Cardle, who was mentored by Dannii Minogue.
Cole's first official book, entitled "Through My Eyes", was published on 30 September 2010 by Bantam Press. The book is described as "a series of stunning exclusive new photos plus informal shots from her own personal collection ... a revealing and intimate portrait of the world of Cheryl Cole". "Through My Eyes" offers a glimpse of Cole in the recording studio, backstage on tour, behind-the-scenes at "The X Factor", at photo shoots and at award ceremonies. She said the book is "filled with pictures that capture those moments, memories and the people [she's closest to". Cole is the subject of several unauthorised biographies, as well as books detailing her relationship with and divorce from Ashley Cole.
In February 2011, Cole launched her own charitable foundation with The Prince’s Trust following a meeting with The Trust’s President, HRH Charles, Prince of Wales. The Cheryl Cole Foundation will provide vital funds for The Trust in the North East, helping disadvantaged young people from Cole’s region. On 13 June 2011, she auctioned 20 dresses with ASOS to raise funds for the foundation.
2011–present: "A Million Lights", debut solo tour and Girls Aloud reunion.
On 5 May 2011, it was officially announced after months of speculation that Cole would appear as a judge alongside Simon Cowell, L.A. Reid, and Paula Abdul on the American version of "The X Factor". However, after only three weeks as a judge and completing the auditions in Los Angeles and Chicago, Cole departed the show. Cowell said that the reason why Cole left was because he offered her the job in the UK version back and he felt that she would have been more comfortable there. Additionally, it was later confirmed that she would not be returning to the UK version either, as Tulisa Contostavlos had taken her place on the UK judging panel. Nicole Scherzinger replaced Cole on the judging panel of "The X Factor USA" for the rest of season 1. A year later on "The Graham Norton Show", Cole revealed that she snubbed the decision to return to the UK version of the show. In December 2012, Cole sued the American version of the X Factor for $2.3 million (£1.4m).
Cole received $1.8 million (£1.1m) for the first season and is now sueing $2 million (£1.25m) fee for the second season, plus additional damages.
Cole's third studio album, "A Million Lights", was released on 18 June 2012. The album debuted on the UK Albums chart at number 2, becoming her first album not to get to number 1 in its first week and her first album not to surpass sales of 100,000 copies in its first week. The lead single "Call My Name", became Cole's third number one single on the UK Singles Chart selling 152,000 copies in its first week making it the fastest selling non charity single of 2012 so far. "Under the Sun", the second single from the album, was released on 3 September 2012. "Screw You" featuring British rapper Wretch 32 has been confirmed as the album's third single.
On 4 June 2012, Cole dueted with Gary Barlow at the Diamond Jubilee concert organised and created by Barlow himself and watched by millions worldwide. In October 2012, Cole embarked on her first solo concert tour, the A Million Lights Tour, which started on 3 October 2012 and ended on 17 October 2012.
On 8 August 2012 it was revealed that Cole would return to the "The X Factor" as a guest mentor to help judge Gary Barlow pick his finalist for the finals of the competition. 
Cole's autobiography entitled "Cheryl: My Story" was published on 11 October 2012. The books content spoke on her relationship with ex husband Ashley Cole, indecent with Simon Cowell and Cole setting the record straight on her personal life In November 2012 Cole was handed her own documentary entitled "Cheryl: Access All Areas",the show attracted 811,000 viewers on ITV2 and 177,000 watched on +1. 
After months of speculation, Cole confirmed that Girls Aloud's reunion would occur in November 2012. The reunion is said to coincide with their tenth birthday and the release of a charity single for "Children in Need". On 31 August 2012, Cole confirmed on BBC Radio 1 and Capital FM that the group's new single will be released in November, teasing the lyrics "I just wanna dance". Girls Aloud reunited for the group's 10th anniversary. On 18 November 2012, the group released their new single, "Something New" which was the official charity single for Children in Need. The single peaked at number-two on the UK Singles Chart. The group released their second greatest hits compilation, "Ten" on 26 November 2012. The second single taken from "Ten", "Beautiful Cause You Love Me" will be released on 17 December 2012. A documentary special entitled "10 Years of Girls Aloud" will air on ITV1 on 15 December 2012. In 2013, the group will embark on .
Artistry.
Voice and stage.
Cole has a mezzo-soprano range.
Cole spoke about her vocal ability saying "I am very aware of my ability, I know I’m no Mariah Carey but I think the emotion in the song is what matters."
It has been widely reported that Cole lip-syncs during live performances. Whilst performing "Fight for this Love" in 2009 on "The X Factor", media speculated that the performance was mimed, something that Cole denied though she admitted to having some pre-recorded vocals to help the live performance. In 2010 during Cole's second performance on "The X Factor" she "showcased her vocal and dancing skills with an energetic, raunchy routine that earned a standing ovation from her fellow judges." Similar to her 2009 performance of "Fight for This Love" on "The X Factor", the media speculated whether Cole lip synced or not. An ITV spokesperson insisted that Cole did not mime, although the performance was pre-recorded. On 26 May 2012, it was reported that Cole would perform "Call My Name" with live vocals on "The Voice UK", following allegedly pre-recorded performances that occurred the previous year on "The X Factor UK". It was also reported that "The Voice" executives always edit the vocals for every artist on the show, and they would "provide some finishing touches to her singing prior to it being broadcast." As the performance began, COLE swan-dived onto her backing dancers before they performed a highly ellaborated routine. Following the broadcast, Cole received mixed comments from viewers, with a few accusing the singer of lip synching, while others, including pop artists Emma Bunton and will.i.am, praised the performance. In an interview with BBC News, Cole addressed the negative comments, and said that "if you think my live vocal sounds so good it must be mimed, I'm happy, I take it as a compliment." She performed the track again on "The Graham Norton Show" on 8 June 2012, and was also accused of lip synching.
Music and Influences.
3 Words was influenced by Cole's appreciation for dance music and has given the album and its singles a distinctively different sound to Girls Aloud. It crosses from contemporary R&B, dance pop, house and a more general pop sound. Messy Little Raindrops utilizes a more dance pop sound than Cole's previous album, Cole described the album as "more exciting, very personal, very me," combining pop, R&B, and dance sounds. In contrast to her debut album "3 Words" (2009) and "Messy Little Raindrops" (2010), which both mainly drew influences from the Dance-pop and Pop genres, "A Million Lights" Cole's third studio album also incorporates R&B and dance. Cole also incorporated Dup-step into "A Million Lights" "The dub-step influenced track Girl In The Mirror – showing a new direction for Chezza, away from her usual R&B influenced sound." 
Cole has named Britney Spears and Beyoncé Knowles as a few of her inspirations, performance and fashion wise. Cole spoke on the reason Beyoncé Knowles was a big influence on her saying "I love Beyonce, I just think she is such a beautiful person inside and out, apart from what she does on the stage which is obviously incredible and aspiration. I just like her as a woman shes empowering." 
Cole has also cited 'Left Eye' a former member of American band TLC was a big influence saying "I wanted to be Lisa 'Left Eye' Lopes from TLC - I used to wear baggy jeans and Timberlands like a tomboy." Cheryl Cole cites singer Rihanna as an influence saying: "You know what I love about Rihanna? I know she gets a lot of criticism, too, about what she wears and what she sings about, but she is so free," she explained. "She doesn’t give two f**ks. I love that in her. I love that sense of freedom about her. She’s gorgeous and free. A perfect pop star." Cheryl Cole also cites American singer Mary J Blidge as an influence stating so Blidge's music has helped her "Mary J. Blige's song Just Fine is my feel good song. Mary's voice sounds so grown up and you can hear that she has experienced a lot in her life, her songs help me with every heartache."
Cole has also influenced other artists, one being American singer Selena Gomez. In October 2010, Gomez revealed that Cole was an influential person for her saying "She's a big influence on me," the star said. "I picked up her CD and they gave me Girls Aloud things and a DVD of her, and her music got me through my whole movie I was filming. She made me feel better, I just love her music and I think she's a really nice person. She's been through a lot, but she carries herself with a lot of class and I love that."
Public image.
Cole has become a recognised and photographed style icon; referred to as a fashionista by the press. Cole has been described as the one of the best dressed women in the world. Fashion magazine British Vogue praised Cole's style saying "Her wardrobe choices have become as successful as her singles - while filming for X Factor, she had fashion fans watching her every sartorial move and was snapped wearing a string of fashion-forward outfits from Givenchy and Preen, to McQueen and Missoni." In both 2009 and 2010 Cole was named the best dressed woman by Glamour Magazine. Cole kept her top spot in 2010 above fashion model Kate Moss and Victoria Beckham, Cole also beat R&B singer Rihanna who came second and actress Blake Lively who came third. The result for the magazine were compiled from around 14,000 votes from the magazine's readers. She has been photographed for the covers of "British Vogue", "Elle" and "Harper's Bazaar". Cole has topped FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World twice: once in 2009 and the second time in 2010. Cole has won a list of awards due to her style and image including Glamour Women of the Year Awards for TV Personality and Best dressed and Style Network Award for Best Dressed Woman and Style icon of the decade In February 2009, Cole appeared on the cover of "British Vogue". The media coverage of her appearance in the magazine boosted the magazine's circulation to 240,000: its best ever February figure. She also appeared on the November 2009 cover of the UK's "Elle" magazine.
Many celebrities have spoken about Cole's fashion style and looks. Actress Megan Fox spoke about Cole saying 'I don't know that many British girls, but what's her surname? Cheryl? Cheryl Cole, yeah she's hot, and I love her tattoos.', Socialite Paris Hilton complimented Cole saying 'I love the way Cheryl dresses, and she's so sweet. We hung out a bit at the Grammys and I just find her beautiful and down to earth.' Actress Teri Hatcher called Cole a role model saying 'Cheryl is a great role model and exactly the sort of woman we would love to have a role on Desperate Housewives. I hear she is an absolute darling.' Rihanna also spoke on her admiration for Cole 'Like, how do you have a face like that, with hair like that and dimples, and a body like that, that's proportioned like that. And you have a successful career, something about that is not right.'
Cole was referenced in Lily Allen's "Cheryl Tweedy", a B-side to her 2006 debut single "Smile". Cole took the song as a compliment to her, although Allen later pointed out that it had been tongue-in-cheek. Allen has since retracted her comments.
Filmography.
Selected filmography
