XXXX (pronounced fourex or quadruple x if you are John Boyer) is a brand of Australian beer brewed in Milton, Brisbane by Queensland brewers, Castlemaine Perkins. It enjoys wide popularity in the state of Queensland, where it is commonly found on-tap in pubs and bars.
The XXXX brand was first introduced in 1924 and is a throwback to the long standing tradition of using Xs to indicate the strength of an ale. The brand name also built upon XXX Sparkling Ale introduced in 1878. The brand is used on the "XXXX Bitter", "XXXX Gold", "XXXX Light Bitter" (Lager), "XXXX DL" (Diet Lager) and "Sovereign" (Lager).
Previously sold beers, currently not available, include "Thirsty Dog" (Wheat Beer) "XXXX Draught"/Original Draught, and "XXX Sparkling Ale" which is only sold at the XXXX alehouse next to the brewery.
History.
The XXXX brand was launched in 1924 by then Castlemaine Brewers, named after the town of Castlemaine, Victoria where the company was born in 1857. The yellow-and-red label still bears this town's name. XXXX has been brewed in the Castlemaine Perkins Milton Brewery since its introduction, and has featured an artist's sketch (later very stylised) of this brewery on the label of beer bottles and cans. In the 1950s the prominent 'XXXX' illuminated sign was erected on the brewery. "XXXX" itself refers to a traditional grading system for strong beer.
In 1992, Castlemaine Perkins was acquired by Australian beverage and food company Lion Nathan, who in turn were taken over by Japanese beverage conglomerate, Kirin, in 2009.
Distribution.
XXXX is the most widely available beer throughout most of Queensland, although many other beers, such as Victoria Bitter and Tooheys are popular. The most widely known variant outside of Australia is XXXX Export Lager. It contains 4.8% alcohol by volume (ABV).
XXXX was brewed under licence in the UK by InBev Ltd until 2009. It was commonly available in cans in British off licences and sometimes on tap in British pubs, although it was much less widely available than Foster's (which is found in many UK pubs). At 3.7% alcohol, the British brewed XXXX was somewhat weaker than most of the Australian variants. Castlemaine XXXX was withdrawn from the UK at the end of June 2009 when InBev's licensing agreement expired.
Iconography, advertising and brand recognition.
XXXX's mascot is Mr Fourex - a jovial cartoon man in a suit with a boater hat, who features on the City side of the Fourex Brewery at Milton and is to be re-introduced into advertising in the near future for the first time since 1967. Mr Fourex is thought to be modelled after a gentleman by the name of Paddy Fitzgerald. However, Mr Fourex may have been around long before Paddy became a force at the brewery. A second theory is that the cartoon is modelled on a well-known dwarf who sold newspapers in the inner city suburb of Fortitude Valley in the late 1920s. The true identity for the inspiration behind the cartoon remains a mystery.
A common nickname used by the military (Australian, passed along to their Allied guests) was "Barbed Wire," as the XXXX has the appearance of the fence product used in the Outback. 
The second major campaign was launched in the early 1980s in the North Queensland area after the general manager of 'XXXX' Pat Holmboe at the time heard of the locally famous Clinton Howe, a council road worker, being able to consume a very high quantity of the beer in a short time (approx. 3L in 1 minute or 3/4 gal.). The company was forced to close the campaign within the first few day s of T.V. advertising following government pressure.
An advertisement campaign from the 1980s and 1990s featured the tagline ""Australians wouldn't give a XXXX for anything else.""
Most beers under the XXXX label are sold in Australia as 375 ml cans ("tinnies"), 375 ml bottles ("stubbies") and 750 ml bottles ("tallies" or "long necks"), on tap (in most Queensland pubs but also to a lesser extent throughout the rest of Australia) and all bottles have twist top lids. Underneath the twist top lids there are trivia questions.
XXXX is still being served from wooden barrels at the Breakfast Creek Hotel in Newstead, Queensland. Whilst not cask-conditioned, as in the case of British real ale, the beer is unpasteurised and delivered by gravity.
XXXX's labels generally feature a depiction of the Milton Brewery alongside the Ipswich railway line, presently with a Citytrain EMU in the foreground with the existing extensive railway fencing omitted. Prior labels had steam engines and diesels when those locomotives were more regularly seen in Brisbane.
Sports sponsorship & Campaigns.
XXXX is the major sponsor of Queensland Maroons in the State of Origin series. XXXX Gold is also a sponsor of the QLD Bulls and the QLD, SA, ACT & NT Cricket Associations. XXXX Gold also sponsors the Australian V8 Supercars Championship Series as well as the Professional Bull Riders' (PBR) Australian branch.
XXXX sponsored the "XXXX Gold Beach Cricket Tri-Nations 2007" series. It involved famous cricketers from Australia such as Allan Border, England including Graham Gooch and West Indies including Courtney Walsh and Sir Viv Richards.
In March 2012 XXXX GOLD obtained a three-year lease on a 15-acre island on the Southern Great Barrier Reef, which they plan to turn XXXX Island into a resort.
