Escape from Planet Earth is a 2013 Canadian 3D computer animated family film produced by Rainmaker Entertainment, and directed by Cal Brunker. The film was released on February 15, 2013.
This was the first Rainmaker Entertainment film theatrically released.
Plot.
The story takes place on Planet Baab where admired astronaut Scorch Supernova is a national hero to the blue alien population. A master of daring rescues, Scorch pulls off astonishing feats with the quiet aid of his nerdy brother, Gary head of mission control at BASA. When BASA's no-nonsense chief Lena informs the brothers of an SOS from a notoriously dangerous planet, Scorch rejects Gary's warnings and bounds off for yet another exciting mission. But when Scorch finds himself caught in a fiendish trap set by the evil Shanker, it's up to scrawny, risk-adverse Gary to do the real rescuing. As the interplanetary stakes rise to new heights, Gary is left to save his brother, his planet, his beloved wife Kira and their adventure hungry son Kip.
Development.
The film has been in development at The Weinstein Company at least since 2007. The film was first announced in a press release from The Weinstein Company, which announced that the film was in full production and also announced most of the cast.
The film's director is Cal Brunker, who previously worked as a storyboard designer on "Despicable Me", "Horton Hears a Who!" and "". The film was originally set for release on February 14th, but was eventually changed to February 15th due to conflicting schedules.
Lawsuit.
Writer-director Tony Leech and film producer Brian Inerfeld sued the Weinstein Company, claiming they signed a deal whereby they were to receive at least 20 percent of Escape's adjusted gross profit, which they estimated would be worth close to $50 million in back end participation alone. But the film languished in development, and the plaintiffs claimed that the Weinsteins repeatedly unlocked the script, forcing rewrites at least 17 times, which they say "eviscerated" the movie's budget by keeping 200-plus animators on payroll. With the film pushing its budget, the Weinsteins went outside for fresh capital. The Weinstein Company entered into a Funding and Security Agreement with JTM whereby the financiers agreed to provide new money and, in return, get 25 percent of the film's gross receipts and 100 percent of all foreign gross receipts. Leech and Inerfeld were upset, alleging that the agreement had mortgaged their own financial upside and said the Weinsteins advised them that if they wanted their past due money, they would have to agree to this arrangement. Instead, Leech and Inerfeld went on the legal attack against TWC even claiming that they were paid $500,000 in hush money to keep the dispute quiet on the verge of the Weinsteins' The King's Speech Oscar victory in 2011. As for JTM, the plaintiffs demanded a declaratory judgment that their contractual rights to share in the profits were superior to JTM's security interest in profits from the film. Leech and Inerfeld continue to pursue The Weinstein Company directly.
Music.
Soundtrack.
Escape from Planet Earth: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was released on February 19, 2013. The following 13 songs are on the official film soundtrack.
Score.
Escape from Planet Earth: Original Score By Aaron Zigman is the soundtrack of the film scored by Aaron Zigman and was released on February 8, 2013.
Reception.
Critical response.
"Escape from Planet Earth" received generally unfavorable reviews from critics. Based on 26 reviews, the film currently holds a rating of 27% on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, with an average rating of 4.3/10. Another review aggregator, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics, calculated a score of 35 based on 10 reviews
Stephen Farber of "The Hollywood Reporter" commented on the film by saying "The picture has enough entertainment value to tickle its target audience and even offers a few chuckles for accompanying adults. A strong cast and bright -- if uninspired — animation help to offset a thin story. Decent box office returns seem likely." Tasha Robinson of The A.V. Club gave the film a C, calling it a "Mild-mannered CGI animated film that consists largely of broad conflicts, broadly resolved. It’s unchallenging fun for a younger crowd, but adults might feel like they’re staring down a colorful 24-piece board puzzle, trying to figure out how such a simple activity could be drawn out over 90 minutes." Mack Rawden of Cinema Blend panned the film by saying "Every single facet of the film is at best, slightly below average and at worst, downright terrible." Stephen Whitty of the Newark Star-Ledger said "It provides a few smiles, and a decent amount of rainy-day, kiddie entertainment." Neil Genzlinger of The New York Times called it "A children’s movie about space-traveling blue beings that has lots of high-flying escapades but fairly low aspirations." Jordan Riefe of the Boston Phoenix said "This might please young kids but torment discerning parents." 
Peter Howell of the Toronto Star gave the film 2 and a half stars and wrote, "No matter whether you call Escape from Planet Earth sincere homage or cynical thievery, it goes down well in its brisk 89 minutes." Gregg Katzman of IGN gave the film a 4.5 out of 10 saying "Escape From Planet Earth looks fantastic and is sporting some commendable voice acting, but these qualities can't overcome a stale script and significant lack of laughs. Unless you have a young kid that wants to see it, I just can't recommend this one at all." Sheri Linden of the los Angeles Times Said "It never discovers new worlds, but "Escape From Planet Earth" is, in its genial way, escape enough." Tom Russo of The Boston Globe gave the film two stars saying " If "Escape” figures prominently into your February staycation plans, you won’t feel like you’ve thrown your money away, but the kids won’t still be buzzing about it when they get back to school, either." Roger Moore of The Seattle Times gave the film two out of four stars saying "The animation is what sells “Escape from Planet Earth,” with rich, textured surfaces — check out the fishnet webbing on Scorch’s spacesuit, the paint worn off the hardware and the perfectly rendered 7-Eleven, where even the Slurpee (product placement in a cartoon?) shimmers like the real thing. But it’s not worth paying 3D prices".
Box office.
As of February 24, 2013, "Escape from Planet Earth" has grossed an estimated total of $35,144,000, worldwide.
In North America, the film opened to #4 in its first weekend with $15,891,055, behind "A Good Day to Die Hard", "Identity Thief" and "Safe Haven".
