Alan Sidney Patrick Rickman (born 21 February 1946) is an English actor of stage and screen. He is a renowned stage actor in modern and classical productions and a former member of the Royal Shakespeare Company. His breakout performance was as the Vicomte de Valmont in "Les Liaisons Dangereuses", for which he was nominated for a Tony Award. Rickman is known for his film performances as Hans Gruber in "Die Hard", Sheriff Of Nottingham in "" for which he won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role in 1991, Severus Snape in the "Harry Potter" film series, Éamon de Valera in "Michael Collins", and Metatron in "Dogma".
Rickman has also had a number other notable film roles such as Jamie in "Truly, Madly, Deeply", P.L. O'Hara in "An Awfully Big Adventure" and Colonel Brandon in Ang Lee's 1995 film "Sense and Sensibility". More recently, he played Judge Turpin in the film adaptation of Stephen Sondheim's musical of '. In 1995, he was awarded the Golden Globe, Emmy Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for his portrayal of Rasputin in '. He has been named one of the best actors to have never received an Academy Award nomination in 2010. 
As of 2012, Rickman has won a BAFTA Award, a Golden Globe Award, an Emmy Award and a Screen Actors Guild Award. 
Early life.
Rickman was born in South Hammersmith, London, to a working-class family, the son of Margaret Doreen Rose (née Bartlett), a housewife, and Bernard Rickman, a factory worker. Rickman's mother was from Wales and a Methodist, and his father was of Irish Catholic background. He has one elder brother, David (b. 1944), a graphic designer, a younger brother, Michael (b. 1947), a tennis coach, and a younger sister, Sheila (b. 1949). Rickman attended Derwentwater Primary School, in Acton, a school that followed the Montessori method of education.
When he was eight, his father died, leaving his mother to bring up four children mostly alone. She married again, but divorced his stepfather after three years. "There was one love in her life," Rickman later said. Rickman excelled at calligraphy and watercolour painting, and from Derwentwater Junior School he won a scholarship to Latymer Upper School in London, where he started getting involved in drama. After leaving Latymer, Rickman attended Chelsea College of Art and Design and then the Royal College of Art. This education allowed him to work as a graphic designer for the radical newspaper the "Notting Hill Herald", which he considered a more stable occupation than acting. "Drama school wasn't considered the sensible thing to do at 18," he said.
After graduation, Rickman and several friends opened a graphic design studio called Graphiti, but after three years of successful business, he decided that if he were to ever explore acting professionally, it was now or never. This led him to write a letter to the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) requesting an audition and was awarded a place in RADA which he attended from 1972–74. While there, he studied Shakespeare's works and supported himself by working as a dresser for Nigel Hawthorne and Sir Ralph Richardson, and left after winning several prizes, including the Emile Littler Prize, the Forbes Robertson Prize, and the Bancroft Gold Medal.
Career.
After graduating from RADA, Rickman worked extensively with various British repertory and experimental theatre groups on productions including "The Seagull" and Snoo Wilson's 'The Grass Widow' at the Royal Court Theatre, and has appeared three times at the Edinburgh International Festival. In 1978, he played with the Court Drama Group, performing in several plays, most notably "Romeo and Juliet" and "A View from the Bridge". While working with the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC) he starred in, among other things, "As You Like It".
In 1982, British television audiences came to know Alan Rickman as the Reverend Obadiah Slope in the BBC's adaptation of "Barchester Towers" known as The Barchester Chronicles.
In 1985, Rickman was given the male lead, the Vicomte de Valmont, in the Royal Shakespeare Company's production of Christopher Hampton's "Les Liaisons Dangereuses", directed by Howard Davies. When the show went to Broadway in 1987, Rickman earned both a Tony Award nomination and a Drama Desk Award nomination for his performance. In 1992, he was the "master of ceremonies" on Mike Oldfield's album "Tubular Bells II" where he read off a list of instruments on the album.
Rickman's career has been filled with a wide variety of roles. He has played romantic leads like Colonel Brandon in "Sense and Sensibility", and Jamie in "Truly, Madly, Deeply"; numerous villains in Hollywood big budget films, like German terrorist Hans Gruber in "Die Hard" (1988) and the Sheriff of Nottingham in "" (1991); and most recently the ambiguous character of Severus Snape, the potions master in the "Harry Potter" series (2001–2011).
His role in "Die Hard" earned him a spot on the AFI's 100 years...100 Heroes & Villains as the 46th best villain in film history. His performance as the Sheriff of Nottingham in "" also made him known as one of the best actors to portray a villain in films. He has taken issue with being typecast as a "villain actor", citing the fact that he has not portrayed a stock villain character since the Sheriff of Nottingham in 1991.
During his long career Rickman has also played a number of comedic roles, sending up classically trained British actors who take on "lesser roles" as the character Sir Alexander Dane/Dr. Lazarus in the science fiction spoof "Galaxy Quest", portraying the angel Metatron, the voice of God, in "Dogma", appearing as Emma Thompson's foolish husband Harry in "Love Actually", providing the voice of Marvin the Paranoid Android in "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy", and the egotistical, Nobel Prize-winning father in "Nobel Son".
Rickman has also received acclaim for two biographical pieces he did for HBO. He won a Golden Globe and an Emmy for his performance as ' in 1996, and was also nominated for an Emmy for his work as Dr. Alfred Blalock in 2004's "Something the Lord Made". He also starred in the independent film "Snow Cake" (with Sigourney Weaver and Carrie-Anne Moss) which had its debut at the Berlinale, and also ' (with Dustin Hoffman), directed by Tom Tykwer.
In 2007, Rickman appeared in the critically acclaimed "" directed by Tim Burton, alongside "Harry Potter" co-stars Helena Bonham Carter and Timothy Spall; he played antagonist Judge Turpin. Rickman also appeared as Absolem the Caterpillar in Burton's 2010 film "Alice in Wonderland".
In 2000, Rickman appeared in "Victoria Wood with All The Trimmings", a Christmas special by Victoria Wood, playing an aged colonel in the battle of Waterloo who is forced to break off his engagement to Honeysuckle Weeks' character. "Harry Potter" co-star Imelda Staunton also appeared in the special.
Rickman has performed on stage in Noël Coward's romantic comedy "Private Lives", which transferred to Broadway after its successful run in London at the Albery Theatre and ended in September 2002. Rickman had reunited with his "Les Liaisons Dangereuses" co-star Lindsay Duncan and director Howard Davies for this Tony Award-winning production.
His previous stage performance was as Mark Antony, opposite Helen Mirren as Cleopatra, in the Royal National Theatre's production of "Antony and Cleopatra" at the Olivier Theatre in London, which ran from 20 October to 3 December 1998. Before that, he performed in Yukio Ninagawa's "Tango at the End of Winter" in London's West End and the Riverside Studio production of "Hamlet" in 1991, directed by Robert Sturua.
Rickman had also directed "The Winter Guest" at London's Almeida Theatre in 1995 and the film version of the same play in 1996 starring Emma Thompson and her real life mother Phyllida Law. He also compiled (with Katharine Viner) and directed the play "My Name Is Rachel Corrie" in April 2005 at the Royal Court Theatre, London, and won the Theatre Goers' Choice Awards for Best Director. In May 2010, he finished directing Strindberg's play "Creditors" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music Harvey Theatre after its previous run at London's Donmar Warehouse in 2008.
In 2009 Rickman was given the James Joyce Award by University College Dublin’s Literary and Historical Society.
In October and November 2010, Rickman starred in the eponymous role in Henrik Ibsen's "John Gabriel Borkman" at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin alongside Lindsay Duncan and Fiona Shaw. The "Irish Independent" called Rickman's performance breathtaking. This production subsequently travelled to the Brooklyn Academy of Music for performances in January and February 2011.
In 2011, Rickman again appeared as Severus Snape in the final installment in the "Harry Potter" series, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2". Kenneth Turan of "The Los Angeles Times" said Rickman "as always, makes the most lasting impression," while Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" called Rickman "sublime at giving us a glimpse at last into the secret nurturing heart that [...] Snape masks with a sneer." Media coverage characterized Rickman's performance as worthy of an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination. He earned his first award nominations for his role as Snape at the 2011 Alliance of Women Film Journalists Awards, 2011 Saturn Awards, 2011 Scream Awards and 2011 St. Louis Gateway Film Critics Association Awards in the Best Supporting Actor category.
On 21 November 2011, Rickman opened in "Seminar", a new play by Theresa Rebeck, at the John Golden Theatre on Broadway. Rickman, who left the production on 1 April, won the Broadway.com Audience Choice Award for Favorite Actor in a Play and was nominated for a Drama League Award.
Rickman is to star with Colin Firth and Cameron Diaz in a remake of 1966's "Gambit" by the Coen brothers.
In 2013, he will be playing Hilly Kristal, the founder of the famous East Village punk-rock club CBGB, in the "CBGB" movie with Rupert Grint.
In the media.
Rickman was chosen by "Empire" as one of the 100 Sexiest Stars in film history (No 34) in 1995 and ranked No 59 in "Empire"'s "The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time" list in October 1997. In 2009 and 2010 Rickman ranked once again as one of the 100 Sexiest Stars by "Empire", both times Rickman was placed 8th out of the 50 actors chosen. Rickman became Vice-Chairman of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in 2003. He was voted No 19 in "Empire" magazine's Greatest Living Movie Stars over the age of 50 and was twice nominated for Broadway's Tony Award as Best Actor (Play): in 1987 for "Les Liaisons Dangereuses", and in 2002 for a revival of Noel Coward's "Private Lives". "The Guardian" named Rickman as an "honourable mention" in a list of the best actors never to have received an Academy Award nomination.
Two researchers, a linguist and a sound engineer, found "the perfect voice" to be a combination of Rickman's and Jeremy Irons's voices based on a sample of 50 voices. Coincidentally, the two actors played brothers in the "Die Hard" series of films.
Rickman has also been featured in several musical works – most notably in a song composed by the English songwriter Adam Leonard entitled "Not Alan Rickman". Moreover, the actor played a "Master of Ceremonies" part in announcing the various instruments in Mike Oldfield's "Tubular Bells II" on the track "The Bell". Rickman was one of the many artists who recited Shakespearian sonnets on the 2002 album" When Love Speaks", and is also featured prominently in a music video by the band Texas entitled "In Demand", which premiered on Europe MTV in August 2000. In the video, lead singer Sharleen Spiteri danced the tango with Rickman: the clip was nominated for Best British Video at the Brit Awards.
Personal life.
In 1965, at the age of 19, Rickman met his girlfriend Rima Horton, a Labour party councillor on Kensington and Chelsea London Borough Council 1986–2006. They began living together in 1977.
