Hannibal Lecter, M.D., is a fictional character in a series of horror novels by Thomas Harris.
Lecter was introduced in the 1981 thriller novel "Red Dragon" as a brilliant psychiatrist and cannibalistic serial killer. The novel and its sequel, "The Silence of the Lambs", feature Lecter as the secondary antagonist after the two serial killers in both novels. In the third novel, "Hannibal", Lecter becomes the main character. His role as the antihero occurs in the fourth novel, "Hannibal Rising", which explores his childhood and development into a serial killer. 
The first film adapted from the Harris novels was "Manhunter" (based on "Red Dragon") which features Brian Cox as Lecter, spelled "Lecktor". In 1991, Anthony Hopkins won an Academy Award for his portrayal of the character in "The Silence of the Lambs". He would reprise the role in "Hannibal" in 2001 and in a second adaptation of "Red Dragon" made in 2002 under the original title. In 2003, Hannibal Lecter (as portrayed by Hopkins) was chosen by the American Film Institute as the #1 movie villain. "Empire" magazine lists Lecter as the fifth "Greatest Movie Character of All Time". In June 2010, "Entertainment Weekly" named him one of the "100 Greatest Characters of the Last 20 Years".
Appearances.
Novels.
In the backstory of "Red Dragon", FBI profiler Will Graham initially consulted Lecter about a series of murders before realizing Lecter was the culprit; Lecter realizes that Graham is on to him, sneaks up behind him and stabs him, nearly disemboweling him, but not killing him. Lecter is convicted and incarcerated in the Baltimore State Hospital for the Criminally Insane, under the care of Dr. Frederick Chilton, whom Lecter despises. Some years later, Graham comes out of retirement and consults Lecter in order to catch another serial killer, Francis Dolarhyde, known by the nickname "The Tooth Fairy". Through the classifieds of a tabloid, "The National Tattler", Lecter provides Dolarhyde with Graham's home address, enabling him to disfigure Graham and attempt to kill his family. At the end of the novel, he sends Graham a note saying that he hopes Graham isn't "too ugly".
In the 1991 sequel "The Silence of the Lambs", Lecter assists an FBI agent-in-training named Clarice Starling in catching a serial killer known as "Buffalo Bill". Lecter and Starling form an unusual relationship in which he provides her with a profile of the killer and his modus operandi in exchange for details about her unhappy childhood. Lecter had previously met Buffalo Bill, the former lover of his patient (and eventual victim) Benjamin Raspail; he keeps this information to himself, however, preferring to give Starling information in the form of clues and riddles designed to help her figure it out for herself. Lecter eventually stages a dramatic, bloody escape from captivity and disappears. While in hiding, he writes one letter to Starling wishing her well, and another to Chilton swearing gruesome revenge. Chilton disappears soon afterward.
In the third novel, 1999's "Hannibal", Lecter lives in Florence, Italy, under an assumed name. The book reveals that one of Lecter's victims survived: Mason Verger, a wealthy, sadistic pedophile whom Lecter mutilated during a therapy session. Verger offers a huge reward for anyone who apprehends Lecter, whom he intends to feed to wild boars. Verger enlists the help of Rinaldo Pazzi, a disgraced Italian police inspector, and Paul Krendler, a corrupt Justice Department official and Starling's boss. Lecter kills Pazzi and returns to the United States to escape Verger's Sardinian henchmen, only to be captured. Starling follows them, intent on apprehending Lecter personally, but is instead also taken captive. After escaping the trap, Lecter convinces Verger's sister Margot to kill her brother as revenge for raping her when they were children, and leaves a voice mail message taking responsibility for the crime. He then rescues the wounded Starling and takes her to his rented lake house to treat her. During her time there he keeps her sedated, attempting to transform her into his dead sister Mischa through a regimen of classical conditioning and mind-altering drugs. One day, he invites her to a formal dinner where the guest and first course is Paul Krendler, whose prefrontal lobes they consume together. (Krendler also partakes) On this night, Starling tells Lecter that Mischa's memory can live within him instead of taking her place. She then offers him her breast, and they become lovers. The novel ends three years later with the couple living in Argentina.
Harris wrote a 2006 prequel, "Hannibal Rising", after film producer Dino De Laurentiis (who owned the cinematic rights to the Lecter character) announced that he was going to make a film depicting Lecter's childhood and development into a serial killer with or without Harris' help. (Harris would also write the film's screenplay.) The novel chronicles Lecter's early life, from birth into an aristocratic family in Lithuania in 1933, to being orphaned, along with his beloved sister Mischa, in 1944 when a German Stuka bomber attacks a Soviet tank in front of their forest hideaway. Shortly thereafter, Lecter and Mischa are captured by a band of Nazi collaborators, who murder and cannibalize Mischa before her brother's eyes. Irreparably traumatized, Lecter escapes from the deserters and takes up residence in an orphanage, where he is bullied by the other children and abused by the dean. When he turns 16, he is adopted by his uncle Robert and his Japanese wife, Lady Murasaki. After his uncle dies, Lecter forms a close, pseudo-romantic relationship with his step-aunt; during this time he also shows great intellectual aptitude, entering medical school at a young age. Despite his seemingly comfortable life, however, Lecter is consumed by a savage obsession with avenging Mischa's death. He kills for the first time as a teenager, beheading a racist fishmonger who insulted Murasaki. He then methodically tracks down, tortures and murders each of the men who had killed his sister, in the process forsaking his relationship with Murasaki and seemingly losing all traces of his humanity. The novel ends with Lecter being accepted into the Johns Hopkins Medical Center.
In film.
"Red Dragon" was first adapted to film in 1986 as the Michael Mann film "Manhunter". Due to copyright issues, the filmmakers changed the spelling of Lecter's name to "Lecktor". He was played by actor Brian Cox.
In 1991, Orion Pictures produced a Jonathan Demme-directed adaptation of "The Silence of the Lambs", in which Lecter was played by actor Anthony Hopkins. Hopkins' Academy Award–winning performance made Lecter into a cultural icon. In 2001, "Hannibal" was adapted to film, with Hopkins reprising his role. In the film adaptation, Starling attempts to apprehend Lecter, who escapes after cutting off his own hand to free himself from her handcuffs-- a change from the controversial ending in the novel. In 2002, "Red Dragon" was adapted again, this time under its original title, with Hopkins again as Lecter and Edward Norton as Will Graham.
In late 2006, the novel "Hannibal Rising" was adapted into the film of the same name, which explained Lecter's development into a serial killer. In the film, which was finished by 2007, eight-year-old Lecter is portrayed by Aaron Thomas, while Gaspard Ulliel portrays him as a young man. Both the novel and the film received generally negative critical reception.
In television.
In February 2012, NBC gave a series order to "Hannibal", a television adaptation of "Red Dragon" to be written and executive-produced by Bryan Fuller. Danish actor Mads Mikkelsen will play Lecter, opposite Hugh Dancy as Will Graham. 
Personality.
Hannibal possesses a very convoluted personality. In "Red Dragon", he describes the majority of human kind as "poor dullards" and thrives on admiration, being unable to part with Francis Dolarhyde's letter because, according to Will Graham, "it was full of compliments."
In "The Silence of the Lambs", his attachment to Clarice Starling is evident since their first meeting, and though initially only on his part, she begins to return it. He is, at first, fascinated by her foolishness and knowledge as she uses his embarrassment at her assault against him to gain information. He then begins to trade answers about the case for details on her background, and continues to contact her after his escape.
In "Hannibal", after his return to the U.S., he seeks her out without her knowledge and it is hinted by numerous characters that he has fallen in love with her in his own twisted way. After she rescues him and resists his brainwashing, the two become lovers with her presence suppressing his cannibalistic urges.
Hannibal is possibly the most knowledgeable man alive, possessing an IQ of 200. He is an expert in psychology (though he does not believe it to be a science) and is able to frighten, manipulate, and bend others to his will with mere words. He is also able to use his immense presence and commanding but subtle personality to great effect. His mental abilities are staggering, stating that by "having created a memory palace" to rival the Vatican although it is stated it would have marveled the greatest medical minds, yet they wouldn’t be able to see it. As such, he does not forget anything, able to revisit a specific memory whenever he wishes in one of the "rooms."
Hannibal is impeccably cultured and sophisticated despite his vicious tendencies. Rather than simply killing for fun, he kills those who exhibit poor taste or bad manners, fine taste and good manners being both an obsession and a compulsion to him. He also kills those whom he finds morally repulsive, such as pedophiles, being quite protective of children as the result of seeing the murder of Mischa when he was a child. This is also thought to have served as the catalyst for his mental illness. Despite his cordial and refined personality and good manners, Hannibal is a sadist who derives great pleasure and amusement from killing his victims, usually in a particularly gruesome manner.
Concept and creation.
Thomas Harris has given few interviews, and has never explained where he got inspiration for Hannibal Lecter. However, in a making-of documentary for the film version of "Hannibal Rising", Lecter's early murders were said to be based on murders that Harris had covered when he was a crime reporter in the 1960s. In 1992, Harris also attended the ongoing trials of Pietro Pacciani, who was suspected of being the serial killer nicknamed the "Monster of Florence". Parts of the killer's modus operandi were used as reference for the novel "Hannibal", which was released in 1999. In an interview on "Inside the Actors Studio", Hopkins said that he used the characteristics of Katharine Hepburn and HAL 9000 from "" as inspiration for his performance.
According to David Sexton, author of "The Strange World of Thomas Harris: Inside the Mind of the Creator of Hannibal Lecter", Harris once told a librarian in Cleveland, Mississippi, that Lecter was inspired by William Coyne, a local murderer who had escaped from prison in 1934 and gone on a rampage that included acts of murder and cannibalism.
In her book "Evil Serial Killers", Charlotte Greig asserts that the serial killer Albert Fish was the inspiration, at least in part, for Lecter. Greig also states that to explain Lecter's pathology, Harris borrowed the story of serial killer and cannibal Andrei Chikatilo's brother Stepan being kidnapped and eaten by starving neighbours (though she states that it is unclear whether the story was true or whether Stepan Chikatilo even existed).
"Red Dragon" firmly states that Lecter does not fit any known psychological profile. Lecter's keeper, Dr. Frederick Chilton, claims that Lecter is a "pure psychopath"; however, it seems more likely that he is a sociopath. Lecter's pathology is explored in greater detail in "Hannibal" and "Hannibal Rising", which explain that he was irreparably traumatized as a child in Lithuania in 1944 when he witnessed the murder and cannibalism of his beloved younger sister, Mischa, by Lithuanian Hilfswillige. One of the Hilfswillige members also claimed that Lecter unwittingly ate his sister as well.
In "The Silence of the Lambs", Lecter is described through Clarice Starling's eyes as "small, sleek, and in his hands and arms she saw wiry strength like her own". The novel also reveals that Lecter's left hand has a condition called mid ray duplication polydactyly, i.e. a duplicated middle finger. In "Hannibal", he performs plastic surgery on his own face on several occasions, and removes his extra digit. Lecter's eyes are a shade of maroon, and reflect the light in "pinpoints of red". He is also said to have small white teeth and dark, slicked-back hair with a widow's peak.
