The Good Wife is an American television legal drama that premiered on CBS on September 22, 2009. The series was created by Robert King and Michelle King. It stars Julianna Margulies, Christine Baranski, Archie Panjabi, Matt Czuchry, and Josh Charles, and features Chris Noth in a recurring role. The current executive producers are the Kings, Ridley Scott, Charles McDougall, and David W. Zucker.
On October 7, 2009, CBS gave the series a full-season pickup, extending the first season from 13 to 22 episodes,
later extended to 23 episodes. On January 14, 2010, CBS renewed the drama for a second season, which premiered on September 28, 2010. On May 18, 2011, CBS renewed "The Good Wife" for a third season, airing Sundays at 9:00 pm On March 14, 2012, CBS renewed the show for a fourth season.
The series and its cast have won a number of awards. Julianna Margulies has been widely recognized for portrayal in the lead role, winning a Primetime Emmy, a Golden Globe, two Screen Actors Guild Awards, and a TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama. Archie Panjabi won a Primetime Emmy Award in 2010 for her portrayal as Kalinda Sharma. In 2012, Martha Plimpton won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series for her portrayal as Patti Nyholm. In addition, the series has won a Peabody Award, and has been twice nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series and the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series. In total, the series and its cast have been nominated for 21 Primetime Emmy Awards in its first three seasons.
Plot.
Bitter Success (pseudonym). [http://www.bitterlawyer.com/the-good-wife-non-lawyers-behind-that-lawyer-show/ "The Good Wife: Non-lawyers behind that lawyer show" (interview with series creators Michelle and Robert King), BitterLawyer.com, January 4, 2010.</ref>
Crew.
The series was created by Robert King and Michelle King who also serve as executive producers and show runners. The pair had produced the short-lived legal drama "In Justice" that aired as a mid-season replacement in early 2006. The creators had previously worked extensively in feature films. Scott Free productions helped to finance "The Good Wife" and Ridley Scott, Tony Scott (till his death) and David W. Zucker are also credited as executive producers. Executive producer Dee Johnson added television writing experience to the team. Charles McDougall directed the pilot episode and was the pilot's other executive producer. McDougall had previously enjoyed success as the director of the pilot for "Desperate Housewives". All seven executive producers returned when a full series was ordered and they were joined by executive producer Brooke Kennedy. McDougall left the crew after directing and executive producing the second episode. The series is produced by Bernadette Caulfield who had previously worked on the HBO polygamy drama "Big Love". Co-producer Ron Binkowski added post production experience to the pilot and returned for the first season.
Several new producers were added to the crew once CBS ordered a full season. Angela Amato Velez joined the crew as a consulting producer and writer bringing legal experience from her careers as a police officer and legal aid attorney and writing experience from the police dramas "Third Watch" and "Southland". Todd Ellis Kessler, who had recently completed production on "The Unit" and had previously worked on legal drama "The Practice", joined the staff as a co-executive producer and writer. Kessler's fellow "The Unit" producer Ted Humphrey served as a supervising producer and writer and then as co-executive producer and writer. Corinne Brinkerhoff completed the production team as a writer and co-producer. Brinkerhoff had previously worked as a writer and story editor on "Boston Legal".
David W. Zucker
W. Zucker is an American TV writer and producer. He has been nominated for 4 Primetime Emmys and one PGA Award. His 18 credits include Judging Amy. The Good Wife, The Pillars of the Earth, Law Dogs. [http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0958379/]
Reception.
The first season of the show received generally favorable reviews. It scored a Metacritic rating of 76 out of 100 based on the views of 26 critics. In reviewing the first early episodes many critics praised the acting talents of the cast. The "Chicago Tribune" commended the show saying "one of the best parts of the show is Alicia's complicated relationship with her husband, who humiliated his family with a sex scandal but also appears to be a pawn in a larger game being played by high-level politician". The second season of the show was generally better received than the first. It currently sits at 89 out of 100 on Metacritic indicating "universal acclaim". The 4th season also received critical acclaim, with a 86 out 100 on Metacritic, indicating "universal acclaim".
The "New York Daily News" report, in a review of the lead character's performance said "Margulies puts a powerful combination of cold fury, bewilderment and tenacity into Alicia Florrick, the wife of a disgraced Chicago politician in a new series that readily admits it ripped itself from the headlines" while "The Baltimore Sun" predicted that "With all four bringing their 'A' games to the pilot, it looks as if CBS could have another winning 10 o'clock drama."
There were a few reservations as to the long-term success and plot of the show, with the "San Francisco Chronicle" concluding that "There's nothing inherently wrong with "The Good Wife" other than it's a legal series with too many close-up shots of knowing glances and 'attagirl Alicia' moments of empowerment that you saw coming 20 minutes prior".
"Time" magazine's James Poniewozik named it one of the Top 10 TV Series of 2010 and 2011, saying, "The ability to keep growing: that's what makes a good "Wife" great". "The Salt Lake Tribune" in its list of the Top 10 series of 2011 ranked "The Good Wife" No. 3, explaining "The mix of fascinating legal drama and even more fascinating personal drama is superb."
AOL named Alicia the 19th Most Memorable Female TV Character.
