Vincent Lamar "Vince" Carter (born January 26, 1977) is an American professional basketball player with the Dallas Mavericks. He is a shooting guard who can also play small forward.
A high school McDonald's All-American, Carter played three years at the University of North Carolina. While there, he twice reached the Final Four of the NCAA Tournament before being selected as the fifth overall pick in the 1998 NBA Draft by the Golden State Warriors, who traded him to the Toronto Raptors. He won the 1999 NBA Rookie of the Year Award and won the Slam Dunk Contest at the 2000 NBA All-Star Weekend the following season. That summer, he represented the United States in the Summer Olympics, winning a gold medal.
He quickly emerged as a league star, entertaining crowds with his leaping ability and slam dunks, earning him nicknames such as "Vinsanity," "Air Canada," and "Half-Man, Half-Amazing." 
He led the Raptors to their first three playoff appearances. In 2004, he was traded to the New Jersey Nets, and he helped lead them to three playoff berths. In July 2009, Carter was traded to the Orlando Magic, helping them to advance to the Eastern Conference finals before being traded to the Phoenix Suns in December, 2010.
An eight-time NBA All-Star, Carter joined NBA players Julius Erving and Michael Jordan as the only players to lead the NBA All-Star Game fan voting three or more times. Carter scored his 20,000th point in 2011, becoming the 37th player in league history to do so.
Off the court, Carter established his Embassy of Hope Foundation, assisting children and their families in Florida, New Jersey and Toronto. He was recognized in 2000 as Child Advocate of the Year by the Children's Home Society, and received the Florida Governor's Points of Light award in 2007 for his philanthropy in his home state.
High school and college.
Born in Daytona Beach, Florida, Carter was a 1995 McDonald's All-American at Mainland High School in Daytona Beach, leading Mainland to its first Class 6A state title in 56 years before spending three seasons playing college basketball at North Carolina under Dean Smith and later, Bill Guthridge. During the 1997–1998 season, he was a member of new coach Guthridge's "six starters" system that featured Antawn Jamison, Shammond Williams, Ed Cota, Ademola Okulaja, and Makhtar N'Diaye. During his sophomore and junior seasons, Carter helped North Carolina to consecutive ACC Men's Basketball Tournament titles and Final Four appearances. He finished the 1997–98 season with a 15.6 points per game average and was named second-team All-American. In May 1998, Carter declared for the 1998 NBA Draft, following his classmate Jamison, who had declared earlier that spring.
On January 31, 2012, Carter was honored as one of the 35 greatest McDonald's All-Americans, and on February 23, 2012, President Obama, an avid NCAA and NBA basketball fan, gave praise to Carter at a fundraiser event, referring to Carter's game as a "huge treat for me ever since he’s been playing for the Tar Heels."
NBA career.
Toronto Raptors (1998–2004).
The Raptors struggled in their early years as did their expansion cousins, the Vancouver Grizzlies. After the acquisition of Carter through a draft day trade in 1998 however, the team set league attendance records in 2000, 2001, and 2002 and the value of the Raptors franchise doubled during Carter's tenure as Raptor. Carter was instrumental in leading the Raptors to the playoffs in 2000 for the first time in franchise history. He also led them to a franchise high of 47 wins and their first ever playoff series win in 2001, advancing to the Eastern Conference Semifinals. 
Carter was initially drafted by the NBA's Golden State Warriors with the fifth overall pick, and then traded to the Toronto Raptors for the fourth overall pick, Antawn Jamison, his college teammate and good friend. Carter's rookie season was the shortened 50-game 1999 season, after the NBA locked out its players in 1998–99. Carter started almost every game for coach Butch Carter, averaged 18.3 points per game (ppg), and eventually won the NBA Rookie of the Year Award. The next year, Carter was selected to an All-Star Team for the first time, averaged 25.7 ppg, made the Third Team All-NBA, and showcased his athleticism and dunking abilities in the 2000 NBA Slam Dunk Contest. He won the contest by performing an array of dunks including a 360° windmill, a between the legs bounce dunk, and an "elbow in the rim" dunk (also known as a "cookie jar" dunk or the "honey dip"). ESPN referred to the 2000 Slam Dunk Contest as, "one of the most memorable contests in the entire run." Kobe Bryant, who was invited along with Carter, Michael Jordan, Dominique Wilkins, and Julius Erving as judges for the 2007 Slam Dunk Contest, said that among the judges in their prime, Carter would win in a dunk contest.
In Carter's first two seasons, he and his distant cousin Tracy McGrady formed a formidable one-two punch as Raptor teammates. The two led the Raptors to their first playoff berth in the 2000 NBA Playoffs, but they were swept in the first round by the New York Knicks, in three games. Upon McGrady's departure to the Orlando Magic as a free agent in a sign and trade deal, Carter became the Raptors' franchise player. Kobe Bryant, whose team won several championships in the decade to follow, believed they could've competed for several championships if they had stayed together. 
In 2000–01, his third season, Carter averaged a career-high 27.6 ppg, made the Second Team All-NBA, and was voted in as a starter in the 2001 NBA All-Star Game, while the Raptors finished the regular season with a franchise-record 47 wins. In the playoffs, the Raptors beat the New York Knicks 3–2 in the first round, and advanced to the 2001 Eastern Conference Semifinals to face off against the Philadelphia 76ers. Carter and Allen Iverson played in a seven-game series that see-sawed back and forth. Carter scored 50 points on Philly in game three and set a NBA playoff record for most three-point field goals made in one game. On the morning of Game Seven, Carter attended his graduation at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He had completed the requirements for his degree in African-American Studies the previous summer and said he felt receiving his diploma was personally significant. Television ratings for game seven soared as one of the highest watched in NBC's history for a non-finals game. As the Sixers and Raptors increased their double team pressures on Carter and Iverson respectively, the game winning shot came down to Carter who missed with 2.0 seconds remaining. Afterwards, he was heavily criticized for his decision to attend his graduation by both media and fans. In July 2011, Iverson reflected back on the series. “It was incredible. (Carter) had great games at home and I had some great games at home, but both of us were just trying to put our teams on our back and win basketball games. It is great just having those memories and being a part of something like that.”
In the summer of 2001, Carter signed a $94 million, six-year extension with the Raptors. In addition, Carter announced that he would be hosting a charity basketball game featuring fellow NBA stars that would be played at the Air Canada Centre in Toronto on August 3, 2001. The success of the first game being sold out encouraged Carter to make the charity game an annual summer event.
The next season was an injury-riddled one for Carter. He started in 60 games and he averaged 24.7 ppg. He was voted into the 2002 NBA All-Star Game, but he could not participate due to injury. The Raptors did not fare well without their All-Star player. The team lost 17 of 18 games to drop to 30–38, then won 12 of their last 14 to finish at 42–40. Carter was injured during the 2002 NBA Playoffs, and his team was defeated in the first round by the Detroit Pistons, in five games. During the 2003 NBA All-Star Game, Carter gave up his starting All-Star spot to the Washington Wizards' Michael Jordan to allow Jordan to make his final start as an All-Star. During his Raptors tenure, news came out that Carter had developed Sinding-Larsen-Johansson disease also known as "jumper's knee," which drew criticism and questions from local media outlets and fans about Carter's long term durability as a NBA scorer.
Fifty games into the 2003–04 season, Toronto was 25–25 and in a position to make the playoffs, but injuries to Jalen Rose, Alvin Williams, and Carter sent the Raptors plummeting down the standings, and the Raptors fell three games short of making the playoffs. Carter's individual season performance was 22.5 ppg, but teammate Alvin Williams' knee injury turned out to be career ending.
Trade to the Nets.
In the 2004 off-season, G.M. Glen Grunwald and the entire coaching staff were fired after falling three games short of the eighth and final playoff spot in the previous season. Carter became frustrated with the Raptors' upper management. In particular, Carter was unhappy with Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment (MLSE) and Raptors president Richard Peddie. In a private meeting, Peddie reassured Carter that MLSE was serious in building a contender in Toronto and that he would pursue established players like point guard Steve Nash and centre Jamaal Magloire. Carter was also given the impression that Peddie would consider Julius Erving as a serious candidate for G.M., thinking he could attract star players to Toronto. Though Julius Erving flew into Toronto for an interview, interim G.M. Jack McCloskey publicly disclosed a week prior that Erving was not really in the mix. Peddie instead hired Rob Babcock whose first priority in rebuilding the Raptors said was to "establish our philosophy," stating "we are not really worried about how many wins we get right away, or whether we make the playoffs within the first year or two." After hiring Sam Mitchell as new head coach, Babcock's first move was to select Rafael Araujo with the eighth overall pick in the 2004 NBA Draft to fill in the centre position. He later signed guard Rafer Alston to a five-year deal.
Consequently, much speculation arose whether Carter wanted to be traded. The "Toronto Sun" reported that Carter felt misled and felt the Raptors would never be an elite team under the current MLSE structure with Peddie as Raptors president. Some NBA fans raised money to fly a "Keep Vince, Trade Peddie" banner over the Air Canada Centre just before Carter's annual charity game. When Rob Babcock was questioned about the trade speculations, he denied Carter asked for a trade but indiscreetly revealed Carter's agent had approached him for a trade request. During the 2004–05 season, new head coach Sam Mitchell often benched Carter in the 4th quarter to emphasize the new team philosophy he and Babcock wanted players to adapt to, spurring rumors of fights between Carter and Mitchell and new point guard Rafer Alston. On Dec. 18, 2004, the Raptors dealt Carter to the Nets for Alonzo Mourning, Eric Williams, Aaron Williams and a pair of first-round draft picks. Mourning did not report to Toronto.
In his first game back in Toronto, on April 15, 2005, Carter was heavily booed and jeered by Raptors fans; some fans were found burning Vince Carter jerseys, while many donned No. 15 baby bibs, 'FUVC' t-shirts, and other merchandise that labelled Carter as "Wince" or as "immature," alluding to Carter's knee and ankle injuries and his dissent. Much like former Raptors teammate Tracy McGrady, Carter has been booed each time he has returned to Toronto. In early January 2005, when asked by TNT's John Thompson if he always pushed himself as hard as he should, Carter replied, "In years past, no. I was just fortunate to have the talent in being able to... you know, you get spoiled when you're able to do a lot of things and you "see" that, and you really don't have to work at it. But now, with all the injuries and all the things that have gone on, I have to work a little harder and I'm a little hungrier. That's why getting the opportunity to have a fresh start with New Jersey has made me want to attack the basket for a lot reasons." Though Carter's comments were perceived by Raptors fans as his confession of quitting on the Raptors, Thompson said the comments were misinterpreted, saying, "That boy never said to me, 'Coach, I just laid down and quit.' ...I was embarrassed and felt awful about it for his sake, because I knew what he was communicating to me... he was more expressing a desire of wanting to do better, as we all do." Despite Thompson's defense of Carter, the "Toronto Star"s Dave Feschuk in 2007 wrote that Carter "cheated on (the Raptors). He quit on the floor." Carter later stated his comments were misconstrued. On the eve of the Raptors–Nets playoff series in 2007, Carter told New York's WFAN radio station, "One day, maybe the fans will understand how it all went down. That's all I can say."
In November 2011, nearly seven years since the trade to the Nets, Carter, along with his cousin Tracy McGrady and Charles Oakley addressed the Toronto audience in an interview on "Off the Record with Michael Landsberg". When asked about being booed in Toronto, Carter said, "They watched myself and Tracy grow up. And when we left they still got to see (us) flourish and become (who we are). For me, I looked at it as, a young child growing up into a grown man and moving on. And I get it. Leaving, hurt a lot of people. It hurt me because I tell you what... I accomplished a lot, I learned a lot, I became the person and player of who I am today because of that experience, through the coaches, players, and everything else. I get it... but regardless I still love the city. I have friends there and my heart is still there because that's where it all started." Later in the interview, when asked about any words to the Toronto fans, Carter said, "I appreciate the fans and whether you cheer for me, boo me, or hate me, I still love you. Toronto's one of the best kept secrets.. puts one of the best products on the floor and one of the top places to play in."
On November 6, 2012, in an interview with TSN Radio 1050, Carter reiterated his love for the city and his appreciation for the Toronto Raptors organization. The next day, Sam Mitchell and Rob Babcock revealed on Sportsnet 590, The Fan that the night before Carter was traded to New Jersey, Carter phoned Mitchell to express his desire to stay in Toronto and commit to their vision for the team. However, Babcock said it was too late and the trade had already been verbally agreed upon. Looking back on it Mitchell feels he should have personally contacted the owner, Larry Tannenbaum, but was reluctant because he did not want to break the chain of command.
New Jersey Nets (2004–2009).
As a Net, Carter produced some of his highest numbers. He scored more than 23.5 ppg and attained career high averages in rebounds per game (5.8) and assists per game (4.7) while missing just 11 games in his four full seasons as a Net. Carter helped lead the New Jersey Nets to three playoff runs and is currently in the top 10 of nineteen different all-time Nets statistical categories, including points, points per game (1st all-time of NBA Nets), defensive rebounds, assists, turnover rate, 3-point field goals, offensive rating, player efficiency rating, and win shares.
The 2004–05 season looked gloomy at first for the Nets. Their star Kidd was recovering from his own microfracture surgery and the team got off to a 2–11 start, and even with Jason Kidd returning from injury, the outlook was bleak with Jefferson requiring season ending surgery. However, after the trade, Carter rallied the Nets from more than 10 games out of the playoffs to gain the final seed in the Eastern Conference.
In the 2005–06 NBA season, the Carter-Kidd duo co-lead the Nets to 49 wins, an Atlantic Division title, and the number three seed in the playoffs, while averaging 24.2 points, 5.8 rebounds, and 4.3 assists per game. He led the Nets to the second round of the playoffs before losing to the eventual NBA champions Miami Heat in five games. Carter averaged 29.6 points, 7.0 rebounds and 5.3 assists in 11 playoff games. Carter was also named to the All-Star Team in 2006.
In the 2006–07 NBA season Carter was named, along with teammate Jason Kidd, as a reserve to the 2007 NBA All-Star Game, after losing out on a starting spot to Gilbert Arenas by 3,010 votes. Both Carter and Kidd made their eighth All-Star game appearance.
In a 120–114 overtime win over the Washington Wizards, April 7, 2007, Carter and Jason Kidd became the first teammates in over 18 years to record triple-doubles in the same game since the Chicago Bulls' Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen achieved this feat against the Los Angeles Clippers in 1989. Carter finished with 46 points, a career-high 16 rebounds, and 10 assists. Kidd finished with 10 points, tied a career-high with 16 rebounds, and tied a season-high with 18 assists. Carter's triple double is the second highest total for a triple double, second only to Alvan Adams of the Phoenix Suns who tallied 47 points and 18 rebounds and 12 assists over 30 years ago. 
Carter's finished the 2006–07 NBA season playing all 82 games, scoring over 24 points with a 21 PER.
After the Nets eliminated the Raptors, the Nets were eliminated from the playoffs by Lebron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers (lost series 4–2). During the season, the New York Knicks and Nets had discussed a trade in February around Carter, which was ended with the trading deadline. Shaquille O'Neal when asked which player he would want to play after playing with Kobe and Wade replied, "I'm gonna have to go with Vince Carter. I think he needs a player like me that can get him to the next level. And I can get him to the next level." Barkley responded by accusing O'Neil of tampering. In the off-season, the two teams again revisited the subject but on July 1, 2007 Carter signed a 4-year, $61.8 million contract with the Nets.
For the 2007–08 season, Jason Kidd was traded mid season and Magic Johnson claimed that Carter's game was on the decline due to his bad knees. In a 2008 ESPN special later that year, Carter was named behind Dominique Wilkins, Julius Erving, and Michael Jordan as being one of the 'greatest dunkers of all time.' In it, Reggie Miller noted "Carter is probably the greatest dunker in the NBA I have ever seen." ESPN's Chris Broussard did a follow up piece in 2011 and called Vince Carter as the greatest in-game dunker of all time in the NBA. 
Carter ended up finishing strong in 2008 with a season average of at least 21 points, 6 rebounds and 5 assists a game, a season accomplishment unique to him, Kobe Bryant, and Lebron James He also led the Nets in freethrow percentage, assists and steals per game (81.6%, 5.1, 1.2). Rod Thorn credited Carter for becoming a leader since the All-Star break. 
For the 2008–09 season, the Nets decided to rebuild and Carter was voted team captain to help mentor the young players. Coach Lawrence Frank commented that Carter had "served the term 'captain' very honorably. Coming with a team that has veterans from other teams, some young guys coming straight from school, a couple of 20-year-olds and one 21-year-old. Showing them how you handle every day and the professionalism you approach your job , his disposition, his character. Plus, he's played at a very high level. He's accepted different roles on the team, at different times, to let other guys thrive and play at a high level, and yet has shown that he still is one of the elite players in the league." Two such players Carter helped mentor were Devin Harris and Brook Lopez. Brook Lopez finished 3rd in Rookie of the Year and Devin Harris made his 1st All-Star team and narrowly missed winning the NBA Most Improved Player award. Carter finished his last season as a Net scoring around the 20 points-five boards-five assists per game mark which were only shared among five other players: LeBron James, Chris Paul, Dwyane Wade, Stephen Jackson, and Kobe Bryant.
Orlando Magic (2009–2010).
On June 25, 2009, the day of the NBA Draft, Carter was traded to his hometown-team, the Orlando Magic with Ryan Anderson for Rafer Alston, Tony Battie and Courtney Lee; the Magic were searching for a go-to scorer who could take pressure off Dwight Howard. The Nets without Carter ended up going 12–70.
Carter made his season debut with the Magic on October 28, 2009 against the Philadelphia 76ers at home, recording 15 points and 2 assists to help the Magic defeat the Sixers. On February 8, 2010, Carter scored a season-high 48 points in a 123–117 win against the New Orleans Hornets, including 34 points in the second half to help rally the Magic back from a 17-point deficit.
Carter helped lead the Magic to the 2010 NBA Playoffs, sweeping the Charlotte Bobcats and the Atlanta Hawks in the first two rounds, before falling to the Boston Celtics in Eastern Conference Finals in 6 games. This marked the first time Carter made it to the Conference Finals.
Phoenix Suns (2010–2011).
On December 18, 2010, Carter was traded to the Phoenix Suns along with Marcin Gortat, Mickael Pietrus, a 2011 first-round draft pick, and $3 million, for Hedo Türkoğlu, Jason Richardson, and Earl Clark. When asked how he felt about being traded from Orlando, Carter replied, "They gave me an opportunity to play at home and they felt it was time to go in a different direction. You can't be mad about that. They've given me an opportunity to play somewhere else and still chase that dream. He changed his jersey number to 25 from 15 because his teammate Robin Lopez was using 15.
On January 16, 2011, Carter scored his 20,000th point, becoming only the 37th NBA player to reach that plateau. Although the back-court pairing of Carter and Steve Nash was successful together, the Suns ultimately missed the playoffs as they were in midst of a rebuilding phase.
On December 9, 2011, Carter was waived by the Suns in the final year of his contract. Of the $18 million he was scheduled to make in the upcoming season, only $4 million of it was guaranteed.
Dallas Mavericks (2011–present).
On December 12, 2011, Carter agreed to sign a three-year deal with the defending-champion Dallas Mavericks, with one year guaranteed. This move reunited Carter with former New Jersey teammate Jason Kidd. In a game against the Golden State Warriors, Carter became the eighteenth player in NBA history with 1,500 3-pointers.
The Mavericks exercised their option for a second year on July 1, 2012. On February 13, 2013, Carter surpassed Bird on the NBA's career scoring list after scoring his 6th three pointer of the night to be on the 29th spot. Carter scored 17 of his 26 points in the 3rd quarter with 5 out of 7 three pointers made. Carter also became the 11th player in NBA history with at least 1,600 3 pointers made.
2000 Summer Olympics.
During the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney, Carter performed a memorable dunk when he jumped over 7-foot-2 (2.18 m) French center Frédéric Weis. Teammate Jason Kidd said it was "One of the best plays I've ever seen." The French media later dubbed it ""le dunk de la mort"" ("the Dunk of Death"). The U.S. team went on to win the gold medal that year.
2003 FIBA Americas Tournament.
Carter replaced Bryant on the USA roster for the 2003 FIBA Americas Tournament while Bryant was undergoing surgeries on his knee and shoulder. He wore Bryant's jersey number 8. Carter's selection was only for the 2003 FIBA Americas Tournament, while Bryant retained his roster spot for the 2004 USA Olympic squad. However, Bryant later on withdrew due to a legal case he was going through at that time. Carter did not take over the Olympic spot.
Awards and achievements.
NBA playoff records
New Jersey Nets franchise records
Career highs
Personal life.
Carter has donated to his high school, Mainland, as well as the foundation he established upon being drafted into the NBA in 1998, The Embassy of Hope. On February 3, 2007, a statue of Carter was unveiled at Mainland.
Carter visited with the Duquesne University basketball team in Pittsburgh as a show of support after its shooting incident in September 2006.
He is a member of the Omega Psi Phi fraternity.
Carter married Ellen Rucker, a doctor of chiropractic medicine, in July 2004; the couple divorced in 2006. They have one daughter, Kai Michelle Carter. born on June 1, 2005.
While with the Nets, Carter lived in Saddle River, New Jersey on the same street as Jason Kidd, and the two played ping pong and went bowling together.
In January 2010, he opened a restaurant, Vince Carter's, in Daytona, Florida.
NBA career statistics.
Regular season.
! Season
! Age
! Team
! GP !! GS !! MIN !! FG% !! 3P% !! FT% !! RPG !! APG !! SPG !! BPG !! PPG
