Kelly Reilly (born 18 July 1977) is an English actress. Her performance in "After Miss Julie" at the Donmar Warehouse made her a star of the London stage and earned her a nomination for a Laurence Olivier Theatre Award for Best Actress of 2003. Reilly's performance in the 2005 British comedy film, "Mrs Henderson Presents", won her the Empire Award for Best Newcomer in 2006. Her first lead role came in 2008 in the critically acclaimed British horror film, "Eden Lake", and in 2009, she had a high-profile role on prime time British television in the three-part police drama "Above Suspicion". That year she also appeared in three major films, "Sherlock Holmes", "Triage", and "Me and Orson Welles". In 2011, she reprised her role as Mary Watson in "". In 2012, Reilly starred opposite Denzel Washington in the Robert Zemeckis film "Flight", and in 2013, she will star in the John Michael McDonagh film "Calvary".
Early life.
Reilly was born and brought up in Surrey, England, the daughter of a hospital receptionist mother, and Jack Reilly, a police officer. Her grandparents were Irish.
Career.
Inspired to seek acting work beyond school, she wrote to the producers of the television drama "Prime Suspect" and six months later was granted and won the audition, for a role in an episode "Prime Suspect 4: Inner Circle", which aired on ITV on 7 May 7 1995. Six years later, she once again appeared alongside Helen Mirren in the film "Last Orders". 
Her first professional role was followed by a series of parts on the English stage. She worked with Terry Johnson in four productions, "Elton John’s Glasses" (1997), "The London Cuckolds" (1998), "The Graduate" (2000) and "Piano/Forte" (2006). Johnson wrote "Piano/Forte" for her and said "Kelly is possibly the most natural, dyed-in-the-wool, deep-in-the-bone actress I've ever worked with." Reilly has stated that she learned the most as an actor from Karel Reisz, who directed her in "The Yalta Game" in Dublin in 2001. She said, "He was my masterclass. There is no way I would have been able to do "Miss Julie" if I hadn't done that play." 
By 2000, Reilly felt she was being typecast in comedy roles and she actively sought out a role as the young Amy in "Last Orders", directed by Fred Schepisi. This was followed by a role in the Royal Court's 2001 re-run of Sarah Kane's "Blasted". "The Times" called her "theatrical Viagra". In 2002, she starred alongside Audrey Tautou and Romain Duris as Wendy, an English Erasmus student, in the French comedy "L'Auberge espagnole" ("The Spanish Apartment"). She resumed her role in the 2005 sequel, "Les Poupées russes" ("The Russian Dolls"). Also in 2005, she had a series of roles in such films as "Mrs. Henderson Presents" and "Pride & Prejudice".
Her first lead role came in 2008 in the horror film "Eden Lake" and, in 2009, she had a high-profile role on prime time British television in the three-part police drama "Above Suspicion". That year she was also in three major films.
In 2012, she appeared opposite Sam Rockwell in "A Single Shot", played Brendan Gleeson's character's daughter in John Michael McDonagh's "Calvary", and had a leading role in Robert Zemeckis' "Flight", opposite Denzel Washington.
Awards and nominations.
Reilly's performance in "After Miss Julie" at the Donmar Warehouse made her a star of the London stage and earned her a nomination for a Laurence Olivier Theatre Award for Best Actress of 2003. Aged 26, she was the youngest person ever nominated for that award. In 2005, she won Best Newcomer Award at the Cannes Film Festival for her role as Wendy in "The Russian Dolls" ("Les Poupées Russes"). In 2006, Reilly won the Empire Award for Best Newcomer for her role in the British comedy film, "Mrs Henderson Presents". She was nominated once again for an Olivier award for her performance as Desdemona in the acclaimed production of Othello at The Donmar Warehouse in 2009. Reilly was nominated for Best Supporting actress at the British Independent film awards for Eden Lake in 2010.
She won the Spotlight award at the 2012 Hollywood Film festival, for her performance as Nicole in "Flight".
Personal life.
Reilly has dated actors JJ Field and Jonah Lotan. She married Kyle Baugher in 2012.
