In grammar, an adjective is a 'describing' word; the main syntactic role of which is to qualify a noun or noun phrase, giving more information about the object signified. 
Adjectives are one of the traditional eight English parts of speech, although linguists today distinguish adjectives from words such as determiners that formerly were considered to be adjectives. In this paragraph, "traditional" is an adjective, and in the preceding paragraph, "main" is.
Distribution.
Most, but not all, languages have adjectives. Those that do not, typically use words of another part of speech, often verbs, to serve the same semantic function; an example, such a language might have a verb that means "to be big", and would use as attributive verb construction analogous to "big-being house" to express what English expresses as "big house". Even in languages that do have adjectives, one language's adjective might not be another's; for example, whereas English uses "to be hungry" ("hungry" being an adjective), Dutch and French use ""honger hebben"" and ""avoir faim"," respectively (literally "to have hunger", "hunger" being a noun), and whereas Hebrew uses the adjective "זקוק" ("zaqūq", roughly "in need of"), English uses the verb "to need".
Adjectives form an open class of words in most languages that have them; that is, it is relatively common for new adjectives to be formed via such processes as derivation. Bantu languages are well known for having only a small closed class of adjectives, however, and new adjectives are not easily derived. Igbo has an extremely limited number, just eight: "mnukwu" 'big', "nta" 'small'; "ojii" 'dark', "ocha" 'light'; "ohuru(ofuru)" 'new', "ochie" 'old'; "oma" 'good', and "ojoo" 'bad'. Similarly, native Japanese adjectives ("i"-adjectives) are a closed class (as are native verbs), although nouns (which are open class) may be used in the genitive and there is the separate class of adjectival nouns ("na"-adjectives), which is also open, and functions similarly to noun adjuncts in English.
Adjectives and adverbs.
Many languages, including English, distinguish between adjectives, which qualify nouns and pronouns, and adverbs, which modify verbs, adjectives, and other adverbs. Not all languages have exactly this distinction and many languages, including English, have words that can function as both. For example, in English "fast" is an adjective in "a fast car" (where it qualifies the noun "car"), but an adverb in "he drove fast" (where it modifies the verb "drove"). In Dutch and German, almost all adjectives are implicitly also adverbs, without any difference in form.
Determiners.
Linguists today distinguish determiners from adjectives, considering them to be two separate parts of speech (or "lexical categories"), but formerly determiners were considered to be adjectives in some of their uses. In English dictionaries, which typically still do not treat determiners as their own part of speech, determiners are often recognizable by being listed both as adjectives and as pronouns. Determiners are words that are neither nouns nor pronouns, yet reference a thing already in context. Determiners generally do this by indicating definiteness (as in "a" vs. "the"), quantity (as in "one" vs. "some" vs. "many"), or another such property.
<span id="Attributive adjective" /><span id="Predicative adjective" /><span id="Absolute adjective" /><span id="Substantive adjective" /><span id="Form" />
Adjectival phrases.
An adjective acts as the head of an "adjectival phrase". In the simplest case, an adjectival phrase consists solely of the adjective; more complex adjectival phrases may contain one or more adverbs modifying the adjective (""very" strong"), or one or more complements (such as "worth "several dollars"", "full "of toys"", or "eager "to please""). In English, attributive adjectival phrases that include complements typically follow their subject ("an evildoer "devoid of redeeming qualities"").
Other noun modifiers.
In many languages, including English, it is possible for nouns to modify other nouns. Unlike adjectives, nouns acting as modifiers (called "attributive nouns" or "noun adjuncts") are not predicative; a beautiful park is beautiful, but a car park is not "car". In plain English, the modifier often indicates origin (""Virginia" reel"), purpose (""work" clothes"), or semantic patient (""man" eater"), however, it may generally indicate almost any semantic relationship. It is also common for adjectives to be derived from nouns, as in "boyish", "birdlike", "behavioral", "famous", "manly", "angelic", and so on.
Many languages have special verbal forms called "participles" that can act as noun modifiers. In many languages, including English, participles are historically adjectives, and have retained most of their original function as such. English examples of this include "relieved" (the past participle of the verb "relieve", used as an adjective in sentences such as "I am so relieved to see you"), "spoken" (as in "the spoken word"), and "going" (the present participle of the verb "go", used as an adjective in sentences such as "Ten dollars per hour is the going rate").
Other constructs that often modify nouns include prepositional phrases (as in "a rebel "without a cause""), relative clauses (as in "the man "who wasn't there""), other adjective clauses (as in "the bookstore "where he worked""), and infinitive phrases (as in "a cake "to die for"").
In relation, many nouns take complements such as content clauses (as in "the idea "that I would do that""); these are not commonly considered modifiers, however.
Adjective order.
So, in English, adjectives pertaining to size precede adjectives pertaining to age ("little old", not "old little"), which in turn generally precede adjectives pertaining to color ("old white", not "white old"). So, we would say "One (quantity) nice (opinion) little (size) round (shape) old (age) white (color) brick (material) house."
This order may be more rigid in some languages than others; in some, like Spanish, it may only be a default ("unmarked") word order, with other orders being permissible.
Due partially to borrowings from French, English has some adjectives that follow the noun as postmodifiers, called postpositive adjectives, such as "time immemorial". Adjectives may even change meaning depending on whether they precede or follow, as in "proper": "They live in a proper town" (a real town, not a village) vs. "They live in the town proper" (in the town itself, not in the suburbs). All adjectives can follow nouns in certain cnstructions, such as "tell me something new".
Comparison of adjectives.
In many languages, adjectives can be "compared". In English, for example, we can say that a car is "big", that it is "bigger" than another is, or that it is the "biggest" car of all. Not all adjectives lend themselves to comparison, however; for example, the English adjective "extinct" is not considered comparable, in that it does not make sense to describe one species as "more extinct" than another. However, even most non-comparable English adjectives are still "sometimes" compared; for example, one might say that a language about which nothing is known is "more extinct" than a well-documented language with surviving literature but no speakers. This is not a comparison of the degree of intensity of the adjective, but rather the degree to which the object fits the adjective's definition.
Comparable adjectives are also known as "gradable" adjectives, because they tend to allow grading adverbs such as "very", "rather", and so on.
Among languages that allow adjectives to be compared in this way, different approaches are used. Indeed, even within English, two different approaches are used: the suffixes "-er" and "-est", and the words "more" and "most". (In English, the general tendency is for shorter adjectives and adjectives from Anglo-Saxon to use "-er" and "-est", and for longer adjectives and adjectives from French, Latin, Greek, and other languages to use "more" and "most".) By either approach, English adjectives therefore have "positive" forms ("big"), "comparative" forms ("bigger"), and "superlative" forms ("biggest"). However, many other languages do not distinguish comparative from superlative forms.
Restrictiveness.
In some languages, such as Spanish, restrictiveness is consistently marked; for example, in Spanish "la tarea difícil" means "the difficult task" in the sense of "the task that is difficult" (restrictive), whereas "la difícil tarea" means "the difficult task" in the sense of "the task, which is difficult" (non-restrictive). In English, restrictiveness is not marked on adjectives, but is marked on relative clauses (the difference between "the man "who recognized me" was there" and "the man, "who recognized me", was there" being one of restrictiveness).
Agreement.
Often a distinction is made here between attributive and predicative usage. Whereas English is an example of a language in which adjectives never agree and French of a language in which they always agree, in German they agree only when used attributively, and in Hungarian only when used predicatively.
