David Tennant (born David John McDonald; 18 April 1971) is a Scottish actor and voice actor. In addition to his work in theatre, including a widely praised "Hamlet", Tennant is best known for his role as the tenth incarnation of the Doctor in "Doctor Who", along with the title role in the TV serial "Casanova" (2005) and as Barty Crouch, Jr., in the film "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire" (2005).
Early life.
Tennant was born in Bathgate, West Lothian, the son of Essdale Helen (née McLeod) and The Rev. Alexander McDonald (known to family and friends as Sandy McDonald). He grew up with his brother Blair and sister Karen in Ralston, Renfrewshire, where his father was the local Church of Scotland minister. Tennant's maternal great-grandparents, William and Agnes Blair, were staunch Protestants from Derry in Ulster, the northern province of Ireland, and were among the signatories of the Ulster Covenant in 1912; William was a member of the Grand Orange Lodge of Ireland. Tennant's maternal grandfather, footballer Archie McLeod, met William and Agnes's daughter Nellie while playing for Derry City. McLeod's parents were from the Isle of Mull in the Scottish Highlands and are descended from tenant farmers.
At the age of three, Tennant told his parents that he wanted to become an actor because he was a fan of "Doctor Who", but they tried to encourage him to aim for more conventional work. He watched almost every "Doctor Who" episode for years, and he spoke to Tom Baker at a book-signing event in Glasgow. Tennant says he was "absurdly single-minded" in pursuing an acting career. Tennant was educated at Ralston Primary and Paisley Grammar School, where he enjoyed a fruitful relationship with English language teacher Moira Robertson, who was among the first to recognise his potential. He acted in school productions throughout primary and secondary school.
Tennant's talent at this young age was spotted by actress Edith MacArthur; after seeing his first role at age 11, she told his parents he would become a successful stage actor. Tennant also attended Saturday classes at the Royal Scottish Academy of Music and Drama; at 16, he passed an audition for the Academy, one of their youngest students, and studied there between the ages of 17 and 20, taking his stage name from the Pet Shop Boys frontman Neil Tennant after reading a copy of "Smash Hits" magazine because there was another David McDonald already on the books of the Equity union. Tennant was flatmates with friend Louise Delamere while at the Academy and gained a bachelor's degree.
Career.
Early work.
Tennant made his professional acting debut while still in secondary school. When he was 16 he acted in an anti-smoking film made by the Glasgow Health Board which aired on television and was also screened in schools. The following year, he played a role in an episode of "Dramarama". Tennant's first professional role upon graduating from drama school was in a staging of "The Resistible Rise of Arturo Ui" costarring Ashley Jensen, one of a few plays in which he performed as part of the agitprop . Tennant also made an early television appearance in the Scottish TV sitcom "Rab C Nesbitt" as a transsexual barmaid called Davina. In the 1990s, Tennant appeared in several plays at the Dundee Repertory Theatre.
Tennant's first major TV role was as the manic depressive Campbell in the Scottish drama series "Takin' Over the Asylum" (1994). During filming, Tennant met comic actress and writer Arabella Weir. When he moved to London shortly afterwards he lodged with Weir for five years and became godfather to her youngest child. He has subsequently appeared alongside Weir in many productions; as a guest in her spoof television series, "Posh Nosh"; in the "Doctor Who" audio drama "Exile"—during which Weir played an alternate version of the Doctor—and as panellists on the "West Wing Ultimate Quiz" on More4 (Weir later guest-starred on "Doctor Who" itself after Tennant left the series). One of his earliest big screen roles was in "Jude" (1996), in which he shared a scene with Christopher Eccleston, playing a drunken undergraduate who challenges Eccleston's Jude to prove his intellect. Coincidentally, Eccleston portrayed the incarnation of The Doctor immediately preceding Tennant's.
Tennant developed his career in the British theatre, frequently performing with the Royal Shakespeare Company. His first Shakespearean role for the RSC was in "As You Like It" (1996); having auditioned for the role of Orlando, the romantic lead, he was instead cast as the jester Touchstone, which he played in his natural Scottish accent. He subsequently specialised in comic roles, playing Antipholus of Syracuse in "The Comedy of Errors" and Captain Jack Absolute in "The Rivals", although he also played the tragic role of Romeo in "Romeo and Juliet".
Tennant also contributed to several audio dramatisations of Shakespeare for the Arkangel Shakespeare series (1998). His roles include a reprisal of his Antipholus of Syracuse in "The Comedy of Errors", as well as Launcelot Gobbo in "The Merchant of Venice", Edgar/Poor Tom in "King Lear", and Mercutio in "Romeo and Juliet", all of which he performs in his natural accent. In 1995, Tennant appeared at the Royal National Theatre, London, playing the role of Nicholas Beckett in Joe Orton's "What the Butler Saw". In television, Tennant appeared in the first episode of Reeves and Mortimer's revamped "Randall & Hopkirk (Deceased)" in 2000, playing an eccentric artist. This is one of his few TV roles in his native Scottish accent.
During the Christmas season of 2002, he starred in a series of television advertisements for Boots the Chemists. Tennant began to appear on television more prominently in 2004 and 2005, when he appeared in a dramatisation of "He Knew He Was Right" (2004), "Blackpool" (2004), "Casanova" (2005), and "The Quatermass Experiment" (2005). In film, he appeared in Stephen Fry's "Bright Young Things" (2003) and played Barty Crouch Jr. in "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire" (2005).
"Doctor Who" (2005–2010).
"Doctor Who" returned to British screens in 2005, with Christopher Eccleston playing the role of the Ninth Doctor in the first series. Tennant replaced him as of the second series, making his first, brief appearance as the Tenth Doctor in the episode "The Parting of the Ways" (2005) at the end of the regeneration scene, and also appeared in a special shown as part of the 2005 Children in Need appeal, broadcast on 18 November 2005. He began filming the new series of "Doctor Who" in late July 2005. His first full-length outing as the Doctor was a 60-minute special, "The Christmas Invasion", first broadcast on Christmas Day 2005.
Tennant has expressed enthusiasm about fulfilling his childhood dream. He remarked to an interviewer for GWR FM, "Who wouldn't want to be the Doctor? I've even got my own TARDIS!" In 2006, readers of "Doctor Who Magazine" voted Tennant 'Best Doctor!', over perennial favourite Tom Baker. In 2007, Tennant's Doctor was voted the "coolest character" on UK television in a "Radio Times" survey. When Tennant was cast as Eccleston's successor, he had wanted to use his native Scottish accent and become "the first kilted Doctor" according to an interview in the "Daily Star", but writer Russell T Davies did not want the Doctor's accent "touring the regions", so he used Estuary English instead.
Tennant had previously had a small role in the BBC's animated "Doctor Who" webcast "Scream of the Shalka". Not originally cast in the production, Tennant happened to be recording a radio play in a neighbouring studio, and when he discovered what was being recorded next door managed to convince the director to give him a small role. This personal enthusiasm for the series had also been expressed by his participation in several audio plays based on the "Doctor Who" television series which had been produced by Big Finish Productions, although he did not play the Doctor in any of these productions. His first such role was in the Seventh Doctor audio "Colditz", where he played a Nazi lieutenant guard at Colditz Castle. In 2004 Tennant played a lead role in the Big Finish audio play series "Dalek Empire III". He played the part of Galanar, a young man who is given an assignment to discover the secrets of the Daleks. In 2005, he starred in "" for Big Finish, recreating his role of Brimmicombe-Wood from a Doctor Who Unbound play, "Sympathy for the Devil". In both of these audio productions Tennant worked alongside Doctor Who alumnus Nicholas Courtney, who reprised the character of Sir Alastair Gordon Lethbridge-Stewart. He also played an unnamed Time Lord in another Doctor Who Unbound play "Exile". "UNIT: The Wasting", was recorded between Tennant getting the role of the Doctor and it being announced. He also played the title role in Big Finish's adaptation of Bryan Talbot's "The Adventures of Luther Arkwright" (2005). In 2006, he recorded abridged audio books of "The Stone Rose" by Jacqueline Rayner, "The Feast of the Drowned" by Stephen Cole and "The Resurrection Casket" by Justin Richards, for BBC Worldwide. 
He made his directorial debut on the "Doctor Who Confidential" episode that accompanies Steven Moffat's episode "Blink", entitled "Do You Remember The First Time?", which aired on 9 June 2007. In 2007, Tennant's Tenth Doctor appeared with Peter Davison's Fifth Doctor in a "Doctor Who" special for Children in Need, written by Steven Moffat and entitled "Time Crash". This was the first "multi-Doctor" story in the series since "The Two Doctors" in 1985 (not counting the 1993 special "Dimensions in Time"). Tennant also later performed alongside Davison's daughter, Georgia Moffett, in the 2008 episode "The Doctor's Daughter" with her taking the titular role as Jenny.
Tennant also featured as the Doctor in an animated version of "Doctor Who" for "Totally Doctor Who", "The Infinite Quest", which aired on CBBC. He also starred as the Doctor in another animated six-part "Doctor Who" series, "Dreamland". Tennant guest starred as the Doctor in a two-part story in "Doctor Who" spin-off "The Sarah Jane Adventures", broadcast in October 2009. Tennant continued to play the Tenth Doctor into the revived programme's fourth series in 2008. However, on 29 October 2008, Tennant announced that he would be stepping down from the role after three full series. He played the Doctor in four special episodes in 2009, before his final episode aired on 1 January 2010.
The "Daily Mirror" reported that Tennant was forbidden from attending "Doctor Who" fan conventions while playing the role. This was done to avoid the chance that Tennant could accidentally let slip any plot points during filming of the series.
Other television roles (2005–present).
While playing the Doctor, Tennant was also in the early December 2005 ITV drama "Secret Smile". His performance as Jimmy Porter in "Look Back in Anger" at the Theatre Royal, Bath and Lyceum Theatre, Edinburgh was recorded by the National Video Archive of Performance for the Victoria and Albert Museum Theatre Collection. He revived this performance for the anniversary of the Royal Court Theatre in a rehearsed reading. In January 2006, he took a one-day break from shooting "Doctor Who" to play Richard Hoggart in a dramatisation of the 1960 "Lady Chatterley's Lover" obscenity trial, "The Chatterley Affair". The play was written by Andrew Davies and directed by "Doctor Who"s James Hawes for the digital television channel BBC Four. Hoggart's son Simon Hoggart praised Tennant's performance in "The Guardian" newspaper.
On 25 February 2007, Tennant starred in "Recovery", a 90-minute BBC1 drama written by Tony Marchant. Tennant played Alan, a self-made building site manager who attempted to rebuild his life after suffering a debilitating brain injury. His costar in the drama was friend Sarah Parish, with whom he had previously appeared in "Blackpool" and an episode of "Doctor Who". She joked that "we're like George and Mildred – in 20 years' time we'll probably be doing a ropey old sitcom in a terraced house in Preston." Later in 2007 he starred in "Learners", a BBC comedy drama written by and starring Jessica Hynes (another "Doctor Who" costar, in the episodes "Human Nature", "The Family of Blood" and "The End of Time"), in which he played a Christian driving instructor who became the object of a student's affection. "Learners" was broadcast on BBC One on 11 November 2007. Tennant had a cameo appearance as the Doctor in the 2007 finale episode of the BBC/HBO comedy series "Extras" alongside Ricky Gervais. In November 2008 Tennant played Sir Arthur Eddington in the BBC and HBO biopic "Einstein and Eddington", which was filmed in Cambridge and Hungary.
In 2009 he worked on a TV film version of the RSC's 2008 "Hamlet" for BBC2. From October 2009, he hosted the "Masterpiece Contemporary" programming strand on the American Public Broadcasting Service. In December 2009, he filmed the lead in an NBC pilot, "Rex Is Not Your Lawyer," playing Rex, a Chicago lawyer who starts to coach clients to represent themselves when he starts suffering panic attacks. The pilot was not picked up and the project was shelved. In October 2010 he starred as Dave, a man struggling to raise five children after the death of his partner, in the British drama "Single Father". For this role he was nominated as Best Actor at the Royal Television Society Programme Awards 2010.
In 2011 he starred in the BBC Two British TV film "United", which tells the story of the Manchester United "Busby Babes" team and the 1958 Munich air disaster, playing coach and assistant manager Jimmy Murphy. In September 2011, he appeared in a guest role in one episode of the comedy series "This is Jinsy", and also started filming "True Love", a semi-improvised BBC1 drama series, on location in Margate, Kent. The series aired in June 2012. 
In April 2012, Tennant played lead in a one-off drama "The Minor Character" for Sky Arts. Between April and June, he filmed "Spies of Warsaw" for BBC4, in the lead role of Jean-François Mercier. This drama series shot in Poland is an adaptation of Alan Furst's novel "The Spies of Warsaw". On 9 June 2012, he started filming the 3-part political drama series "The Politician's Husband" for BBC2, playing an ambitious cabinet minister who takes drastic action when his wife's career starts to outshine his. Also in June it was announced that Tennant would star in the new ITV detective series "Broadchurch". The series was filmed in Bristol and Bridport, Dorset between August and November 2012, and will air in March 2013 . Tennant also presented the new comedy quiz show "Comedy World Cup", in Autumn 2012 which ran on Saturday nights for seven episodes. In late January 2013 Tennant began filming "The Escape Artist" for BBC1. Tennant will play Will Burton, a talented junior barrister who "specialises in spiriting people out of tight legal corners".
Other work (2007–present).
Tennant was the "Star in a Reasonably Priced Car" on "Top Gear" in December 2007, where he claimed to have unsuccessfully auditioned for a role on "Taggart" 26 times. Tennant is the voice behind the 2007 advertising campaign for catalogue retailer Argos, and appeared in adverts for The Proclaimers' 2008 album and learndirect in June 2008 (using his natural Scottish accent in both). Tennant also lent his voice to adverts for Tesco Mobile, Nintendo Wii, and American Express.
Tennant appeared in Derren Brown's "Trick or Treat". In the 26 April – 2 May issue of "TV & Satellite Week", Brown is quoted as saying: "One of the appeals of "Doctor Who" for David is time travel, so I wanted to give him that experience. He was open and up for it, and I got a good reaction. He's a real screamer!" The episode aired on Channel 4 on 16 May 2008, and showed Tennant apparently predicting future events correctly by using automatic writing. Tennant also returned for the final episode of the series with the rest of the participants from the other episodes in the series to take part in one final experiment.
Tennant appeared in the 2008 episode "Holofile 703: Us and Phlegm" of the radio series "Nebulous" (a parody of "Doctor Who") in the role of Doctor Beep, using his Lothian accent. Also in 2008, Tennant voiced the character of Hamish the Hunter in the 2008 English language DVD rerelease of the 2006 animated Norwegian film, "Free Jimmy", alongside Woody Harrelson. The English language version of the film has dialogue written by Simon Pegg, who also starred in it as a main voice actor. In early 2009, Tennant narrated the digital planetarium space dome film "We are Astronomers" commissioned by the UK's National Space Centre. On 13 March 2009, he presented Red Nose Day 2009 with Davina McCall. He joined Franz Ferdinand onstage to play the guitar on their song "No You Girls" on a special Comic Relief edition of "Top of the Pops". In summer 2009, Tennant filmed "". The film was released in December 2009.
In November 2009, Tennant cohosted the Absolute Radio Breakfast Show with Christian O'Connell for three consecutive days. He returned to cohost the show for one day in October 2010 and again in September 2011. Tennant also provides the narration and all the character voices for the audio book versions of the "Hiccup Horrendous Haddock III" stories by Cressida Cowell such as "How to Train Your Dragon". In these audio books, Tennant employs his vocal skills to create a vast cast of recognisably distinct voices. Some of his most memorable characterisations include the Norfolk yokel of Norbert the Nutjob, the broad Glaswegian of Gobber the Belch, the hissing and whining Cockney of Toothless the Dragon and the sly insinuations of Alvin the Treacherous. He also played the role of Spitelout in the recent animated film adaption of said books.
On 7 March 2010, he also appeared as George in a one-part BBC Radio 4 adaptation of "Of Mice and Men" in the "Classic Serial" strand. Tennant appeared alongside former costar Catherine Tate in the Shakespeare comedy "Much Ado About Nothing" at London's Wyndham's Theatre from 16 May 2011 to 3 September 2011. For his performance as Benedick he won the BroadwayWorld UK Award for Best Leading Actor in a Play. In September 2011, it was announced that Tennant will voice a character in the movie adaptation of "Postman Pat" named "You Know You're the One" with a planned 3D theatrical release for spring 2013. In October 2011, Tennant started shooting the semi-improvised comedy film "" in Coventry. Tennant plays two roles: the main character, put-upon teacher Mr Peterson, and his "golden boy" twin brother and rival.
Tennant appeared in multi-million pound campaign for Virgin Media. One advert was voluntarily withdrawn after a complaint lodged by BBC Worldwide, which believed that the advert broke the corporation's guidelines by featuring references to "Doctor Who" that appeared to be a commercial endorsement of the service.
Royal Shakespeare Company (2008–present).
Despite his recent focus on television work, Tennant has described theatre work as his "default way of being". It was announced on 30 August 2007 that he would join the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), to play Hamlet (alongside Patrick Stewart) and Berowne (in "Love's Labours Lost") during 2008. From August to November 2008 he appeared at the Courtyard Theatre in Stratford-upon-Avon as Hamlet, playing that role in repertory with Berowne that October and November.
"Hamlet" transferred to the Novello Theatre in London's West End in December 2008, but Tennant suffered a prolapsed disc during previews and was unable to perform from 8 December 2008 until 2 January 2009, during which time the role was played by his understudy Edward Bennett. He returned to his role in the production on 3 January 2009, and appeared until the run ended on 10 January. On 12 April 2011, a photograph of Tennant as Hamlet featured on a stamp issued by the Royal Mail to mark the RSC's fiftieth anniversary. In January 2012, Tennant was appointed to the Royal Shakespeare Company board, to be on the selection committee interviewing and choosing the new artistic director.
It was announced on 23 January 2013 that Tennant will return to the RSC for the company's 2013 winter season, playing the title role in "Richard II" at Stratford-upon-Avon (from 10 October to 16 November) and transferring to the Barbican Centre in London (from 9 December to 25 January 2014).
Personal life.
Tennant married actress Georgia Moffett, who played his Doctor's genetically-created daughter in the "Doctor Who" episode "The Doctor's Daughter" (and is also the real-life daughter of Fifth Doctor actor Peter Davison), on 30 December 2011. Tennant and Moffett have a daughter, Olive, born in March 2011, and he adopted her then nine-year-old son, Tyler, in September 2011. Tennant does not discuss his personal life, especially his relationships, in interviews. "Relationships are hard enough with the people you're having them with, let alone talking about them in public," he said in December 2009. He believes that religion "must have" shaped his character, and he is an occasional churchgoer. On 5 January 2013, Jonathan Ross announced on Tennant's behalf, during an interview with Tennant, that Moffett was pregnant for the third time.
In 2008 Tennant was voted "Greenest Star on the Planet" in an online vote held by Playhouse Disney as part of the Playing for the Planet Awards. Later that year he underwent surgery for a prolapsed disc. Tennant is a supporter of the Labour Party and appeared in a party political broadcast for them in 2005. In 2010 he declared his support for then British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, in April 2010 he lent his voice to a Labour Party election broadcast and in 2012 introduced Labour leader Ed Miliband at the Labour Party Conference. He is a celebrity patron of the Association for International Cancer Research.
Popularity.
In December 2005, "The Stage" newspaper listed Tennant at No. 6 in its "Top Ten" listing of the most influential British television artists of the year, citing his roles in "Blackpool", "Casanova", "Secret Smile" and "Doctor Who". In January 2006, readers of the British gay and lesbian newspaper "The Pink Paper" voted Tennant the "Sexiest Man in the Universe" over David Beckham and Brad Pitt. A poll of over 10,000 women for the March 2006 issue of "New Woman" magazine ranked him 20th in their list of the "Top 100 Men". In October 2006, Tennant was named as "Scotland's most stylish male" in the Scottish Style Awards. He was named "Coolest Man on TV" of 2007 in a Radio Times survey. He also won the National Television Awards award for Most Popular Actor in 2006, 2007, 2008 and 2010. He was voted 16th Sexiest Man In The World by a 2008 Cosmopolitan survey.
Tennant was ranked the 24th most influential person in the British media, in the 9 July 2007 "MediaGuardian" supplement of "The Guardian". He appeared in the paper's annual media rankings in 2006. In December 2008, he was named as one of the most influential people in show business by British theatre and entertainment magazine "The Stage", making him the fifth actor to achieve a ranking in the top 20 (in a list typically dominated by producers and directors). One of the editors for "The Stage" said that Tennant placed highly on the list because he was "the biggest box office draw in recent memory".
Tennant was voted as the third best dressed man in Britain in GQ reader's poll for 2013.
The popularity of Tennant has led to impersonations of him on various social networking sites, leading the BBC to issue a statement making it clear that Tennant does not use any of these sites and any account or message purporting to be or from him is fake.
