Robert Swift (born December 3, 1985, in Bakersfield, California) is an American professional basketball player who last played for the now defunct Tokyo Apache. He stands 7 feet 1 inches tall and plays the center position.
High school.
Swift caught the attention of NBA and college scouts while playing for Garces Memorial High School, and then later as the centerpiece of the Bakersfield High School team.
During his time at Garces, the small Catholic high school broke into the "USA Today" top-25 high school basketball team rankings. Between his junior and senior years, Swift transferred from Garces to Highland High School, and then just before his senior year, he transferred to Bakersfield High School. This move provoked a hearing by the California Interscholastic Federation that initially declared Swift ineligible for the 2003–04 season; however, this ruling was later overturned and he played his senior season.
College.
In 2004, Swift bypassed college and opted for the NBA, turning down his commitment to play for USC.
NBA.
Swift was selected by the Seattle SuperSonics in the first round with the twelfth overall pick in the 2004 NBA Draft. 
In his first season he played in 16 games, averaging 4.5 minutes, 0.9 points, 0.4 rebounds, and 0.4 blocks per game. In his second season, under the direction of coach Bob Hill, he started 20 out of 47 games, averaging 21 minutes, 6.4 points, 5.6 rebounds, and 1.19 blocks per game.
In 2006 Swift was awarded the starting job at center but he ruptured the ACL in his right knee after playing just over one minute in a pre-season game vs the Sacramento Kings. The resulting injury occurred when he twisted his right knee when he fell and went out of bounds awkwardly in front of the Seattle bench. Swift suffered another injury to his right knee in February 2008, a torn lateral meniscus.
On December 22, 2009, the Oklahoma City Thunder renounced the rights to Swift.
NBDL and Japan.
In 2009, Swift joined the Bakersfield Jam of the NBDL. However, he left the team for personal reasons after appearing in two games. Swift later played for the Tokyo Apache with his former head coach in Seattle, Bob Hill. (Swift is one quarter Japanese.)
Legal problems.
In 2013, it was reported that Swift was refusing to vacate his foreclosed home, which had been bought by a new owner. The new owner bought the house in Sammamish, Washington in January 2013 for half the price paid in 2006.
