The Magdalene Sisters is a 2002 film, written and directed by Peter Mullan, about four teenage girls who were sent to Magdalene Asylums (also known as 'Magdalene Laundries'), homes for women who were labelled as "fallen" by their families or society. The homes were maintained by individual religious orders in the Roman Catholic Church in Ireland. 
Peter Mullan has remarked that the film was initially made because victims of Magdalene Asylums had received no closure in the form of recognition, compensation, or apology, and many remained lifelong devout Catholics. Former Magdalene inmate Mary-Jo McDonagh told Mullan that the reality of the Magdalene Asylums was much worse than depicted in the film.
However, since the publication of the Irish government's McAleese Report on the Magdalene Laundries, the depiction of the abuse in this film has been called into question. 
Though set in Ireland, it was shot entirely on location in the Dumfries and Galloway area, South-West Scotland.
Plot.
In Ireland in 1964, three young women, considered sinners in need of redemption by society or their families, are sent to the Magdalene Asylum: Margaret, who was raped by her cousin at a wedding; Bernadette, who flirts with boys; and Rose, who has a child out of wedlock. As the Mother Superior, Sister Bridget, tells them, Magdalene Asylum's philosophy is to help young women return to God's grace through prayer, hard work and other forms of penance; it is named after Mary Magdalene, the Biblical fallen woman whom Jesus forgave and who devoted her life to asceticism to ensure she would be able to enter the Kingdom of Heaven.
On her first night in the Asylum, Rose, known there by her confirmation name, Patricia, is in anguish as the milk backs up in her breasts. Another inmate of the asylum tells her she must endure the pain rather than lactate because the nuns will be outraged by any "leakage." She also warns Rose and Bernadette that if the nuns suspect they are becoming too intimate, they will be punished severely. The next morning, Katy, one of the older inmates, lectures Bernadette and Crispina about their insensitivity; rather than wash clothes in silence, they traded laundry secrets despite the fact that one of the asylum's nuns was in trouble for letting an inmate named Una O'Connor escape.
The next night, Una is brought back by her father -- she had left the asylum because she desperately longed for her family. Her father renounces her, telling her that he will cripple her the next time he sees her. Although Sister Bridget speaks tenderly to her that night, the next day she cuts all of Una's long brunette locks off. Crispina and Bernadette are also reprimanded for speaking aloud in the laundry rooms, resulting in several blows to the back of the thighs with Sister Bridget's switch.
Bernadette tries to seduce Brendan, one of the men who ferry the laundry to and from the asylum, hoping that he will help her escape. But Brendan loses his nerve, leaving Bernadette to be punished with a bloody, forced haircut. She then continues to endure the miseries forced upon her and her fellow inmates, including having their naked bodies mocked by the nuns. Crispina tries to make herself terminally ill with the flu by soaking her nightgown in cold water then sleeping in it. When she loses her St. Christopher medal, she believes God is punishing her for some wrong and tries to hang herself. Only the intervention of Margaret, Rose and Bernadette saves her. Margaret tries to console Crispina by telling her she will soon be able to leave the convent to see her son, but Bernadette scoffs at the idea. Bernadette, who has had the St. Christopher medal all along, decides to keep it rather than return it to Crispina.
The next day, Margaret sees Crispina performing fellatio on Father Fitzroy, the resident priest just before mass. She continues to protect the mildly retarded Crispina, telling her not to consider Fitzroy a man of God and fighting with Bernadette when she finds the St. Christopher medal under her bed. She also washes Fitzroy's vestments with a caustic plant that causes him to break out in a livid rash and strip off his clothes during an open-air mass. When Crispina realizes she has the same rash between her legs and that Sister Bridget will not help her, she obsessively screams "You're not a man of God!" at Fitzroy for 10 minutes. That night, Crispina is forcibly taken to Mt. Vernon, a hospital for the mentally ill, so she cannot reveal any more about Fitzroy's sexual abuse of her.
At Christmas, Margaret's brother Eamonn retrieves her from the asylum; she has been at Magdalene for four years and has a difficult time accepting her good fortune. On the way out, they encounter Sister Bridget and the Bishop. When Margaret begins to pray in response to a threat from Sister Bridget, the Bishop gestures to Sister Bridget to move on without a confrontation. Bernadette finds Katy dead; when she goes to tell Sister Bridget, she sees Patricia being viciously beaten for telling Crispina's sister that she had been imprisoned in the mental hospital. That night, she tells Patricia that they have to leave. They break in to Sister Bridget's office, and after a confrontation with Bridget and other nuns, escape the asylum. With the help of Bernadette's aunt, who lives in a nearby town, they are able to start anew. 
Patricia (now Rose again) takes a ferry to Liverpool, in England; as an adult, she will marry and have two daughters before finding the son that was taken from her in 1964. Bernadette becomes a hairstylist like her aunt and moves to Scotland but is never able to have stable, happy relationships. She marries and divorces three times. Margaret became a school deputy headmistress but never married. Crispina was found by her sister in Mt. Vernon but, her mental health having deteriorated, she died there of anorexia in 1971.
Critical reception.
The film received very positive reviews from critics. As of 25 October 2008, the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 90% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 144 reviews. Metacritic reported the film had an average score of 83 out of 100, based on 38 reviews — indicating "universal acclaim". This made it the twentieth best reviewed film of the year. The film appeared on several US critics' top ten lists of the best films of 2003.
The film also received critical acclaim when it was premiered at the Venice Film Festival in 2002, culminating with Peter Mullan taking home the festival's highest prize the Golden Lion.
