In mathematics, trigonometric identities are equalities that involve trigonometric functions and are true for every single value of the occurring variables. Geometrically, these are identities involving certain functions of one or more angles. They are distinct from triangle identities, which are identities involving both angles and side lengths of a triangle. Only the former are covered in this article.
These identities are useful whenever expressions involving trigonometric functions need to be simplified. An important application is the integration of non-trigonometric functions: a common technique involves first using the substitution rule with a trigonometric function, and then simplifying the resulting integral with a trigonometric identity.
Notation.
Angles.
Unless otherwise specified, all angles in this article are assumed to be in radians, though angles ending in a degree symbol (°) are in degrees.
Trigonometric functions.
The primary trigonometric functions are the sine and cosine of an angle. These are sometimes abbreviated sin("θ") and cos("θ"), respectively, where "θ" is the angle, but the parentheses around the angle are often omitted, e.g., sin "θ" and cos "θ".
These definitions are sometimes referred to as ratio identities.
Inverse functions.
The inverse trigonometric functions are partial inverse functions for the trigonometric functions. For example, the inverse function for the sine, known as the inverse sine (sin−1) or arcsine (arcsin or asin), satisfies
and
Pythagorean identity.
where means and means .
Historic shorthands.
The versine, coversine, haversine, and exsecant were used in navigation. For example the haversine formula was used to calculate the distance between two points on a sphere. They are rarely used today.
Symmetry, shifts, and periodicity.
By examining the unit circle, the following properties of the trigonometric functions can be established.
Shifts and periodicity.
By shifting the function round by certain angles, it is often possible to find different trigonometric functions that express the result more simply. Some examples of this are shown by shifting functions round by π/2, π and 2π radians. Because the periods of these functions are either π or 2π, there are cases where the new function is exactly the same as the old function without the shift.
Angle sum and difference identities.
These are also known as the "addition and subtraction theorems" or "formulae".
They were originally established by the 10th century Persian mathematician Abū al-Wafā' Būzjānī.
One method of proving these identities is to apply Euler's formula. The use of the symbols formula_9 and formula_10 is described in the article plus-minus sign.
Matrix form.
This shows that these matrices form a representation of the rotation group in the plane (technically, the special orthogonal group "SO"(2)), since the composition law is fulfilled: subsequent multiplications of a vector with these two matrices yields the same result as the rotation by the sum of the angles.
Sines and cosines of sums of infinitely many terms.
In these two identities an asymmetry appears that is not seen in the case of sums of finitely many terms: in each product, there are only finitely many sine factors and cofinitely many cosine factors.
If only finitely many of the terms θ"i" are nonzero, then only finitely many of the terms on the right side will be nonzero because sine factors will vanish, and in each term, all but finitely many of the cosine factors will be unity.
Tangents of sums.
Let "e""k" (for "k" = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...) be the "k"th-degree elementary symmetric polynomial in the variables
for "i" = 0, 1, 2, 3, ..., i.e.,
Then
The number of terms on the right side depends on the number of terms on the left side.
and so on. The case of only finitely many terms can be proved by mathematical induction.
Secants and cosecants of sums.
where "e""k" is the "k"th-degree elementary symmetric polynomial in the "n" variables "x""i" = tan "θ""i", "i" = 1, ..., "n", and the number of terms in the denominator and the number of factors in the product in the numerator depend on the number of terms in the sum on the left. The case of only finitely many terms can be proved by mathematical induction on the number of such terms. The convergence of the series in the denominators can be shown by writing the secant identity in the form
and then observing that the left side converges if the right side converges, and similarly for the cosecant identity.
For example,
Multiple-angle formulae.
Double-angle, triple-angle, and half-angle formulae.
These can be shown by using either the sum and difference identities or the multiple-angle formulae.
The fact that the triple-angle formula for sine and cosine only involves powers of a single function allows one to relate the geometric problem of a compass and straightedge construction of angle trisection to the algebraic problem of solving a cubic equation, which allows one to prove that this is in general impossible using the given tools, by field theory. 
A formula for computing the trigonometric identities for the third-angle exists, but it requires finding the zeroes of the cubic equation formula_21, where "x" is the value of the sine function at some angle and "d" is the known value of the sine function at the triple angle. However, the discriminant of this equation is negative, so this equation has three real roots (of which only one is the solution within the correct third-circle) but none of these solutions is reducible to a real algebraic expression, as they use intermediate complex numbers under the cube roots, (which may be expressed in terms of real-only functions only if using hyperbolic functions).
Sine, cosine, and tangent of multiple angles.
For specific multiples, these follow from the angle addition formulas, while the general formula was given by 16th century French mathematician Vieta.
Chebyshev method.
The Chebyshev method is a recursive algorithm for finding the "n"th multiple angle formula knowing the ("n" − 1)th and ("n" − 2)th formulae.
Similarly sin("nx") can be computed from the sines of ("n" − 1)"x" and ("n" − 2)"x"
where "H"/"K" = tan("n" − 1)"x".
Tangent of an average.
Setting either "α" or "β" to 0 gives the usual tangent half-angle formulæ.
Power-reduction formula.
Obtained by solving the second and third versions of the cosine double-angle formula.
and in general terms of powers of or the following is true, and can be deduced using De Moivre's formula, Euler's formula and binomial theorem.
Product-to-sum and sum-to-product identities.
The product-to-sum identities or prosthaphaeresis formulas can be proven by expanding their right-hand sides using the angle addition theorems. See beat (acoustics) and phase detector for applications of the sum-to-product formulæ.
Miscellaneous.
Dirichlet kernel.
The convolution of any integrable function of period 2π with the Dirichlet kernel coincides with the function's "n"th-degree Fourier approximation. The same holds for any measure or generalized function.
Weierstrass substitution.
If we set
then
where e"ix" = cos("x") + "i" sin("x"), sometimes abbreviated to cis("x").
When this substitution of "t" for tan("x"/2) is used in calculus, it follows that sin("x") is replaced by 2"t"/(1 + "t"2), cos("x") is replaced by (1 − "t"2)/(1 + "t"2) and the differential "dx" is replaced by (2 "dt")/(1 + "t"2). Thereby one converts rational functions of sin("x") and cos("x") to rational functions of "t" in order to find their antiderivatives.
