Pooja Kumar (Hindi: पूजा कुमार, "Pūjā Kumār"; born February 4, 1977) is an American actress, producer, model and television hostess. She was crowned Miss India USA and has been a VJ for Channel V, a newsreader on the show "Namaste America" and has starred in such feature films as "Kaadhal Rojave", "Night of Henna", "Flavors", "Hiding Divya", "Park Sharks", "Bollywood Beats", "Man on a Ledge", "Anything For You" and "Vishwaroopam".
Early life.
Pooja was born into a Mathur family in St. Louis, Missouri. Her parents are immigrants from India; her father is from Dehradun and her mother is from Lucknow. Her younger brother, Paraag Kumar, is a model. She attended Washington University where she graduated with degrees in political science and finance. Kumar is also trained in the Bharatanatyam, Kuchipudi, and Kathak forms of Indian classical dance. She was crowned Miss India USA in 1995.
Career.
Pooja Kumar first signed on to appear in director K. R.'s Tamil film "Kadhal Rojave" in 1997 alongside George Vishnu, but the film's production delays meant that it only released in 2000 and her stint as an actress in the Tamil film industry went unnoticed. She was earlier signed and then left out of the 1997 film "V. I. P", while she had also signed to appear alongside Karthik in Chithra Lakshmanan's "Chinna Raja", but was eventually dropped from the film.
Pooja produced a short film, "1001 Auditions", that has been selected in eight film festivals, including being nominated for "Best Short" at the Stuttgart Film Festival in Germany. She has also produced a short film called "Shoot My Life". Pooja has also been seen in national TV commercials for "Bombay Dreams", Verizon, Dodge, Pearle Vision, New York Lottery, Tata True Roots, AOL Time Warner, and Outback Steakhouse.
In 2003, she received the Screen Actors Guild Emerging Actress Award for "Flavors". In 2008, she hosted a late-night live quiz show on Zee TV in India, known as "Jaago Aur Jeeto". She appeared in the musical comedy miniseries "Bollywood Hero" on the IFC in 2008. She starred opposite "Saturday Night Live" comedian Chris Kattan in the three part series. In the late 2000s, she appeared in the Pakistani drama serial "Ishq Junoon Dewaangi" on Hum TV.
