The Schutzstaffel (, translated to "Protection Squadron" or "defence corps", abbreviated SS—or with stylized "Armanen" "sig" runes) was a major paramilitary organization under Adolf Hitler and the Nazi Party (NSDAP). It began at the end of 1920 as a small, permanent guard unit known as the "Saal-Schutz" (Hall-Protection) made up of NSDAP volunteers to provide security for Nazi Party meetings in Munich. Later in 1925, Heinrich Himmler joined the unit which had by then been reformed and renamed the "Schutz-Staffel". Under Himmler's leadership (1929–45), it grew from a small paramilitary formation to one of the largest and most powerful organizations in the Third Reich. Built upon the Nazi ideology, the SS under Himmler's command was responsible for many of the crimes against humanity during World War II (1939–45). The SS, along with the Nazi Party, was banned in Germany as a criminal organization after 1945.
Background.
The SS grew from a small paramilitary unit to a powerful force that served as the "Führer"'s body guard, the Nazi Party's "Protection Squadron" and a force that, fielding almost a million men (both on the front lines and as political police), managed to exert as much political influence in the Third Reich as the "Wehrmacht", Germany's regular armed forces.
According to the Nuremberg Trials, as well as many war crimes investigations and trials conducted since then, the SS was responsible for the vast majority of Nazi war crimes. In particular, it was the primary organization which carried out the Holocaust. As a part of its race-centric functions, the SS oversaw the isolation and displacement of Jews from the populations of the conquered territories, seizing their assets and transporting them to concentration camps and ghettos where they would be used as slave labor (pending extermination) or immediately killed.
Initially a small branch of the "Sturmabteilung" ("Brownshirts" or stormtroopers, abbreviated in German as SA), the SS grew in size and power due to its exclusive loyalty to Adolf Hitler, as opposed to the SA, which was seen as semi-independent and a threat to Adolf Hitler's hegemony over the party. Under Himmler, the SS selected its members according to the Nazi ideology. Creating elite police and military units such as the "Waffen-SS", Adolf Hitler used the SS to form an order of men claimed to be superior in racial purity and ability to other Germans and national groups, a model for the Nazi vision of a master race. During World War II, SS units operated alongside the regular Heer (German Army). However, by the final stages of the war, the SS came to dominate the Wehrmacht in order to eliminate perceived threats to Adolf Hitler's power while implementing his strategies, despite the increasingly futile German war effort.
Chosen to implement the Nazi "Final Solution" for the Jews and other groups deemed inferior (and/or enemies of the state), the SS was the lead branch in carrying out the killing, torture, and enslavement of approximately 12 million people. Most victims were Jews or of Polish or other Slavic extraction. However, other racial/ethnic groups such as the Roma made up a significant number of victims, as well. Furthermore, the SS purge was extended to those viewed as threats to "race hygiene" or Nazi ideology—including the mentally or physically handicapped, homosexuals, and political dissidents. Members of labor organizations and those perceived to be affiliated with groups (religious, political, social, and otherwise) that opposed the regime, or were seen to have views contradictory to the goals of the Nazi government, were rounded up in large numbers; these included clergy of all faiths, Jehovah's Witnesses, Freemasons, Communists, and Rotary Club members.
Foreseeing defeat, a significant number of SS personnel organized their escape to South American nations. These escapes are said to have been assisted by an organization known as ODESSA, an acronym of the German phrase "Organisation der ehemaligen SS-Angehörigen", which translates as the "Organization of Former Members of the SS". Many others were captured and prosecuted by Allied authorities at the Nuremberg Trials for war crimes, and absconding SS criminals were the targets of police forces in various Allied nations, post-war West and East Germany, Austria, and Israel.
The Nazis regarded the SS as an elite unit, the party's "Praetorian Guard", with all SS personnel (originally) selected on the principles of racial purity and loyalty to the Nazi Party. In the early days of the SS, officer candidates had to prove German ancestry to 1750. They also were required to prove that they had no Jewish ancestors. Later, when the requirements of the war made it impossible to confirm the ancestry of officer candidates, the proof of ancestry regulation was dropped.
In contrast to the black-uniformed "Allgemeine SS" (the political wing of the SS), the "Waffen-SS" (the military wing) evolved into a second German army aside the "Wehrmacht" (the regular national armed forces) and operating in tandem with them; especially with the Heer (German Army).
Special ranks and uniforms.
The SS was distinguished from other branches of the German military, the National Socialist Party, and German state officials by its own rank structure, unit insignia, and uniforms. The all-black SS uniform was designed by "SS-Oberführer" Prof. Karl Diebitsch and graphic designer "SS-Sturmhauptführer" Walter Heck. These uniforms were rarely worn after the war began, however, as Himmler ordered that the all-black uniforms be turned in for use by others. They were sent east where they were used by auxiliary police units and west to be used by Germanic-SS units such as the ones in Holland and Denmark. In place of the black uniform, SS men wore uniforms of earth-grey ("Erdgrau") or Army field-grey (grey-green) with distinctive insignia. The uniforms were made by hundreds of clothing factories licensed by the RZM, including Hugo Boss, with some workers being prisoners of war forced into labor work. Many were made in concentration camps. The SS also developed its own field uniforms. Initially these were similar to standard Wehrmacht wool uniforms but they also included reversible smocks and helmet covers printed with camouflage patterns with a brown–green "spring" side and a brown–brown "autumn" side. In 1944 the "Waffen-SS" began using a universal camouflage uniform intended to replace the wool field uniform.
Ideology.
In contrast to the Imperial military tradition, the nature of the SS was based on an ideology where commitment, effectiveness, and political reliability—not class or education—would determine how far they succeeded in the organization. The SS also stressed total loyalty and obedience to orders unto death. It became a powerful tool used by Hitler and the Nazi state for political ends. The SS ideology and values of the organization were one of the main reasons why the SS was entrusted with the execution of many Nazi atrocities and war crimes of the Nazi state.
Merger with police forces.
As the Nazi party monopolized political power in Germany, key government functions such as law enforcement were absorbed by the SS, while many SS organizations became de facto government agencies. To maintain the political power and security of the Nazi party (and later the nation), the SS established and ran the "SD" (Security service) and took over the administration of "Gestapo" (Secret state police), "Kripo" (criminal investigative police), and the "Orpo" (regular uniformed police). Moreover, legal jurisdiction over the SS and its members was taken away from the civilian courts and given to courts run by the SS itself. These actions effectively put the SS above the law.
Personal control by Himmler.
Himmler, the leader of the SS, was a chief architect of the Final Solution. The SS "Einsatzgruppen" death squads, formed by his deputy, Heydrich, murdered many civilian non-combatants, primarily Jews, in the countries occupied by Germany during World War II. Himmler was responsible for establishing and operating concentration camps and extermination camps in which millions of inmates died of systematic mass gassing, shooting, hanging, inhumane treatment, overwork, malnutrition, or medical experiments. After the war, the judges of the Nuremberg Trials declared the SS and its sub-parts criminal organizations responsible for the implementation of racial policies of genocide and committing war crimes and crimes against humanity.
History.
The history of the SS may be grouped into several key periods of the organization's existence. The first group associated with SS (but not known as such) existed briefly in 1923, before being disbanded and re-founded in 1925. This second version of the SS, sometimes known as the "Pre-Himmler SS", existed from 1925 to 1929; then the more recognizable SS under Heinrich Himmler came into being. Himmler's SS existed from 1929 to 1945, and may itself be divided into a peacetime SS until 1939, replaced by a wartime SS lasting until the end of World War II. The group was formally disbanded upon the defeat of Nazi Germany.
Origins.
The group was first formed in 1923, as a company of the SA who were given the task of protecting senior leaders of the Nazi Party at rallies, speeches, and other public events. Commanded by Emil Maurice, and known as the "Stabswache" (Staff Guard), the original group consisted of eight men and was modeled after the Erhardt Naval Brigade, a violent "Freikorps" of the time.
After the failed 1923 "Putsch" by the Nazi Party, the SA and the "Stabswache" were abolished, yet they returned in 1925. At that time, the "Stabswache" was reestablished as the 30-man ""Stosstrupp" Adolf Hitler", given the task of providing personal protection for Hitler at Nazi Party functions and events. That same year, the "Stosstrupp" was expanded to a national level, and renamed successively the "Sturmstaffel" (storm squadron), then the "Schutzkommando" (protection command), and finally the "Schutzstaffel" (SS). The new SS was delegated to be a protection company of various Nazi Party leaders throughout Germany. Hitler's personal SS protection unit was later enlarged to include combat units and after April 13, 1934, was known as the "Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" (LSSAH). After Germany mobilized in 1939, the combat units in the LSSAH were mobilized as well, leaving behind an honour guard battalion to protect Hitler. It is these SS troops that are seen at the Reich Chancellery and Hitler's Obersalzberg estate in his personal 8 mm movies.
Development.
Between 1925 and 1929, the SS was considered merely a small "Gruppe" of the SA and numbered no more than 1,000 personnel; by 1929 that number was down to 280. After SS commander Erhard Heiden resigned, Hitler appointed Himmler to the position of "Reichsführer-SS" in January 1929. By the end of 1932, the SS had 52,000 members. By the end of the next year, it had over 209,000 members. Himmler's expansion of the SS was based on models from other groups, such as the Knights Templar and the Italian Blackshirts. According to SS-"Obergruppenführer" and General of the "Waffen-SS", Karl Wolff, it was also based on the model from the Society of Jesus of absolute obedience to the Pope. A motto of the SS was ""Treu, Tapfer, Gehorsam"" ("Loyalty, Valiance, Obedience").
Before 1929, the SS wore the same brown uniform as the SA, with the exception of a black tie and a black cap with a "Totenkopf" ("death's head") skull and bones symbol on it. In that year Himmler extended the black colour to include breeches, boots, belts, and armband edges; and in 1932 they adopted the all-black uniform, designed by Prof. Diebitsch and Walter Heck. In 1936 an "earth-grey" uniform was issued. The "Waffen" ("armed") SS wore a field-grey ("feldgrau") uniform similar to the regular army, or "Heer". During the war, "Waffen-SS" units wore a wide range of items printed with camouflage patterns (such as "Platanenmuster," "Erbsenmuster," captured Italian "Telo Mimetico", etc.), while their "feldgrau" uniforms became largely indistinguishable from those of the "Heer", save for the insignia. In 1945, the SS adopted the "Leibermuster" disruptive camouflage pattern that inspired many forms of modern battle dress, although it was not widely issued before the end of the war.
Their official motto was ""Meine Ehre heißt Treue"" ("My Honour is Loyalty"). The SS rank system was unique in that it did not copy the terms and ranks used by the "Wehrmacht"'s branches ("Heer" ("army"), "Luftwaffe" ("air force"), and "Kriegsmarine" ("navy")), but instead used the ranks established by the post-World War I "Freikorps" and taken over by the SA. This was mainly done to establish the SS as being independent from the "Wehrmacht", although SS ranks did generally have equivalents in the other services.
Himmler, together with his right-hand man, Reinhard Heydrich, consolidated the power of the organization. In 1931 Himmler gave Heydrich the assignment to build an intelligence and security service inside the SS, which became the "Sicherheitsdienst" (SD). By the time the war began, the number of members rose to 250,000, and the "Waffen-SS" was formed in August 1940, expanding the earlier armed SS troops who had fought in Poland and France in 1939–40, to serve alongside the "Wehrmacht", Germany's regular armed forces. Himmler also received control of the Gestapo in 1934, and, that same year, Hitler had given the SS jurisdiction over all concentration camps. In the wake of the plot against Hitler's life by a group of regular military generals in July 1944, the "Führer" came to distrust his regular military, putting ever more trust in the SS, particularly Himmler, who had acted against the plotters and their families. This attitude of Hitler's was further shown at the very end of the war, when he refused to station himself in the OKW bunker in Berlin, claiming that he did not "trust the strength of army concrete", however the true reason was probably that he feared another generals' plot and so chose to stay in his own headquarters, surrounded by an apparently more loyal SS retinue.
Early SS disunity.
In its first years of existence, the SS was characterized by significant disunity both geographically within Germany as well as within the structure of the SS as a whole. In addition, prior to April 1934, the Gestapo was a civilian state police agency outside the control of SS leadership. In some cases, it came into direct conflict with the SS and even attempted to arrest some of its members.
The first major division in the early SS was between SS units in northern Germany, situated around Berlin, and SS units in southern Germany headquartered around Munich. The "Northern-SS" was under the command of Kurt Daluege who had close ties to Hermann Göring and enjoyed his position in Berlin where most of the Nazi government offices were located. This in contrast to the SS in southern Germany, commanded unquestionably by Heinrich Himmler and located mostly in Munich which was the location of the major Nazi political offices.
Within the SS, early divisions also developed between the "General SS" and the SS under the command of Sepp Dietrich which would eventually become the "Waffen-SS". The early military SS was kept quite separate from the regular SS and Dietrich introduced early regulations that the military SS answered directly to Hitler, and not Himmler, and for several months even ordered his troops to wear the black SS uniform without a swastika armband to separate the soldiers from other SS units once the black uniform had become common throughout Germany.
The division between the military and general SS never entirely disappeared even in the last days of World War II. Senior "Waffen-SS" commanders had little respect for Himmler and he was scornfully nicknamed "Reichsheini" by the "Waffen-SS" rank and file. Himmler worsened his own position when he attempted to hold a military command during the last months of the war and proved totally incompetent as a field commander.
The Gestapo, which would eventually become a semi-integrated part of the SS security forces, was at first a large "thorn in the side" to Himmler as the group was originally the Prussian state political police under the control of Hermann Göring and commanded by his protege Rudolf Diels. Early Gestapo activities came into direct conflict with the SS and it was not until the SA became a common enemy that Göring turned over control of the Gestapo to Himmler and Heydrich (the three then worked together to destroy the greater threat of the SA leadership). Even so, Göring was reported to have disliked Himmler to the last days of the war and even turned down honorary SS rank since he did not want to be subordinate to Himmler in any way.
Before 1933.
1925–28.
In early 1925, the future SS was a single, 30-man company that was Hitler's personal bodyguard. In September, all local NSDAP offices were ordered to create body guard units of no more than ten men apiece. By 1926, six "SS-Gaus" were established, supervising all such units in Germany. In turn, the "SS-Gaus" answered to the "SS-Oberleitung", the headquarters unit. The "SS-Oberleitung" answered to the office of the Supreme SA Leader ("Oberste SA-Führer"), Franz Pfeffer von Salomon, clearly establishing the SS as a subordinate unit of the "Sturmabteilung".
1929–31.
Each "SS-Oberführerbereiche" contained several "SS-Brigaden", which in turn were divided into regiment-sized "SS-Standarten".
1931–33.
In addition to the "SS-Amt", the "SS-Rasseamt" (Race Office) and "Sicherheitsdienst Amt" (Office of the SD) were established as two separate offices on an equal footing with the Headquarters Office.
The lower levels of the SS remained unchanged between 1931 and 1933. However, it was during this time that the SS began to establish its independence from the "Sturmabteilung" (SA), although officially the SS was still considered a sub-organization of the SA and answerable to the SA Chief of Staff.
After the Nazi seizure of power.
After the Nazi seizure of power, the mission of the SS expanded from the protection of the person of Adolf Hitler to the internal security of the Nazi regime. In 1936 Himmler described this new mission of the SS in his pamphlet, "The SS as an Anti-Bolshevist Fighting Organization". The LSSAH would later become the first division in the Order of Battle of the "Waffen-SS".
1934–36.
On April 20, 1934, (as a prelude to the Night of the Long Knives), Göring transferred the Gestapo to Himmler, who was also named chief of all German police forces outside Prussia; two days later Himmler named Heydrich the head of the Gestapo.
Following the Night of the Long Knives, the SS again underwent a massive reorganization. The "SS-Gruppen" were renamed as "SS-Oberabschnitt", and the former SS Headquarters and command offices were reorganized into three and then eight "SS-Hauptämter". The "SS-Hauptamt" offices would eventually grow in number to twelve main offices by 1944. These offices remained unchanged in their names until the end of World War II and the fall of the SS.
By mid-1934, the SS had taken control of all concentration camps from the SA, and a new organization, the "SS-Totenkopfverbände" (SS-TV) had been established as the SS Concentration Camp Service. The original SS-TV was organized into six "Wachtruppen" at each of Germany's major concentration camps. The "Wachtruppen" were expanded in 1935 into "Wachsturmbanne" and again in 1937 into three main "SS-Totenkopfstandarten". This structure would remain unchanged until 1941, when a massive labor and death camp system in the occupied territories necessitated the concentration camps to be placed under the "Wirtschafts und Verwaltungshauptamt" (SS-WVHA) in three main divisions of labor camps, concentration camps, and death camps.
The early "Waffen-SS" can trace its origins to 1934 in the "SS-Verfügungstruppe": two "Standarten" (regiments) under retired general Paul Hausser armed and trained to Army standards, and held ready at the personal disposal of the "Führer" in peace or war. Hausser also established two "Junkerschule" for the training of SS officers.
1936–39.
Himmler was named the chief of all German police (nominally in that role subordinate to Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick) on June 17, 1936. He thereby assumed control of all of the German states' regular police forces and, nationalizing them, formed the "Ordnungspolizei" and the "Kriminalpolizei". The Orpo, uniformed police, were placed under the command of SS "Obergruppenführer" Kurt Daluege. Further, the Gestapo and the Kripo or "Kriminalpolizei" (Criminal Police) were incorporated into the SiPo or "Sicherheitspolizei" (Security Police) and considered a complementary organisation to the SD or "Sicherheitsdienst" (Security Service). Reinhard Heydrich was head of the SiPo (made up of the Gestapo and Kripo) and SD. Heinrich Müller, was chief of operations of the Gestapo. These events effectively placed all German police under the control of SS commanders. In September 1939, the security and police agencies of Nazi Germany (with the exception of the Orpo) were consolidated into the Reich Main Security Office (RSHA), headed by Heydrich.
In 1939 from the existing "Totenkopfverbände" was formed the SS Division "Totenkopf" composed of members of the concentration camp service together with support units transferred from the Army. The "Totenkopf" or "Death's Head" division would later become a division of the "Waffen-SS".
During World War II.
By the outbreak of World War II, the SS had solidified into its final form. By this point, the term "SS" could be applied to two completely separate organizations, mainly the Allgemeine-SS and the Waffen-SS. The Allgemeine-SS also had control over a third SS branch, known as the Germanic-SS, which was composed of SS groups formed in occupied territories and allied countries. In the last months of World War II, a fourth branch of the SS known as the "Auxiliary-SS" was formed from non-SS members conscripted to serve in Germany's concentration camps.
SS and police leaders.
During World War II, the most powerful men in the SS were the SS and Police Leaders, divided into three levels: regular leaders, higher leaders, and supreme leaders. Such persons normally held the rank of "SS-Gruppenführer" or above and answered directly to Himmler in all matters pertaining to the SS in their area of responsibility. Thus, SS and Police Leaders bypassed all other chains of command. In Himmler's grand dream of the SS, the SS and Police Leaders were eventually to become SS-Governors of the "Lebensraum" which would be ruled by SS-Lords, protected by SS-Legions, and worked and lived in by SS-Yeoman Warriors overseeing Slavic serfs.
SS offices.
By 1942 all activities of the SS were managed through twelve main offices of the "Allgemeine-SS".
"Allgemeine-SS".
The "Allgemeine-SS" (the "General SS") refers to a non-combat branch of the SS. The "Allgemeine-SS" formations were divided into "Standarten", organized into larger formations known as "Abschnitte" and "Oberabschnitte". Many personnel served in other branches of the state government, Nazi Party, and certain departments within the RSHA (e.g., the SD, Gestapo and Kripo). Members of the "Allgemeine-SS" were considered more or less reservists with many serving the German military, or the "Waffen-SS". For those who served in the "Waffen-SS", it was a standard practice to hold separate SS ranks for both the "Allgemeine-SS" and the "Waffen-SS".
"Waffen-SS".
For the invasion of France and the Low Countries in 1940 ("Fall Gelb") the three SS-VT and three of the SS-TV regiments were each organized into divisions (the future 2nd "Das Reich" and 3rd "Totenkopf"), and another division was raised from the "Ordnungspolizei" (later the 4th "Polizei"). Following the campaign, these units together with the "Leibstandarte" and additional SS-TV "Standarten" were amalgamated into the newly-formed "Kommandoamt der Waffen-SS" within the "SS Führungshauptamt".
In 1941 Himmler announced that additional "Waffen-SS" "Freiwilligen" units would be raised from non-German foreign nationals. His goal was to acquire additional manpower from occupied nations. These foreign legions eventually included volunteers from Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Norway, Sweden, and the Netherlands.
While the "Waffen-SS" remained officially outside the armed forces ("Wehrmacht") and under Himmler's authority, they were placed under the operational command of the Armed Forces High Command (OKW) or Army High Command (OKH), and were largely funded by the "Wehrmacht". During the war, the "Waffen-SS" grew to 38 divisions. The most famous are the "1st SS Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" (LSSAH), "2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich", "3rd SS Division Totenkopf", "5th SS Panzer Division Wiking", and the "12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend".
The "Waffen-SS" maintained several "Foreign Legions" of personnel from conquered territories and countries allied to Germany. The majority wore a distinctive national collar patch and preceded their SS rank titles with the prefix "Waffen" instead of SS. Volunteers from Scandinavian countries filled the ranks of two divisions, the 5th "Wiking" and 11th "Nordland." Belgian Flemings joined Dutchmen to form the "Nederland" Legion, their Walloon compatriots joined the Sturmbrigade "Wallonien". There was also a French volunteer division, 33rd Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS Charlemagne (1st French).
Racial restrictions were relaxed to the extent that Ukrainian Slavs, Albanians from Kosovo, Arabs, Turkic Tatars, and even Asians from Dutch East Indies (Indonesia)units were recruited. The Ukrainians and the Tatars had both suffered persecution under Joseph Stalin and their motive was a hatred of communism rather than sympathy for National Socialism. The exiled Grand Mufti of Jerusalem, Hajj Amin al-Husayni, used hatred of Serbs and Jews to recruit an entire Waffen-SS division of Bosnian Muslims, the 13th SS Division "Handschar" (Scimitar). The year-long Soviet occupation and oppression of the Baltic states at the beginning of World War II produced volunteers for Latvian and Estonian "Waffen-SS" units. The Estonian Legion, for example, had 1,280 volunteers under training by the end of 1942. However, by 1 February 1944 the German military situation on the Eastern front had worsened. As the result, another 10,000 Estonia men were conscripted into the "Waffen-SS". Approximately 25,000 men served in the Estonian SS division (with thousands more conscripted into the "Police Front" battalions and border guard units). After 1943 most men from the east were conscripts. However, some other occupied countries such as Greece, Lithuania, Czechoslovakia, and Poland never formed formal "Waffen-SS" legions. With that said, there were some countrymen that were in the service of the "Waffen-SS". In Greece, the fascist organisation ESPO tried to create a Greek SS division, but the attempt was abandoned when its leader was assassinated.
The "Indische Freiwilligen Infanterie Regiment 950" (also known at various stages as the "Indische Freiwilligen-Legion der Waffen-SS", the "Legion Freies Indien", and "Azad Hind Fauj") was created in August 1942, chiefly from disaffected Indian soldiers of the British Indian Army, captured by the Axis in North Africa. Many, if not most, of the Indian volunteers who switched sides to fight with the German Army and against the British were strongly nationalistic supporters of the exiled, anti-British, former president of the Indian National Congress, "Netaji" (the Leader) Subhas Chandra Bose. See also the Tiger Legion and the Indian National Army.
Germanic-SS.
The Germanic-SS was an SS-modeled structure formed in occupied territories and allied countries. The main purpose of the Germanic-SS was enforcement of Nazi racial doctrine and antisemitic policies. Denmark and Belgium were the two largest participants in the Germanic-SS program. Germanic-SS members wore the all-black SS uniforms favored by the pre-war German SS. After the war began, Himmler ordered the uniforms to be turned in and many were then sent west to be used by Germanic-SS units such as the ones in Holland and Denmark. These groups had their own uniforms with a modification of SS rank titles and insignia. All Germanic-SS units answered to the SS headquarters in Germany.
Auxiliary-SS.
The Auxiliary-SS (SS "mannschaft") was an organization that arose in 1945 as a last-ditch effort to keep concentration camps running. Auxiliary-SS members were not considered regular SS personnel, but were conscripted members from other branches of the German military, the Nazi Party, and the "Volkssturm". Such personnel wore a distinctive twin swastika collar patch and served as camp guard and administrative personnel until the surrender of Germany.
Auxiliary SS members had the distinct disadvantage of being the "last ones in the camp" as the major concentration camps were liberated by allied forces. As a result, many auxiliary SS members, in particular those captured by Russian forces, faced swift and fierce retaliation and were often held personally responsible for the carnage of the camps to which some had only been assigned for a few weeks or even days.
There also exist very few records of the Auxiliary SS since, at the time of this group's creation, it was a foregone conclusion that Germany had lost the Second World War and the entire purpose of the Auxiliary SS was to serve in support roles while members of the SS proper escaped from allied forces. Thus, there was never a serious effort to properly train, equip, or maintain records on the Auxiliary SS.
SS units and branches.
Within the two main branches of the "Allgemeine-SS" and "Waffen-SS", there further existed several branches and sub-branches some with overlapping duties while other SS commands had little to no contact with each other. In addition, by 1939 the SS had complete control over the German Police, with many police member serving as dual SS members. Most of these branches committed war crimes and crimes against humanity, and many individuals were tried for these offences after the war.
Concentration camps.
The SS is closely associated with Nazi Germany's concentration camp system. After 1934, the running of Germany's concentration camps was placed under the total authority of the SS and an SS formation known as the "SS-Totenkopfverbände" (SS-TV), under the command of Theodor Eicke. Known as the "Death's Head Units", the SS-TV was first organized as several battalions, each based at one of Germany's major concentration camps, the oldest of which was at Dachau. In 1939, the "Totenkopfverbände" expanded into a military division with the establishment of the "Totenkopf" division, which in 1940 would become a full division within the "Waffen-SS".
With the start of World War II, the "Totenkopfverbände" began a large expansion that eventually would develop into three branches covering each type of concentration camp the SS operated. By 1944, there existed three divisions of the SS-TV, those being the staffs of the concentration camps proper in Germany and Austria, the labor camp system in occupied territories, and the guards and staffs of the extermination camps in Poland that were involved in the Holocaust.
In 1942, for administrative reasons, the guard and administrative staff of all the concentration camps became full members of the "Waffen-SS". In addition, to oversee the large administrative burden of an extensive labor camp system, the concentration camps were placed under the command of the "SS-Wirtschafts-Verwaltungshauptamt" (WVHA). Oswald Pohl commanded the WVHA, while Richard Glücks served as the Inspector of Concentration Camps.
By 1944, with the concentration camps fully integrated with the "Waffen-SS" and under the control of the WVHA, a standard practice developed to rotate SS members in and out of the camps, based on manpower needs and also to give assignments to wounded "Waffen-SS" officers and soldiers who could no longer serve in front-line combat duties. This rotation of personnel is the main argument that nearly the entire SS knew of the concentration camps, and what actions were committed within, making the entire organization liable for war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Security services.
In addition to running Germany's concentration camps, the SS is well known for establishing the police state of Nazi Germany and suppressing all resistance to Adolf Hitler through the use of security forces, such as, the Gestapo.
The RSHA was the main office in charge of SS security services and had under its command the "Sicherheitsdienst" (SD), "Kriminalpolizei" (Kripo), and the "Gestapo" as well as several additional offices to handle finance, administration, and supply. The term "Sicherheitspolizei" referred to the combined forces of the "Kriminalpolizei", and the Gestapo, police and security offices.
Reinhard Heydrich is viewed as the mastermind behind the SS security forces and held the title of "Chef des Sicherheitspolizei und SD" until 27 September 1939 when he became the overall supreme commander of the Reich Main Security Office. Heinrich Müller became Gestapo Chief, Arthur Nebe, chief of the Criminal Police (Kripo), and the two branches of SD were commanded by various SS officers such as Otto Ohlendorf and Walter Schellenberg. Heydrich was assassinated in 1942. His positions were taken over by Ernst Kaltenbrunner in January 1943, following a few short months of Heinrich Himmler personally running the RSHA while searching for Heydrich's replacement.
Death squads.
The "Einsatzgruppen" were special units of the SS that were formed on an "as-needed" basis under the authority of the "Sicherheitspolizei" and later the RSHA, whose commander was Heydrich. The first "Einsatzgruppen" were created in 1938 for use during the "Anschluss" of Austria and again in 1939 for the annexation of Czechoslovakia. The original purpose of the "Einsatzgruppen" was to "enter occupied areas, seize vital records, and neutralize potential threats". In Austria and Czechoslovakia, the activities of the "Einsatzgruppen" were mainly limited to Nazification of local governments and assistance with the establishment of new concentration camps.
In 1939 the "Einsatzgruppen" were reactivated and sent into Poland to exterminate the Polish elite (Operation Tannenberg, AB-Aktion), so that there would be no leadership to form a resistance to German occupation. In 1941 the "Einsatzgruppen" reached their height when they were sent into Russia to begin large-scale extermination and genocide of "undesirables" such as Jews, gypsies, and communists. The "Einsatzgruppen" were responsible for the murders of more than one million people. The most notorious massacre of Jews in the Soviet Union was at a ravine called Babi Yar outside Kiev, where 33,771 Jews were killed in a single operation on September 29–30, 1941.
The last "Einsatzgruppen" were disbanded in mid-1944 (although on paper some continued to exist until 1945) due to the retreating German forces on both fronts and the inability to carry on with further "in-the-field" extermination activities. Former "Einsatzgruppen" members were either folded into the "Waffen-SS" or took up roles in the more established Concentration Camps such as Auschwitz.
Special action units.
Beginning in 1938, the SS enacted a procedure where offices and units of the SS could form smaller sub-units, known as "Sonderkommandos", to carry out special tasks and actions which might involve sending agents or troops into the field. The use of "Sonderkommandos" was very widespread, and according to former SS Sturmbannführer (Major) Wilhelm Höttl, not even the SS leadership knew how many "Sonderkommandos" were constantly being formed, disbanded, and reformed for various tasks.
The best-known "Sonderkommandos" were formed from the SS Economic-Administrative Head Office, the SS Head Office, and also Department VII of the Reich Main Security Office (Science and Research) whose duties were to confiscate valuable items from Jewish libraries.
The "Eichmann Sonderkommando" was attached to the Security Police and the SD in terms of provisioning and manpower, but maintained a special position in the SS due to its direct role in the deportation of Jews to the death camps as part of the Final Solution.
The term "Sonderkommando" was also used to describe the teams of Jewish prisoners who were forced to work in gas chambers and crematoria, receiving special privileges and above-average treatment, before then being murdered themselves. The distinction was that these Jewish "special-action units" were not SS "Sonderkommandos"; the term was simply applied to these obviously non-SS personnel due to the nature of the tasks which they performed.
SS and police courts.
The one exception to the SS and Police Courts jurisdiction involved members of the "Allgemeine-SS" who were serving on active duty in the regular "Wehrmacht". In such cases, the SS member in question was subject to regular "Wehrmacht" military law and could face charges before a standard military tribunal.
Special protection units.
The original purpose of the SS, that of safeguarding the leadership of the Nazi Party (Adolf Hitler) continued until the very end of the group's existence. Hitler had used bodyguards for protection since the 1920s, and as the SS grew in size and importance, so too did Hitler's personnel protection unit. In all, there were two main SS groups most closely associated with protecting the life of Adolf Hitler.
Hitler also made use of regular military protection, especially when travelling into the field or to operational headquarters (such as the Wolf's Lair). Hitler always maintained an SS escort, however, and his security was mainly handled by the "Leibstandarte" and the RSD.
SS special purpose corps.
Another section of the SS consisted of special purpose units which assisted the main SS with a variety of tasks. The first such units were SS cavalry formations formed in the 1930s as part of the "Allgemeine-SS" (these units were entirely separate from the later "Waffen-SS" cavalry commands).
One of the more infamous SS special purpose corps were the SS medical units, composed mostly of doctors who became involved in both euthanasia and human experimentation. The SS also formed a special corps for women, since full SS membership was available only for men, as well as a scientific corps to conduct historical research into Nordic-Germanic origins.
SS Cavalry Corps.
The SS Cavalry Corps (German: "Reiter-SS") comprised several "Reiterstandarten" and "Reiterabschnitte", which were really equestrian clubs to attract the German upper class and nobility into the SS. In the 1930s, the "Reiter-SS" was considered as a nucleus for a military branch of the SS, but this idea was phased out with the rise of the "SS-Verfügungstruppe" (later the "Waffen-SS").
By 1941 the "Reiter-SS" was little more than a social club. Most of the serious cavalry officers transferred to combat units in the "Waffen-SS" and the SS Cavalry Brigade. Between 1942 and 1945, the "Reiter-SS" effectively ceased to exist except on paper, with only a handful of members. During the Nuremberg Trials, when the Tribunal declared the SS to be a criminal organization, the "Reiter-SS" was expressly excluded, due to its insignificant involvement in other SS activities.
SS Medical Corps.
The SS Medical Corps first appeared in the 1930s as small companies of SS personnel known as the "Sanitätsstaffel". After 1931, the SS formed a headquarters office known as "Amt" V, which was the central office for SS medical units.
In 1945, after the surrender of Germany, the SS was declared an illegal criminal organization by the Allies. SS doctors, in particular, were marked as war criminals due to the wide range of human medical experimentation which had been conducted during World War II as well as the role SS doctors had played in the gas chamber selections of the Holocaust. The most infamous member, Doctor Josef Mengele, served as a medical officer at Auschwitz under the command of Eduard Wirth of the Auschwitz medical corps. Eduard Wirth was "organizer-in-chief" of selections, which he often attended himself. Josef Mengele also made the daily gas chamber selections of people as well as conducted many experiments at the camp. After the trial of members as to crimes against humanity, it was determined that in the territory of the Krasnodar Territory of the USSR about 7,000 civilians were killed by gas poisoning.
SS Women's Corps.
The "SS-Helferinnenkorps" ("Women Helper Corps") comprised women volunteers who joined the SS as auxiliary personnel. They were not considered bona fide SS members, since membership was closed to women. The Helferin Corps maintained a simple system of ranks, mainly "SS-Helfer", "SS-Oberhelfer", and "SS-Haupthelfer". Members of the Helferin Corps were assigned to a wide variety of activities such as administrative staff, supply support personnel, and female guards at concentration camps.
SS Scientific Corps.
The Scientific Branch of the SS that was used to provide scientific and archeological proof of Aryan supremacy. Formed in 1935 by Himmler and Herman Wirth, the society did not become part of the SS until 1939.
Other SS groups.
Austrian-SS.
The term "Austrian-SS" was never a recognized branch of the SS, but is often used to describe that portion of the SS membership from Austria. Both Germany and Austria contributed to a single SS and Austrian SS members were seen as regular SS personnel, in contrast to SS members from other countries which were grouped into either the Germanic-SS or the Foreign Legions of the "Waffen-SS".
The Austrian branch of the SS first developed in 1932 and, by 1934, was acting as a covert force to influence the "Anschluss" with Germany which would eventually occur in 1938. The early Austrian SS was led by Ernst Kaltenbrunner and Arthur Seyss-Inquart and was technically under the command of the SS in Germany, but often acted independently concerning Austrian affairs. In 1936 the Austrian-SS was declared illegal by the Austrian government.
After 1938, when Austria was annexed by Germany, the Austrian SS was folded into "SS-Oberabschnitt Donau" with the 3rd regiment of the "SS-Verfugungstruppe", "Der Führer," and the fourth "Totenkopf" regiment, "Ostmark", recruited in Austria shortly thereafter. A new concentration camp at Mauthausen also opened under the authority of the SS Death's Head units.
Austrian SS members served in every branch of the SS, including Concentration Camps, Einsatzgruppen, and the Security Services. One notable Austrian-SS member was Amon Göth, immortalized in the film "Schindler's List". The fictional character of Hans Landa in the film "Inglourious Basterds" was also depicted as a member of the Austrian-SS.
Contract workers.
To conduct upkeep, house-keeping, and the general maintenance of its many headquarters buildings both in Germany and in other occupied countries, the SS frequently hired civilian contract workers to perform such duties as maids, maintenance workers, and general laborers. The SS also occasionally employed civilian secretaries, but more often used the female SS corps for these duties.
Within the concentration camps, the SS used a different method to gain such work skills, mainly through the use of slave labor by "assigning" concentration camp inmates to work in certain jobs. This included doctors, such as Miklós Nyiszli who, while a Jewish prisoner in Auschwitz, served as Chief Pathologist and personal assistant to Josef Mengele.
In occupied countries, especially France and the Low Countries, various resistance groups made use of the SS need for low-level workers by planting resistance members in certain jobs within SS headquarters buildings. This allowed for intelligence gathering which assisted resistance attacks against German forces; resistance groups in the conquered eastern lands also used this method, with less success, although groups in Norway conducted several assassinations of SS officers through the use of intelligence plants within SS offices. The SS was often aware of such "moles" and actively attempted to locate such persons and, on occasion, even used the resistance plants to German advantage by supplying bad information in an attempt to bring resistance groups out into the open and destroy them.
The French Resistance was by far the most successful in using SS contracted civilian workers to achieve intelligence gathering and conduct partisan operations. At the end of World War II, resistance groups also rounded up local civilians who had worked for the SS, subjecting them to humiliating ordeals; such as, the shaving of heads in public squares.
Several motion pictures have been the subject of local civilians working for the SS, such as "A Woman at War", starring Martha Plimpton, and "Black Book", starring Christian Berkel.
Postwar activity and ODESSA.
According to Simon Wiesenthal, toward the end of World War II, a group of former SS officers went to Argentina and set up a Nazi fugitive network code-named ODESSA, (an acronym for "Organisation der ehemaligen SS-Angehörigen", "Organization of the former SS members"), with ties in Germany, Switzerland, and Italy, operating out of Buenos Aires, Argentina. ODESSA allegedly helped Adolf Eichmann, Josef Mengele, Erich Priebke, and many other war criminals find postwar refuge in Latin America.
It is estimated that out of roughly 70,000 members of the SS involved in crimes in German concentration camps, only about 1,650 to 1,700 were tried after the war.
However, SS members who escaped judicial punishment were often subject to summary execution, torture and beatings at the hands of freed prisoners, displaced persons or Allied soldiers. "Waffen SS" soldiers were executed by U.S. soldiers during the liberation of Dachau concentration camp, and SS officer Oskar Dirlewanger was beaten and tortured to death at the end of the war. In addition at least some members of the U.S Army Counter Intelligence Corps (CIC) delivered captured SS camp guards to displaced persons camps with the intention of them being extrajudicially executed.
Argentinian citizen and water company worker Ricardo Klement was discovered to be Adolf Eichmann in the 1950s, by former Jewish Dachau worker Lothar Hermann, whose daughter, Sylvia, became romantically involved with Klaus Klement (born Klaus Eichmann in 1936 in Berlin). He was captured by Mossad, the Israeli intelligence agency, in a suburb of Buenos Aires on May 11, 1960, and tried in Jerusalem on April 11, 1961, where he explicitly declared that he had abdicated his conscience in order to follow the "Führerprinzip" (the "leader principle", or superior orders).
Josef Mengele, disguised as a member of the regular German infantry, was captured and released by the Allies, oblivious of who he was. He was able to go and work in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in 1949 and to Altos, Paraguay, in 1959 where he was discovered by Nazi hunters. From the late 1960s on, he exercised his medical practice in Embu, a small city near São Paulo, Brazil, under the identity of Wolfgang Gerhard, where in 1979, he suffered a stroke while swimming and drowned.
The British writer Gitta Sereny (born in 1921 in Hungary), who conducted interviews with SS men, considers the story about ODESSA untrue and attributes the escape of notorious SS members to postwar chaos, an individual bishop in the Vatican, and the Vatican's inability to investigate the stories of those people who came requesting help.
The Argentine author and journalist Uki Goñi's book, "The Real Odessa", claims that such a network in fact existed, and in Argentina was largely run by Argentine President Juan Domingo Perón, a Nazi sympathiser who had been impressed by Mussolini's reign in Italy during a military tour of duty in that country which also took him to Nazi Germany. More recently researched (2002) than Sereny's interviews, counterclaimants point out that it is at a far greater chronological remove—multiple decades, not simply a year or two—from the actual point(s) in time he asserts such events occurred, a remove material enough that it could call into question the veracity of a number of his claims.
In the modern age, several neo-Nazi groups claim to be successor organizations to the SS. There is no single group, however, that is recognized as a continuation of the SS, and most such present-day organizations are loosely organized with separate agendas.
