The Cabin in the Woods is a 2012 American comedy horror film directed and co-written by Drew Goddard and co-written and produced by Joss Whedon. Kristen Connolly, Chris Hemsworth, Anna Hutchison, Fran Kranz, and Jesse Williams portray five friends who travel to a remote cabin for a holiday and become victims of a seemingly stereotypical horror movie plot while being observed via hidden cameras by mysterious office workers.
Goddard and Whedon, having worked together previously on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and "Angel", wrote the screenplay in three days, describing it as an attempt to "revitalize" the slasher film genre and a critical satire on torture porn. Filming took place from March to May 2009 on an estimated budget of $30 million, and was shot in Vancouver, British Columbia. More than 60 artists worked on the effects before filming began.
"The Cabin in the Woods" premiered on March 9, 2012 at the South by Southwest film festival in Austin, Texas and was released in the United States on April 13, 2012. The film was both a critical and financial success, receiving near universal positive reviews, and featured on Metacritics best films of 2012 list. "The Cabin in the Woods" went on to gross over $65 million worldwide.
Plot.
Technicians Gary Sitterson and Steve Hadley prepare for an operation, one of several taking place around the world, while joking with fellow technician Wendy Lin.
College students Dana Polk, Holden McCrea, Marty Mikalski, Jules Louden, and her boyfriend Curt Vaughan go to a remote cabin in the woods for a vacation. The technicians control the environment the group are in from afar and give them mood-altering drugs to make them more likely to venture into the cellar and do something that will lead to "punishment." The drugs gradually reduce the group's intelligence and awareness, and also increase their libido. After entering the cellar, the group discovers a large assortment of items, including a diary by Patience Buckner, a girl abused by her sadistic family. Reciting an incantation from the diary, Dana inadvertently summons the zombified Buckner family.
Curt and Jules, influenced by more mood-altering drugs, go outside to have sex. The Buckners attack the lovers and kill Jules, but Curt flees to the cabin and informs the group of Jules' death. Marty, who frequently smokes marijuana, becomes paranoid, and believes they are being manipulated. Discovering a hidden camera, Marty thinks that he is on a reality television show, but is attacked and dragged away by one of the Buckners. Holden, Dana, and Curt attempt to flee in their RV, but the technicians are able to trigger a tunnel collapse in time to block their path. Curt attempts to use his motorcycle to jump a ravine in order to escape, only to crash into an invisible force-field and fall to his death. Realizing that something is unusual about the environment, Dana becomes convinced that Marty's worries about them being manipulated were correct. While driving back to the cabin Holden is killed by a Buckner who has been hiding in the RV. The RV falls into the lake and Dana swims away, only to be attacked by a Buckner on the dock.
The technicians celebrate the completion of the scenario, but a phone call informs them that Marty is still alive. Arriving at the dock, Marty saves Dana. He reveals that he dismembered his assailant after being dragged away, stumbled upon a hidden control box, and was able to access an underground elevator. The technicians realize that Marty is immune to their drugs because one of his stashes of marijuana has not been chemically treated. Marty and Dana take the elevator down to the lower levels of the facility, passing a variety of imprisoned monsters. One of the monsters carries an item that Dana remembers seeing in the cabin's cellar, and she realizes that the items in the cellar determine which monster will be released. A security team then corners her and Marty, but she uses a control station to release the monsters, which massacre the facility staff. Hadley, Lin, and Sitterson are killed in the carnage. Dana flees to the lower levels of the facility with Marty.
Discovering a temple adorned with large stone tablets, Dana and Marty meet the Director. They are informed that the scenario is to appease the "Ancient Ones" — beings who live beneath the facility and are kept in perpetual slumber through an annual, pars pro toto ritual sacrifice of five young people who embody certain archetypes: the Whore (Jules), the Athlete (Curt), the Scholar (Holden), the Fool (Marty), and the Virgin (Dana). The order in which they die does not matter, as long as the whore is first and the virgin is last, and her death is optional, as long as she suffers. Should the Ancient Ones awake, they will destroy the world. The Director reveals that rituals around the world have been taking place for the same purpose, but each of them failed. The Director urges Dana to kill Marty to complete the ritual. Dana draws a gun on Marty, but is attacked by a werewolf while the Director fights with Marty. Patience Buckner arrives and kills the Director before Marty pushes them both into the Ancient Ones' pit.
Marty forgives Dana for threatening to shoot him. The pair accepts that it might be better for another species to take humanity's place if this is the price of its continued existence. Marty and Dana light a joint and hold hands as the gigantic hand of an Ancient One rises up, destroying the facility and the cabin.
Production.
With an estimated budget of $30 million, principal photography began on March 9, 2009 in Vancouver, and concluded in May 2009. Joss Whedon co-wrote the script with "Cloverfield" screenwriter Drew Goddard, who also directed the film, marking his directorial debut. Goddard previously worked with Whedon on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and "Angel" as a writer.
In November 2010, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy, but the film was still released as one of MGM's last pre-Spyglass films in development.
Concerning the sheer number of creatures to be designed and made for the film, AFX Studio's David LeRoy Anderson estimated that "close to a thousand" people were turned into one of around 60 different monster types. The task necessitated renting a much larger facility to use as a workspace, as a crew of around 60 people were recruited. The producers told them to commence work on December 15, 2008, ahead of the official January 1, 2009 start date. They only completed the work by the March 9, 2009 production date because, as Anderson stated "We had nearly seventy people at peak, but in effect we had a hundred and forty people, because everybody had at least two jobs...it was crazy, but people had an incredible time...none of us are ever going to forget it, and we're never all going to be in the same room again."
The underground complex, elevators, and the control room were all sets, but for several wide shots, the British Columbia Institute of Technology's Aerospace building was used. Production designer Martin Whist referenced Stanley Kubrick and commented: "It's very high-tech industrial, and it's a brand new building, never been shot in before...I wanted elevators to be without any controls...to almost feel like a glamorized freight elevator...The lobby I wanted to look slightly utilitarian, contemporary and institutional...sharp and almost characterless." Goddard called the control room "mission control at NASA", with production design aimed at grounding the room's look in the reality of governments and institutions.
Release.
"The Cabin in the Woods" was slated for wide release on February 5, 2010 and then delayed until January 14, 2011 so the film could be converted to 3D. However, on June 17, 2010, MGM announced that the film would be delayed indefinitely due to ongoing financial difficulties at the studio.
On March 16, 2011, the "Los Angeles Times" reported the following: "New (MGM) chief executives Gary Barber and Roger Birnbaum are seeking to sell both "Red Dawn" and the horror film "The Cabin in the Woods," the last two pictures produced under a previous regime, as they try to reshape the 87-year-old company." A distribution sale to Lions Gate Entertainment Corporation was announced on April 28, 2011, with some industry news outlets reporting plans for a Halloween 2011 release. On July 20, 2011, Lionsgate announced that they had acquired the distribution rights to the film and set a release date of April 13, 2012. Goddard described the deal as "a dream," stating "there's no question that Lionsgate is the right home for "Cabin"...you look at all the films that inspired "Cabin" - most of them were released by Lionsgate in the first place!"
The world premiere was on March 9, 2012 at the South by Southwest film festival in Austin, Texas.
Home media.
In June 2012, Lionsgate announced that "The Cabin in the Woods" is scheduled to be released for Blu-ray in North America on September 18, 2012. The Blu-Ray features an audio commentary by Goddard and Whedon, a documentary about the making of the film, and a question and answer session at the WonderCon convention.
Reception.
Box office.
"The Cabin in the Woods" earned $42,073,277 in North America, along with $23,829,690 in other territories, for a worldwide total of $65,902,967. It is currently the 66th highest grossing film of 2012.
The film opened in North America on April 13, 2012, opening with $5.5 million and went on to gross $14.7 million in its opening weekend in the United States at 2,811 theaters, taking the number three spot. "The Cabin in the Woods" closed in theaters on July 12, 2012 with $42.0 million. It is currently the 58th highest grossing film of 2012 in North America. In total earnings, its highest-grossing countries after North America were the United Kingdom ($8.5 million), France ($2.4 million) and Russia ($2.3 million).
Critical reaction.
"The Cabin in the Woods" received positive reviews. The film review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 92% approval rating with an average rating of 7.8/10, based on 225 reviews. It offers the consensus: ""The Cabin in the Woods" is an astonishing meta-feat, capable of being funny, strange, and scary -- frequently all at the same time." On Metacritic, the film achieved an average score of 72 out of 100, based on a rating of 40 reviews, signifying it "generally favorable reviews".
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave a positive review of the film, saying that ""The Cabin in the Woods" has been constructed almost as a puzzle for horror fans to solve. Which conventions are being toyed with? Which authors and films are being referred to? Is the film itself an act of criticism?" Ebert gave the film three out of four stars. Peter Travers of the "Rolling Stone" gave the film three-and-a-half out of four stars. Travers said the film was "fiendishly funny". Travers also praised Kristen Connolly and Fran Kranz for their performances, and would later go on to say that "By turning splatter formula on its empty head, "Cabin" shows you can unleash a fire-breathing horror film without leaving your brain or your heart on the killing floor." Lisa Schwarzbaum of "Entertainment Weekly" gave the film a "B−" grade and said that "The movie's biggest surprise may be that the story we think we know from modern scary cinema — that horror is a fun, cosmic game, not much else — here turns out to be pretty much the whole enchilada."
Conversely, Betsy Sharkey of the "Los Angeles Times" believed that the film "is an inside joke" and also said "The laughs the film come easily, the screams not so much." David Rooney of "The Hollywood Reporter" remarked, "It’s just too bad the movie is never much more than a hollow exercise in self-reflexive cleverness that’s not nearly as ingenious as it seems to think." A.O. Scott of "The New York Times" said, "Novelty and genre traditionalism often fight to a draw. Too much overt cleverness has a way of spoiling dumb, reliable thrills. And despite the evident ingenuity and strenuous labor that went into it, The Cabin in the Woods does not quite work."
Books.
On April 17, 2012, Titan Books released the "Cabin in the Woods: The Official Visual Companion". It features interviews and behind-the-scenes photos. Alongside this Titan Books released the mass market paperback "The Cabin in the Woods: The Official Movie Novelization", from the author Tim Lebbon and creators Joss Whedon and Drew Goddard.
External links.
