Rani Mukerji (born Rani Mukherjee on 21 March 1978) is an Indian film actress who works in Hindi movies. Born to the Mukherjee-Samarth family, she made her acting debut with a cameo appearance in the Bengali film "Biyer Phool" (1996), on the insistence of her mother. The following year, Mukerji made her Hindi film debut with "Raja Ki Aayegi Baraat", and subsequently featured in Karan Johar's blockbuster romance "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" (1998), which won her a Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress. For her work in the 2002 relationship drama "Saathiya", she won her first Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress.
In 2004, her performances in the hit romantic comedy "Hum Tum" and the critically acclaimed drama "Yuva" earned her the Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress awards, respectively, at the 50th Filmfare Awards. She later received unanimous praise for her portrayal of a blind, deaf and mute woman in "Black" (2005), for which she garnered two more Filmfare Awards: Best Actress and Actress – Critics. She went on to play leading roles in the comedy "Bunty Aur Babli" (2005) and the adult drama "Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna" (2006), both of which emerged as major economic successes in India and overseas. These accomplishments established Mukerji as a leading actress of Hindi cinema. Kulkarni, Ronjita (23 December 2005). Ten best Bollywood actresses of 2005. Rediff.com. Retrieved on 24 February 2007 Sen, Raja (18 December 2007).The most powerful actresses of 2007. Rediff.com. Retrieved on 25 December 2007</ref> She then starred in a series of commercially unsuccessful films, a majority of which were under the Yash Raj Films banner, that led to setbacks in her career. She later earned praise for her portrayal of a headstrong journalist in "No One Killed Jessica" (2011) and a grieving mother in "" (2012).
In addition to acting in films, Mukerji has featured as a talent judge for Sony Entertainment Television's reality show "Dance Premier League" (2009). She is a regular stage performer and has been involved in philanthropic endeavours related to women and children. Despite constant speculation, she remains guarded about her personal life and is sometimes labelled a recluse by members of the media.
Early life and background.
Mukerji was born in Mumbai on 21 March 1978 to a film-oriented family of Bengali origin. Her father, Ram Mukherjee, is a retired director and one of the founders of Filmalaya Studios while her mother, Krishna, was a playback singer. Her brother, Raja Mukherjee, is a film producer turned director. Her maternal aunt, Debashree Roy, is a Bengali film actress and her cousin, Kajol, is a popular Bollywood actress. Another cousin of hers, Ayan Mukerji is the writer and director of "Wake Up Sid" (2009). As part of a tradition, the Mukherjee family celebrates the festival of "Durga Puja" at Santacruz every year. Mukerji, being a religious person, takes part in the festivities with her entire family.
Mukerji is a trained Odissi dancer and began learning the dance in the tenth grade. She was schooled at Maneckji Cooper High School in Juhu, and graduated from SNDT Women's University in the field of Home Science. Despite her family background, Mukerji was never interested in becoming an actress. In 1994, director Salim Khan approached her to be a part of his directorial, "Aa Gale Lag Jaa". Her father was against her working in films and hence, she turned down the offer. However, she finally decided to take up acting on an experimental basis, on the insistence of her mother.
Acting career.
Early work and breakthrough (1997–2001).
After doing a cameo appearance in her father's Bengali film "Biyer Phool" (1996), Mukerji made her Hindi film debut, the following year, as the protagonist of the social drama "Raja Ki Aayegi Baraat". A critical and commercial failure, she received positive reviews for her portrayal of a rape victim in the film and won a special recognition award at the Screen Awards ceremony. The film's commercial failure made her return to college to complete her education. However, inspired by her cousin Kajol's success in Bollywood, she decided to try films again.
In 1998, Mukerji featured in Vikram Bhatt's commercially successful action film "Ghulam", opposite Aamir Khan. Though she portrayed a small role in the film, the song "Aati Kya Khandala" earned her public recognition. Karan Johar's directorial debut, "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai", a romance starring Shahrukh Khan and Kajol, was her next release. She played the supporting role of Tina Malhotra, a sophisticated girl in love with Khan's character. Of her performance, Rediff.com wrote, "Rani Mukherjee is a pleasant surprise — totally comfortable, clearly having suspended all disbelief". The film emerged as a blockbuster, with an adjusted worldwide gross of , and Mukerji received her first Filmfare Award in the Best Supporting Actress category.
Due to her slightly broken voice texture, her lines were dubbed by a dubbing artist in "Ghulam". Johar initially wanted her voice dubbed for "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai" too, but Mukerji improved on her diction and eventually dubbed for her own lines.
Following the success of "Kuch Kuch Hota Hai", she played leading roles in the social drama "Mehndi" (1998) and the comedy "Hello Brother" (1999). Both these films were critically and commercially unsuccessful.
Mukerji's first release of 2000 was Raj Kanwar's action drama "Badal" opposite Bobby Deol. The film emerged as one of the highest-grossing films of the year, but met with negative reviews from critics. She then essayed a brief role in Kamal Haasan's "Hey Ram" as the protagonist's first wife, Aparna Ram. The controversial film, based on Mahatma Gandhi's assassination, was a critical success and was chosen as India’s official entry to the Oscars that year. Mukerji next appeared in "Bichhoo", an unofficial adaptation of Luc Besson's "Leon", as the foul-mouthed, coarse daughter of a drug dealer. The film and her performance received negative reviews from critics. Following a collaboration with actor Govinda, for the first time, in the comedy "Hadh Kar Di Aapne", Mukerji featured opposite Salman Khan in two romantic dramas, Raj Kanwar's "Har Dil Jo Pyar Karega" and K. M.M. Rao's "Kahin Pyaar Na Ho Jaaye". She was appreciated for her performance in the latter and received her second Filmfare nomination in the Best Supporting Actress category.
In 2001, Mukerji starred in Abbas Mustan's drama "Chori Chori Chupke Chupke", co-starring Salman Khan and Preity Zinta. The film was released after a one-year delay, and was one of the first Bollywood films to handle the issue of surrogate childbirth. Mukerji's role was that of Priya Malhotra, a woman who is unable to conceive after a miscarriage and thus, hires a surrogate mother. Sukanya Verma wrote, "Rani Mukerji is handicapped with a role that doesn't give her much scope besides weeping and sobbing. To her credit, she manages to hold her own even while playing a stereotypical sacrificing "bhartiya nari" woman." She next played the love-interests of Abhishek Bachchan and Anil Kapoor respectively, in two predominantly male-centric films: "Bas Itna Sa Khwaab Hai" and "". Upon release, both the films under-performed at the box office.
Success (2002–06).
In 2002, Mukerji essayed the lead role of Pooja Sahani in Kunal Kohli's romantic comedy "Mujhse Dosti Karoge!", alongside Hrithik Roshan and Kareena Kapoor. The film marked the first of her many collaborations with one of India's largest production companies: Yash Raj Films. Although the movie flopped in India, it performed well overseas. That year, she acted opposite Govinda once again in two commercially unsuccessful films, "Pyaar Diwana Hota Hai" and "Chalo Ishq Ladaaye". Later that year, Mukerji starred in Shaad Ali's critically acclaimed drama "Saathiya", opposite Vivek Oberoi. Essaying the role of Suhani Sharma, a medical student who deals with the tensions and discontent of being married at a young age, she won a Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actress, and received her first Best Actress nomination at the same ceremony. BBC reviewed, "Mukerji plays the character of a middle class girl with great conviction", and Udita Jhunjhunwala of "Mid Day" added, "Her expressions and acting are understated in a role that fits her like a glove."
"Saathiya" emerged as a moderate commercial success and rejuvenated her fading career. In an interview with "Hindustan Times", she said, ""Saathiya" nothing that was coming my way excited me... I knew "Saathiya" was a special film. I felt it while making it."
Mukerji's first release of 2003 was Aziz Mirza's box office hit "Chalte Chalte" opposite Shahrukh Khan. Though the film saw her play a role similar to the one she played in "Saathiya", her new "tanned" look met with public appreciation and her portrayal earned her a second nomination for Best Actress at the Filmfare awards ceremony. She next featured as the protagonist in Milan Luthria's romantic comedy "Chori Chori" opposite Ajay Devgan, Sudhir Mishra's suspense drama "Calcutta Mail", alongside Anil Kapoor and Manisha Koirala, and J.P. Dutta's multi-starrer war film "LOC Kargil". All three of them were critical as well as commercial failures.
In 2004, she acted in Mani Ratnam's composite film "Yuva" alongside Ajay Devgan, Abhishek Bachchan, Vivek Oberoi, Kareena Kapoor and Esha Deol. The film, which narrated the story of three youngsters from different stratums of society, saw Mukerji play a Bengali housewife opposite Bachchan. Though the film failed to do well at the box office, the film and her performance were critically acclaimed. Rediff.com, as part of a performance analysis noted, "Her inspiring work in "Yuva" as the devoted yet frustrated wife of a local goon came alive every time she flashed those big fire-filled eyes at her husband or broke down angrily at an unsuspecting onlooker." The film fetched Mukerji her second Best Supporting Actress award at Filmfare. She received further success by playing the leading role in Yash Raj Films' romantic comedy "Hum Tum", directed by Kunal Kohli, which became one of the biggest hits of the year with a lifetime nett of . The film starred Mukerji along with Saif Ali Khan and followed the arcs of their characters at different stages of their lives. Mukerji's portrayal of Rhea Sharma, an independent woman, won her several Best Actress awards, including her first Filmfare Award for Best Actress. BBC observed, "Rani is fast becoming one of the more dependable and versatile actresses of her generation." She eventually became the first actor to have received both the Filmfare awards for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress in the same year.
Her last release of the year was Yash Chopra's love saga "Veer-Zaara", in which she co-starred alongside Shahrukh Khan and Preity Zinta. The film, which emerged as a major commercial success, grossing worldwide, narrated the love story of the title characters, Veer Pratap Singh, played by Khan, and a Pakistani woman, Zaara Hayaat Khan, played by Zinta. Mukerji played the supporting role of Saamiya Siddiqui, a Pakistani lawyer who takes it upon herself to find the truth about Singh. The film, which was screened at the Berlin Film Festival met with positive reviews. A review carried by Rediff.com noted, "...Rani walks away with the best lines and a performance full of grit."
In 2005, Mukerji starred in four high-profile films: Sanjay Leela Bhansali's "Black", Shaad Ali's "Bunty Aur Babli", Amol Palekar's "Paheli" and Ketan Mehta's "". She was primarily noted for her performance in "Black". When Bhansali first offered the film to Mukerji, she turned it down as she was not confident enough to play a deaf-blind person. Once Bhansali reinforced his faith in her, she agreed and intensely studied sign language with professionals at the Helen Keller Institute in Mumbai. "Black" was a major critical success, and Mukerji received unanimous acclaim for her performance, which "Filmfare" included in their listing of Indian cinema's "80 Most Iconic performances". Rediff.com noted, "The performer in Rani Mukerji must have turned more than a few mental cartwheels when she got "Black". It is a pure, performance-driven role, and Rani does it with a fluid maturity that is great to watch.". She eventually won the Best Actress and the Best Actress – Critics at the Filmfare Awards ceremony.
Her next release, the comedy "Bunty Aur Babli", surfaced as the second highest grossing film of 2005. She played the character of Vimmi "Babli" Saluja, a con woman, opposite Abhishek Bachchan. The film opened to mixed reviews, as did Mukerji's performance. A review carried by "Variety" mentioned, "Three years ago, in "Saathiya", helmer Shaad Ali managed to rediscover Mukerji's earlier vivacity, and he's done it again here in a role that the raspy-voiced diva-ette simply eats up" Consequently, Mukerji received another nomination for the Filmfare Award for Best Actress for her work. Her third release that year, the fantasy film "Paheli", opposite Shahrukh Khan, was screened at the Sundance Film Festival and was chosen as India’s official entry to the Oscars for the 79th Academy Awards. The film was critically acclaimed, as was Mukerji's performance, which Raja Sen called "another perfectly played part". In her final release of the year, "The Rising", Mukerji played a prostitute, Heera, who is the love interest of the protagonist Mangal Pandey, played by Aamir Khan. Derek Elley of "Variety" mentioned that she made "the most of her feisty nautch-girl," inpite of having "a small role for a star of her caliber."
In 2006 she starred in Karan Johar's adult drama "Kabhi Alvida Naa Kehna"; featuring Amitabh Bachchan, Shahrukh Khan, Abhishek Bachchan, Preity Zinta and Kirron Kher. The film opened to mixed reviews but emerged as a major international success with a worldwide gross of . The film told the story of two unhappily married couples in New York, which later results in an extramarital affair. Mukerji played the role of Maya Talwar, a woman layered with self-doubt and question about the relationship between her and her husband, played by Abhishek Bachchan. Her performance was well-received with Rajeev Masand from CNN-IBN concluding, "Rani looks a million bucks and she dives under the skin of her character to make that part one that we will remember for a long time." She received several nominations for the role, including her sixth Filmfare Best Actress nomination, and won the IIFA Best Actress Award for the third consecutive year. Mukerji's next release was B.R. Chopra's tearjerker "Baabul" alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Salman Khan and John Abraham. The movie did not do well at the box office in India, but proved to be a hit overseas. Her portrayal of Malvika, a young widow, met with mixed reviews from critics with Sarita Tanwar from "Mid Day" commenting, "Rani Mukerji breathes life into a somewhat confused character".
Recent work (2007–present).
From 2007 to 2009, Mukerji featured primarily in films produced by Yash Raj Films (with the exception of "Saawariya").
Her first release was Siddharth Anand's melodrama "Ta Ra Rum Pum", where she played Radhika Rai Banerjee, a pianist turned housewife opposite Saif Ali Khan. The film performed decently at the box office, while her performance was generally well received. Adarsh wrote, "Rani enacts the role of the mother/wife proficiently." Negative reviews, however were directed towards the film itself, with Rajeev Masand writing, "neither Saif Ali Khan nor Rani is able to make much of an impression because their characters are so unidimensional and boring."
Her next release of the year was Pradeep Sarkar's drama "Laaga Chunari Mein Daag" alongside Jaya Bachchan, Abhishek Bachchan, Konkana Sen Sharma and Kunal Kapoor. The film met with mixed reviews, while Mukerji was criticised for playing stereotypical roles that required her to cry often. A review carried by "Indian Express" noted, "Rani holds the film together, even if her part, both as the ingénue and the hooker, doesn’t have freshness." Her performance nonetheless fetched her another Best Actress nomination at Filmfare. Her final release of the year was Sanjay Leela Bhansali's tragedy "Saawariya", where she essayed a smaller part of a sex-worker. The film, which featured debutants Ranbir Kapoor and Sonam Kapoor in lead roles, was a critical and commercial failure, but Mukerji's performance earned her a fifth Filmfare Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress.
In 2008, Mukerji was paired with Saif Ali Khan again for Kunal Kohli's "Thoda Pyaar Thoda Magic". This fantasy film had Mukerji play an angel who comes to Earth to help four troubled kids. The film, which flopped at the box office, met with generally positive reviews from critics.
The box office failure of her recent films made Mukerji lose weight and undergo a makeover in her following release, "Dil Bole Hadippa" (2009). The project, co-starring Shahid Kapoor, saw Mukerji portray a cricket-obsessed Punjabi village girl masquerading as a man. The film, which premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival under performed at the Indian box office. A review carried by "The Economic Times" noted, "Mukerji's mock sob-whine-whimper do not amuse anymore. Also after a point you dislike visualizing the charming actress as the moustached male player."
Though her performances in the films during this period were generally well received, none of them performed well commercially, leading to major setbacks in her career. When questioned about working only under the Yash Raj Films banner, she said, "An actor is here to act and pick great roles and scripts. I was getting great roles from Yash Raj at that point, roles that any actor would give an arm to do. I stand by those films regardless of their fate".
In 2011, Mukerji starred in UTV Motion Pictures' semi-biographical thriller, "No One Killed Jessica", based on the Jessica Lal murder case. She played the fictional character of a foul-mouthed television journalist, Meera Gaity, deeply involved with the case. In an interview with "The Telegraph" she said, "It was such a different role to portray. It wasn’t a role that was typical of a Hindi film heroine. Meera was more like a hero. It was a character that actually took the story forward... Meera made a lot of things happen. It wasn’t something that I had ever done before. I actually had to play a man! " Upon release, Mukerji's performance received mostly positive reviews. "The Times of India" wrote, "Rani's character being fictional and glamourized seems superficial to an extent but she packs in the punch required for her dynamic character." While other critics praised her performance, with "Daily News and Analysis" describing it as "one of her best performances till date," several critics were less positive, including Anupama Chopra of NDTV, who called her role, "the fatal, false note in "No One Killed Jessica"," arguing that "The character is written superficially and Rani’s portrayal of her is equally banal. It’s all about externals. She argues a lot and proudly labels herself a bitch but her hair stays perfectly in place and in the end, she even gets to do a super-hero-like slow motion walk." The film eventually earned and was especially noted for being a commercial success, despite the absence of any prominent male actors. Consequently, Mukerji won her third Filmfare Award for Best Supporting Actress.
Mukerji followed the success of "No One Killed Jessica" with a leading role in Sachin Kundalkar's "Aiyyaa" (2012); a comedy of manners co-starring Prithviraj. She played Meenakshi Deshpande, a woman with a heightened sense of smell who develops a one-sided attraction towards Prithiviraj's character. Critically and commercially unsuccessful, "Aiyyaa" generated positive comments for Mukerji's performance alone. Rediff.com criticised her decision to star in the film and wrote, "Rani, as fine an actor that one gets in Bollywood, gets no support from the way her character is written but nevertheless is a joy to watch." Later that year, Mukerji earned critical appreciation for her portrayal of Roshni Shekhawat, a mother who loses her only child in a boating accident, in Reema Kagti's supernatural thriller "". Co-starring Aamir Khan and Kareena Kapoor, the film proved an economic success with gross earnings of over . Ronnie Schieb of "Variety" mentioned Mukerji as "vivid" in a "quietly sympathetic role"; Saibal Chatterjee added, "A deglamorised Rani Mukerji plays her role with finesse and a great sense of empathy". She received Best Supporting Actress nominations at several award ceremonies, including Filmfare.
As of January 2013, Mukerji will star in the anthology film "Bombay Talkies", in the segment directed by Karan Johar, alongside Saqib Saleem and Randeep Hooda.
Other work.
Television.
In 2009, Mukerji made her television debut as a talent judge with the reality show "Dance Premier League" on Sony Entertainment Television. She explained her stint with television, saying that it made her "more accessible" to the audience and helped her "gain visibility when was not doing too many films." In 2011, she reprised her role of Meera Gaity on the TV series "C.I.D." in a guest appearance to promote her film "No One Killed Jessica".
Philanthropy and stage performances.
Involved with several social causes, Mukerji remarked, "It's my dream that every child in India is educated because the way India is growing I don't think without education, we can see a very bright future. So if we want a bright future for our country, I think education is foremost." Mukerji has stated that she feels strongly for causes that affect women, because, "it angers me to know that women are ill-treated". In March 2004, Mukerji visited the desert of Rajasthan, where she spent a day at the army training base to boost the morale of the jawan troops. The visit was conducted for a NDTV show, "Jai Jawan", on which entertainers and actors visit Indian troops. In February 2005, Mukerji performed at the "HELP! Telethon Concert" to help raise money for the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake alongside several other Bollywood stars. In March 2006, Mukerji interacted with the physically challenged children of the Helen Keller Institute, during her birthday celebrations. She had previously worked with them while researching for her role in "Black". In November 2010, she was part of a fund raising auction for the "Because I am a Girl" charity campaign.
Among her stage performances, Mukerji has participated in two world tours. Her first concert, "Magnificent Five" was in the year 1999 with actors Aamir Khan, Aishwarya Rai, Akshaye Khanna and Twinkle Khanna. Five years later, she was a part of the "Temptations 2004" concert. Mukerji performed alongside Shahrukh Khan, Saif Ali Khan, Preity Zinta, Arjun Rampal and Priyanka Chopra in nineteen stage shows across the globe. Mukerji was also part of the "Temptations 2005" concert in New Delhi. She helped to raise funds for the National Centre For Promotional of Employment for Disabled People (NCPEDP), a disabled rights' group, with the show which also featured Shah Rukh Khan, Fardeen Khan, Ameesha Patel and Malaika Arora Khan. In 2010, Mukerji joined Shahrukh Khan, Arjun Rampal, Ishaa Koppikar, among others for a concert at the Army Stadium, Dhaka, Bangladesh to a packed audience. For the "Temptations Reloaded" concert of 2012 in Jakarta, Mukerji performed alongside Shahrukh Khan, Preity Zinta and Bipasha Basu.
Personal life and media image.
Rani uses the English transliteration of "Mukerji" instead of the original "Mukherjee" for her surname. She has never clarified the reason for having done so. Mukerji has three homes in Mumbai, including her childhood home. She currently lives in Juhu with her parents.
Mukerji is extremely guarded about her personal life, and despite constant media speculation, has never spoken about her relationships. However, in an interview with Simi Garewal she claimed to have been "absolutely in love", without divulging the name of the person. As opposed to most of her contemporaries, Mukerji limits her media interactions and is often termed as a recluse. However in 2011, in an interview to "Screen India" she clarified, "Today actors have become more open with the media. But this has posed a problem for actors like me because if I don’t do that, then I end up being called reclusive. So now I have changed myself and am easily approachable." She is additionally known for her friendly image and shares a close friendship with several Bollywood stars including Shah Rukh Khan, Aamir Khan and Karan Johar.
In June 2005, Mukerji was widely criticised following the publication of an interview with British newspaper "Desi Xpress". Mukerji was asked to name her idol and she replied, "Adolf Hitler". However, in an interview with Times Now a year later, she denied ever mentioning Hitler's name. In November 2006, Mukerji was shooting for the film "Laaga Chunari Mein Daag" in Varanasi when avid fans crowded the set. Security personnel beat the crowd back. A media storm followed as various groups insisted that Mukerji should have stopped the security guards. Mukerji later issued an apology.
Mukerji occupied the top slot of Box Office India's "Top Actresses" list for two years in a row (2005–2006). She was also placed number one on Rediff's "Top Bollywood Female Stars" Rankings for three consecutive years (2004–2006), while in 2007, she was ranked at number five.
In February 2006, "Filmfare" placed her eighth amongst the "Ten Most Powerful Names of Bollywood", an achievement she repeated from the previous year, where she was ranked at number ten, the only woman on the list. In 2007, she was ranked at number five.
On Women's International Day 2007, Mukerji came in fourth on the "Best Bollywood Actresses Ever" listing.
She was placed at number 36 by the UK magazine, "Eastern Eye", as one of "Asia's Sexiest Women" (2006). Mukerji is frequently featured in various lists by Rediff.com, including, "Bollywood's Most Beautiful Actresses", "Bollywood's Best Dressed Women" and "Women of Many Faces". In 2013, she was honoured by the US Embassy, on the day of Barack Obama's inauguration into office, for her contribution to Indian cinema.
