Donald Richie (17 April 1924 – 19 February 2013) was an American-born author who wrote about the Japanese people and Japanese cinema. Although he considered himself only a writer, Richie directed many experimental films, the first when he was 17.
Biography.
Richie was born in Lima, Ohio. During World War II, he served aboard Liberty ships as a purser and medical officer. By then he had already published his first work, "Tumblebugs" (1942), a short story.
In 1947, Richie first visited Japan with the American occupation force, a job he saw as an opportunity to escape from Lima, Ohio. He first worked as a typist, and then as a civilian staff writer for the "Pacific Stars and Stripes". While in Tokyo, he became fascinated with Japanese culture, particularly Japanese cinema. He was soon writing movie reviews in the "Stars and Stripes". In 1948 he met Kashiko Kawakita who introduced him to Yasujiro Ozu. During their long friendship, Richie and Kawakita collaborated closely in promoting Japanese film in the West. Hence, he began composing contemporary music and had released title for ballet at the time.
After returning to the United States, he enrolled at Columbia University's School of General Studies in 1949 and received a B.S. degree in English in 1953. Richie then returned to Japan as film critic for "The Japan Times". The greater tolerance in Japan at the time for homosexuality than in the United States was a reason he gave for returning to Japan, as he was openly bisexual. He spent much of the second half of the 20th century there. In 1959, he published his first book, "The Japanese Film: Art and Industry", coauthored with Joseph Anderson. In this work, the authors gave the first English language account of Japanese film. Richie served as Curator of Film at the New York Museum of Modern Art from 1969 to 1972. In 1988, he was invited to become the first guest director at the Telluride Film Festival.
Among his most noted works on Japan are "The Inland Sea", a travel classic, and "Public People, Private People", a look at some of Japan's most significant and most mundane people. He has compiled two collections of essays on Japan: "A Lateral View" and "Partial Views". A collection of his writings has been published to commemorate fifty years of writing about Japan: "The Donald Richie Reader." "The Japan Journals: 1947-2004" consists of extended excerpts from his diaries.
In 1991, film makers Lucille Carra and Brian Cotnoir produced a film version of "The Inland Sea", which Richie narrated. Produced by Travelfilm Company, the film won numerous awards, including Best Documentary at the Hawaii International Film Festival (1991) and the Earthwatch Film Award. It screened at the Sundance Film Festival in 1992.
Author Tom Wolfe describes Richie as "the Lafcadio Hearn of our time, a subtle, stylish, and deceptively lucid medium between two cultures that confuse one another: the Japanese and the American."
Although Richie spoke Japanese fluently, he could neither read nor write it proficiently.
Richie died, aged 88, on February 19, 2013, in Tokyo.
Japanese cinema.
Richie's most widely recognized accomplishment has been his analysis of Japanese cinema. From his first published book, Richie has revised not only the library of films he discusses, but the way he analyzes them. With each subsequent book, he has focused less on film theory and more on the conditions in which the films were made. One thing that has emerged in his works is an emphasis on the "presentational" nature of Japan's cinema, in contrast to the "representational" films of the West. In the foreword to Richie's book "A Hundred Years Of Japanese Film", Paul Schrader says "Whatever we in the West know about Japanese film, and how we know it, we most likely owe to Donald Richie." Richie also penned analyses of two of Japan's best known filmmakers: Yasujiro Ozu and Akira Kurosawa. 
Richie wrote the English subtitles for Akira Kurosawa's films "Kagemusha" (1980), "Red Beard", and "Dreams" (1990). 
In the 21st century, Richie provided audio commentaries for The Criterion Collection on DVDs of various classic Japanese films, notably those of Ozu ("A Story of Floating Weeds" and "Early Summer"), Mikio Naruse ("When a Woman Ascends the Stairs"), and Kurosawa ("Drunken Angel", "Rashomon", "The Lower Depths", and "The Bad Sleep Well"), among others.
Films by Richie.
Among the short works not included in the collection are for example "Small Town Sunday" (1941, 8 mm), filmed when he was still resident in the United States, "A Sentimental Education" (1953), "Aoyama Kaidan" (1957), "Shu-e" (1958), and "Life" (1965).
Other films: 
