Amitriptyline (Tryptomer, Elavil, Tryptizol, Laroxyl, Saroten, Sarotex, Lentizol, Endep) is a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA). It is the most widely used TCA and has at least equal efficacy against depression as the newer class of SSRIs according to a study from early 2001. As well as reducing depressive symptoms, these types of tricyclics also ease migraines, tension headaches, anxiety attacks and some schizophrenic symptoms. It is also known to reduce aggression and violent behaviour.
Medical uses.
Amitriptyline is used for a number of medical conditions including: depressive disorders, anxiety disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, migraine prophylaxis, eating disorders, bipolar disorder, post-herpetic neuralgia, and insomnia.
Amitriptyline is used in ankylosing spondylitis for pain relief. It is also used as a preventive for patients with recurring biliary dyskinesia (sphincter of Oddi dysfunction).
Amitriptyline is also used in the treatment of nocturnal enuresis (bedwetting) in children.
Amitriptyline may be prescribed for other conditions such as cyclic vomiting syndrome post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), chronic pain, tinnitus, chronic cough, carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS), fibromyalgia, vulvodynia, interstitial cystitis, male chronic pelvic pain syndrome, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), diabetic peripheral neuropathy, neurological pain, laryngeal sensory neuropathy, chronic fatigue syndrome and painful paresthesias related to multiple sclerosis. Typically lower dosages are required for pain modification of 10 to 50 mg daily.
A randomized controlled trial published in June 2005 found that amitriptyline was effective in functional dyspepsia that did not respond to a first-line treatment (famotidine or mosapride).
Adverse effects.
The main two side effects that occur from taking amitriptyline are drowsiness and a dry mouth. Other common side effects of using amitriptyline are mostly due to its anticholinergic activity, including: weight gain, changes in appetite, muscle stiffness, nausea, constipation, nervousness, dizziness, tremor, blurred vision, urinary retention, and changes in sexual function. Some rare side effects include seizures, tinnitus, hypotension, mania, psychosis, sleep paralysis, hypnagogic or hypnopompic hallucinations related to sleep paralysis, heart block, arrhythmias, lip and mouth ulcers, extrapyramidal symptoms, depression, tingling pain or numbness in the feet or hands, yellowing of the eyes or skin, pain or difficulty passing urine, confusion, abnormal production of milk in females, breast enlargement in both males and females, fever with increased sweating, and suicidal thoughts. The Indianapolis Discovery Network for Dementia (IDND) rates amitriptyline as having definite anticholinergic effects. A side effect of many commonly used drugs with such effects appears to be to increase the risks of both cognitive impairment and death in older people, according to research led by the University of East Anglia (UEA).
Amitriptyline can induce hepatotoxicity.
Overdose.
The symptoms and the treatment of an overdose are largely the same as for the other TCAs. The British National Formulary notes that amitriptyline can be particularly dangerous in overdose, thus it and other tricyclic antidepressants are no longer recommended as first line therapy for depression. Alternative agents, SSRIs and SNRIs are safer in overdose, though they are no more efficacious than TCAs.
Pharmacology.
Amitriptyline acts primarily as a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, with strong actions on the serotonin transporter and moderate effects on the norepinephrine transporter. It has negligible influence on the dopamine transporter and therefore does not affect dopamine reuptake, being nearly 1,000 times weaker on it than on serotonin.
Amitriptyline additionally functions as a 5-HT2A, 5-HT2C, 5-HT3, 5-HT6, 5-HT7, α1-adrenergic, H1, H2, H4, and mACh receptor antagonist, and σ1 receptor agonist. It has also been shown to be a relatively weak NMDA receptor negative allosteric modulator at the same binding site as phencyclidine. Amitriptyline inhibits sodium channels, L-type calcium channels, and Kv1.1, Kv7.2, and Kv7.3 voltage-gated potassium channels, and therefore acts as a sodium, calcium, and potassium channel blocker as well.
Recently, amitriptyline has been demonstrated to act as an agonist of the TrkA and TrkB receptors. It promotes the heterodimerization of these proteins in the absence of NGF and has potent neurotrophic activity both "in-vivo" and "in-vitro" in mouse models. These are the same receptors BDNF activate, an endogenous neurotrophin with powerful antidepressant effects, and as such this property may contribute significantly to its therapeutic efficacy against depression. Amitriptyline also acts as FIASMA (functional inhibitor of acid sphingomyelinase).
History.
Amitriptyline, under the brand name Elavil, was developed by Merck and approved by the FDA on April 7, 1961, for the treatment of major depression in the United States.
In India, Merck & Co launched amitriptyline under the brand name Tryptomer, which is now with Merind, a division of Wockhardt.
