Switched at Birth is an American television series that premiered on ABC Family on June 6, 2011, at 9:00 ET/PT. The one-hour scripted drama revolves around two teenagers who were switched at birth and grew up in very different environments. The series' debut was the highest-rated show debut for ABC Family to date. According to ABC Family, it is "the first mainstream television series to have multiple deaf and hard-of-hearing series regulars and scenes shot entirely in ASL Sign Language." 
On August 1, 2011, ABC Family announced that they were ordering more episodes for the first season of "Switched at Birth", bringing the first season to a total of 30 episodes. The series continued with a winter premiere on January 3, 2012, ending on March 20, 2012, with 12 episodes. The series began airing its remaining 8 episodes for its first season, beginning September 3, 2012. On , ABC Family renewed "Switched at Birth" for a second season; it premiered on .
Premise.
Bay Kennish (Vanessa Marano) is an artistic teenager being raised by her stay-at-home mother Kathryn (Lea Thompson) and former professional baseball player father John (D. W. Moffett), in the wealthy Kansas City suburb of Mission Hills, Kansas, along with her older brother Toby (Lucas Grabeel). After studying blood types in school, Bay questions why her type is considered impossible given those of her parents. After genetic testing that confirms Bay is not biologically related to her parents, the family discovers that the hospital mistakenly switched Bay with another newborn, Daphne Vasquez (Katie Leclerc), a deaf teen who lost her hearing as a result of meningitis, living with her struggling single mother, Regina (Constance Marie) and Puerto Rican grandmother (Ivonne Coll) in the low-income neighborhood of East Riverside Riverside, Missouri.
When the two families meet, the girls struggle with their identities as Bay relates to Regina's artistic abilities and Daphne is drawn to John's athletic skills. The Kennishes learn that Regina is facing financial woes and propose the Vasquezes move into their guest home. The new living situation forces the girls, along with both families, to understand their differences and embrace their similarities. Kathryn attempts to bond with Daphne while unintentionally alienating Bay. At the same time, Regina struggles with Kathryn's influence on Daphne and bonding with Bay.
Oscar-winning actress and Deaf advocate Marlee Matlin plays a friend of Regina's and the mother of Emmett (Sean Berdy), Daphne's best friend and schoolmate. Gilles Marini plays Angelo Sorrento, Bay's biological father. On September 18, 2012, it was announced that Marini was promoted to a series regular for the show's second season.
Production.
The show has an American Sign Language expert who helps make sure that the sign language used by the four fluent regulars (Katie Leclerc, Sean Berdy, Constance Marie, and Marlee Matlin) all employ a similar dialect.
Audio editing.
Scenes featuring only Deaf characters having a conversation have their audio edited to remove all background noise except for ambient noise. This is done so viewers can focus on the emotions and physical nature of sign language, while also providing them with a perspective of what it is like to be Deaf.
Setting.
The show is set in Kansas City, although it is filmed in Los Angeles, California. The Kennishes reside in Mission Hills, an old-money suburb, and before moving into the Kennishes' guest home, the Vasquezes lived in East Riverside. The Kemper Museum of Contemporary Art and Loose Park are both located in Kansas City. In addition, establishing shots used in several episodes feature video of downtown Kansas City, including a shot of Liberty Memorial in the first episode. Some scenes are also filmed in Santa Clarita, California.
Vehicles driven by members of the Kennish family bear Kansas license plates, but they appear to be the 2010 "America's Heartland" base used only for personalized license plates instead of the 2008 "Ad Aspera/State Seal" base used for standard issue license plates. In season 1, episode 5 a close up of John Kennish's license plate is clearly visible, showing a Kansas plate, but the county sticker in the upper-left corner says "SN", which stands for Shawnee County, Kansas, the county in which the state capital Topeka is located, rather than "JO" for Johnson County, Kansas, where Mission Hills is located. Another inaccuracy is the use of license plates on the front of Kansas-registered cars; Kansas provides only rear-mounted plates.
Promotion.
One week before the premiere, ABC Family launched the online game, "Switched at Birth: Hunt for the Code". Bay, a graffiti artist, left her signature stencil image on ten different websites and users searched for the picture and accompanying code to redeem sneak peeks and enter to win $4,000. Each weekday, ABCFamily.com posted two clues hinting at a site featuring the image and instructed users to scan the code with a Microsoft Tag Reader for exclusive content. Additionally, each code had two letters for fans to collect and enter to win upon completion of the ten-digit code.
Broadcast.
Reception.
The show had the highest-rated premiere ever on the ABC Family network with 3.3 million viewers. When counting the repeat of the first episode later that evening, an estimated 4.9 million people saw the premiere. The first 30 episodes are available on Netflix's Watch Instantly service.
