Sir David Frederick Attenborough (), OM, CH, CVO, CBE, FRS, FZS, FSA (born 8 May 1926) is a British broadcaster and naturalist. 
His career as the face and voice of natural history programmes has endured for 60 years. He is best known for writing and presenting the nine "Life" series, in conjunction with the BBC Natural History Unit, which collectively form a comprehensive survey of all life on the planet. He is also a former senior manager at the BBC, having served as controller of BBC Two and director of programming for BBC Television in the 1960s and 1970s. He is the only person to have won a BAFTA in black and white, colour, HD and 3D.
Attenborough is widely considered a national treasure in Britain, although he himself does not like the term. In 2002, he was named among the 100 Greatest Britons following a UK-wide vote. He is a younger brother of director, producer and actor Richard Attenborough.
Early life and family.
Attenborough was born in Isleworth, west London, but grew up in College House on the campus of the University College, Leicester, where his father, Frederick, was principal. He is the middle of three sons (his elder brother, Richard, became an actor and his younger brother, John, an executive at Italian car manufacturer Alfa Romeo). During World War II, through a British government initiative known as Kindertransport, his parents also fostered two Jewish refugee girls from Europe.
Attenborough spent his childhood collecting fossils, stones and other natural specimens. He received encouragement in this pursuit at age seven, when a young Jacquetta Hawkes admired his "museum." A few years later, one of his adoptive sisters gave him a piece of amber filled with prehistoric creatures; some 50 years later, it would be the focus of his programme "The Amber Time Machine."
Attenborough was educated at Wyggeston Grammar School for Boys in Leicester and then won a scholarship to Clare College, Cambridge in 1945, where he studied geology and zoology and obtained a degree in natural sciences. In 1947, he was called up for national service in the Royal Navy and spent two years stationed in North Wales and the Firth of Forth.
In 1950, Attenborough married Jane Elizabeth Ebsworth Oriel; the marriage lasted until her death in 1997. The couple had two children, Robert and Susan. Robert is a senior lecturer in bioanthropology for the School of Archaeology and Anthropology at the Australian National University in Canberra.
First years at the BBC.
After leaving the Navy, Attenborough took a position editing children's science textbooks for a publishing company. He soon became disillusioned with the work and in 1950 applied for a job as a radio talk producer with the BBC. Although he was rejected for this job, his CV later attracted the interest of Mary Adams, head of the Talks (factual broadcasting) department of the BBC's fledgling television service. Attenborough, like most Britons at that time, did not own a television, and he had seen only one programme in his life. However, he accepted Adams' offer of a three-month training course, and in 1952 he joined the BBC full-time. Initially discouraged from appearing on camera because Adams thought his teeth were too big, he became a producer for the Talks department, which handled all non-fiction broadcasts. His early projects included the quiz show "Animal, Vegetable, Mineral?" and "Song Hunter," a series about folk music presented by Alan Lomax.
Attenborough's association with natural history programmes began when he produced and presented the three-part series "The Pattern of Animals." The studio-bound programme featured animals from London Zoo, with the naturalist Julian Huxley discussing their use of camouflage, aposematism and courtship displays. Through this programme, Attenborough met Jack Lester, the curator of the zoo's reptile house, and they decided to make a series about an animal-collecting expedition. The result was "Zoo Quest," first broadcast in 1954, where Attenborough was presented at short notice due to Lester taking ill.
In 1957, the BBC Natural History Unit was formally established in Bristol. Attenborough was asked to join it, but declined, not wishing to move from London where he and his young family were settled. Instead, he formed his own department, the Travel and Exploration Unit, which allowed him to continue to front "Zoo Quest" as well as produce other documentaries, notably the "Travellers' Tales" and "Adventure" series.
In the early 1960s, Attenborough resigned from the permanent staff of the BBC to study for a postgraduate degree in social anthropology at the London School of Economics, interweaving his study with further filming. However, he accepted an invitation to return to the BBC as controller of BBC Two before he could finish the degree.
BBC administration.
Attenborough became the controller of BBC Two in March 1965, but had a clause inserted in his contract that would allow him to continue making programmes on an occasional basis. Later the same year, he filmed elephants in Tanzania, and in 1969, he made a three-part series on the cultural history of the Indonesian island of Bali. For the 1971 film "A Blank on the Map", he joined the first Western expedition to a remote highland valley in New Guinea to seek out a lost tribe.
BBC Two was launched in 1964, but had struggled to capture the public's imagination. When Attenborough arrived as controller, he quickly abolished the channel's quirky kangaroo mascot and shook up the schedule. With a mission to make BBC Two's output diverse and different from that offered by other networks, he began to establish a portfolio of programmes that defined the channel's identity for decades to come. Under his tenure, music, the arts, entertainment, archaeology, experimental comedy, travel, drama, sport, business, science and natural history all found a place in the weekly schedules. Often, an eclectic mix was offered within a single evening's viewing. Programmes he commissioned included "Man Alive", "Call My Bluff", "Chronicle", "Life", "One Pair of Eyes", "The Old Grey Whistle Test", "Monty Python's Flying Circus" and "The Money Programme". When BBC Two became the first British channel to broadcast in colour in 1967, Attenborough took advantage by introducing televised snooker, as well as bringing rugby league to British television on a regular basis via the BBC2 Floodlit Trophy.
One of his most significant decisions was to order a 13-part series on the history of Western art, to show off the quality of the new UHF colour television service that BBC Two offered. Broadcast to universal acclaim in 1969, "Civilisation" set the blueprint for landmark authored documentaries, which were informally known as "tombstone" or "sledgehammer" projects. Others followed, including Jacob Bronowski's "The Ascent of Man" (also commissioned by Attenborough), and Alistair Cooke's "". Attenborough thought that the story of evolution would be a natural subject for such a series. He shared his idea with Chris Parsons, a producer at the Natural History Unit, who came up with the title "Life on Earth" and returned to Bristol to start planning the series. Attenborough harboured a strong desire to present the series himself, but this would not be possible so long as he remained in a management post.
In 1969, Attenborough was promoted to director of programmes, making him responsible for the output of both BBC channels. His tasks, which included agreeing budgets, attending board meetings and firing staff were now far removed from the business of filming programmes. When Attenborough's name was being suggested as a candidate for the position of Director General of the BBC in 1972, he phoned his brother Richard to confess that he had no appetite for the job. Early the following year, he left his post to return to full-time programme-making, leaving him free to write and present the planned natural history epic.
Return to broadcasting.
After his resignation, Attenborough became a freelance broadcaster and immediately started work on his next project, a pre-arranged trip to Indonesia with a crew from the Natural History Unit. It resulted in the 1973 series "Eastwards with Attenborough", which was similar in tone to the earlier "Zoo Quests" but without the animal-collecting element.
On his return, he began to work on the scripts for "Life on Earth". Due to the scale of his ambition, the BBC decided to partner with an American network to secure the necessary funding. While the negotiations were proceeding he worked on a number of other television projects. He presented a series on tribal art ("The Tribal Eye", 1975) and another on the voyages of discovery ("The Explorers", 1975). He also presented a BBC children's series about cryptozoology entitled "Fabulous Animals" (1975), which featured mythical creatures such as the griffin and kraken. Eventually, the BBC signed a co-production deal with Turner Broadcasting and "Life on Earth" moved into production in 1976.
Life series.
Beginning with "Life on Earth" in 1979, Attenborough set about creating a body of work which became a benchmark of quality in wildlife film-making and influenced a generation of documentary film-makers. The series also established many of the hallmarks of the BBC's natural history output. By treating his subject seriously and researching the latest discoveries, Attenborough and his production team gained the trust of the scientific community, who responded by allowing him to feature their subjects in his programmes. In Rwanda, for example, Attenborough and his crew were granted privileged access to film Dian Fossey's research group of mountain gorillas. Innovation was another factor in "Life on Earth"'s success: new film-making techniques were devised to get the shots Attenborough wanted, with a focus on events and animals that were hitherto unfilmed. Computerised airline schedules, which had only recently been introduced, enabled the series to be elaborately devised so that Attenborough visited several locations around the globe in each episode, sometimes even changing continents mid-sentence. Although appearing as the on-screen presenter, he consciously restricted his pieces to camera to give his subjects top billing.
The success of "Life on Earth" prompted the BBC to consider a follow-up, and five years later, "The Living Planet" was screened. This time, Attenborough built his series around the theme of ecology, the adaptations of living things to their environment. It was another critical and commercial success, generating huge international sales for the BBC. In 1990, "The Trials of Life" completed the original Life trilogy, looking at animal behaviour through the different stages of life. The series drew strong reactions from the viewing public for its sequences of killer whales hunting sea lions on a Patagonian beach and chimpanzees hunting and violently killing a colobus monkey.
In the 1990s, Attenborough continued to use the "Life" moniker for a succession of authored documentaries. In 1993, he presented "Life in the Freezer", the first television series to survey the natural history of Antarctica. Although past normal retirement age, he then embarked on a number of more specialised surveys of the natural world, beginning with plants. They proved a difficult subject for his producers, who had to deliver five hours of television featuring what are essentially immobile objects. The result, "The Private Life of Plants" (1995), showed plants as dynamic organisms by using time-lapse photography to speed up their growth.
Prompted by an enthusiastic ornithologist at the BBC Natural History Unit, Attenborough then turned his attention to the animal kingdom and in particular, birds. As he was neither an obsessive twitcher, nor a bird expert, he decided he was better qualified to make "The Life of Birds" (1998) on the theme of behaviour. The order of the remaining "Life" series was dictated by developments in camera technology. For "The Life of Mammals" (2002), low-light and infrared cameras were deployed to reveal the behaviour of nocturnal mammals. The series contains a number of memorable two shots of Attenborough and his subjects, which included chimpanzees, a blue whale and a grizzly bear. Advances in macro photography made it possible to capture natural behaviour of very small creatures for the first time, and in 2005, "Life in the Undergrowth" introduced audiences to the world of invertebrates.
However, in 2010 Attenborough asserted that his "First Life" — dealing with evolutionary history before "Life on Earth" — should also be included within the "Life" series. In the documentary "Attenborough's Journey" he stated, "This series, to a degree which I really didn't fully appreciate until I started working on it, really completes the set."
Other documentaries.
Alongside the "Life" series, Attenborough has continued to work on other television documentaries, mainly in the natural history genre. He wrote and presented a series on man's influence on the natural history of the Mediterranean basin, "The First Eden", in 1987. Two years later, he demonstrated his passion for fossils in "Lost Worlds Vanished Lives".
Attenborough narrated every episode of "Wildlife on One", a BBC One wildlife series which ran for 253 episodes between 1977 and 2005. At its peak, it drew a weekly audience of eight to ten million, and the 1987 episode "Meerkats United" was voted the best wildlife documentary of all time by BBC viewers. He has also narrated over 50 episodes of "Natural World", BBC Two's flagship wildlife series. (Its forerunner, "The World About Us", was created by Attenborough in 1969, as a vehicle for colour television.) In 1997, he narrated the "BBC Wildlife Specials", each focussing on a charismatic species, and screened to mark the Natural History Unit's 40th anniversary.
As a writer and narrator, he continued to collaborate with the BBC Natural History Unit in the new millennium. Alastair Fothergill, a senior producer with whom Attenborough had worked on "The Trials of Life" and "Life in the Freezer", was making "The Blue Planet" (2001), the Unit's first comprehensive series on marine life. He decided not to use an on-screen presenter due to difficulties in speaking to camera through diving apparatus, but asked Attenborough to narrate the films. The same team reunited for "Planet Earth" (2006), the biggest nature documentary ever made for television and the first BBC wildlife series to be shot in high definition. In 2011, Fothergill gave Attenborough a more prominent role in "Frozen Planet", a major series on the natural history of the polar regions. Attenborough appeared on screen and authored the final episode, in addition to performing voiceover duties.
In 2009, he co-wrote and narrated "Life", a ten-part series focussing on extraordinary animal behaviour, and narrated "Nature's Great Events", which showed how seasonal changes trigger major natural spectacles.
By the turn of the millennium, Attenborough's authored documentaries were adopting a more overtly environmentalist stance. In "State of the Planet" (2000), he used the latest scientific evidence and interviews with leading scientists and conservationists to assess the impact of man's activities on the natural world. He later turned to the issues of global warming ("The Truth about Climate Change", 2006) and human population growth ("How Many People Can Live on Planet Earth?", 2009). He also contributed a programme which highlighted the plight of endangered species to the BBC's "Saving Planet Earth" project in 2007, the 50th anniversary of the Natural History Unit.
Attenborough is also forging a new partnership with Sky, working on documentaries for the broadcaster's new 3D network, Sky 3D. Their first collaboration was "Flying Monsters 3D", a film about pterosaurs which debuted on Christmas Day of 2010. A second film, "The Bachelor King 3D", followed a year later, and further collaborations are planned.
Current projects.
Attenborough celebrated his 60th year in broadcasting in 2012, and continues to work on a number of television, film and radio projects. In January 2013, he presented "David Attenborough's Natural Curiosities," a five-part series on Eden which looks at evolutionary quirks, melding history, natural history and science. Later, in the year he will return to BBC television for a two-part series on the origins of vertebrates, provisionally titled "Rise of Animals".
Attenborough continues to work in partnership with Colossus Productions on 3D projects for Sky 3D, with their latest series "Micro Monsters 3D" due for transmission in the spring of 2013. 
2013 will also yield the third series of "David Attenborough's Life Stories" for BBC Radio 4. Other projects include the one-off TV documentary "Attenborough and Bjork: The Nature of Music", a BBC Scotland series called "Wild Cameramen at Work" and the environmental documentary "Plastic Oceans".
Other work.
From 1983, Attenborough worked on two environmentally themed musicals with the WWF and writers Peter Rose and Anne Conlon. "Yanomamo" was the first, about the Amazon rainforest, and the second, "Ocean World", premiered at the Royal Festival Hall in 1991. They were both narrated by Attenborough on their national tour, and recorded on to audio cassette. "Ocean World" was also filmed for Channel 4 and later released.
In 1990, he highlighted the case of Mahjoub Sharif as part of the BBC's "Prisoners of Conscience" series.
In January 2009, the BBC commissioned Attenborough to provide a series of 20 ten-minute monologues covering the history of nature. Entitled "David Attenborough's Life Stories", they are broadcast on Radio 4 in the Friday night slot vacated by Alistair Cooke's "Letter from America". Part of Radio 4's "A Point of View" strand, the talks are also available as podcasts.
He appeared in the 2009 Children's Prom at the BBC Promenade Concerts and in the Last Night of the Proms on 12 September 2009, playing a floor polisher in Sir Malcolm Arnold's "A Grand, Grand Overture" (after which he was "shot" by Rory Bremner, who was playing the gun).
In May 2005, Attenborough was appointed as patron of the UK's Blood Pressure Association, which provides information and support to people with hypertension.
He is also a patron of the Friends of Richmond Park and serves on the advisory board of "BBC Wildlife" magazine.
Attenborough is also an honorary member of BSES Expeditions, a youth development charity that operates challenging scientific research expeditions to remote wilderness environments.
Achievements, awards and recognition.
Attenborough's contribution to broadcasting and wildlife film-making has brought him international recognition. He has been called "the great communicator, the peerless educator" and "the greatest broadcaster of our time." His programmes are often cited as an example of what public service broadcasting should be, even by critics of the BBC, and have influenced a generation of wildlife film-makers.
Honorary titles.
By January 2013, Attenborough had collected 31 honorary degrees from British universities, more than any other person. In 1980, he was honoured by the Open University with whom he has had a close association throughout his career. He also has honorary Doctor of Science awards from the University of Cambridge (1984) and University of Oxford (1988). In 2006, the two eldest Attenborough brothers returned to their home city to receive the title of Distinguished Honorary Fellows of the University of Leicester, "in recognition of a record of continuing distinguished service to the University." David Attenborough was previously awarded an honorary Doctor of Letters degree by the university in 1970, and was made an honorary Freeman of the City of Leicester in 1990. In 2010, he was awarded an Honorary Doctorate from Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University, his first in Africa.
Attenborough has received the title Honorary Fellow from Clare College, Cambridge (1980), the Zoological Society of London (1998), the Linnean Society (1999), the Institute of Biology (2000) and the Society of Antiquaries (2007).
Recognition.
Attenborough has been featured as the subject of a number of BBC television programmes. "Life on Air" (2002) examined the legacy of his work and "Attenborough the Controller" (2002) focused on his time in charge of BBC Two. He was also featured prominently in "The Way We Went Wild" (2004), a series about natural history television presenters, and "100 Years of Wildlife Films" (2007), a special programme marking the centenary of the nature documentary. In 2006, British television viewers were asked to vote for their "Favourite Attenborough Moments" for a UKTV poll to coincide with the broadcaster's 80th birthday. The winning clip showed Attenborough observing the mimicry skills of the superb lyrebird.
Attenborough was named as the most trusted celebrity in Britain in a 2006 Reader's Digest poll. and the following year he won "The Culture Show"'s Living Icon Award. He has also been named among the 100 Greatest Britons in a 2002 BBC poll and is one of the top ten "Heroes of Our Time" according to "New Statesman" magazine.
He has the distinction of having a number of newly discovered species and fossils being named in his honour. In 1993, after discovering that the Mesozoic reptile "Plesiosaurus conybeari" had not, in fact, been a true plesiosaur, the paleontologist Robert Bakker renamed the species "Attenborosaurus conybeari". A fossilised armoured fish discovered at the Gogo Formation, Western Australia in 2008 was given the name "Materpiscis attenboroughi", after Attenborough had filmed at the site and highlighted its scientific importance in "Life on Earth". The "Materpiscis" fossil is believed to be the earliest organism capable of internal fertilisation.
He has also lent his name to a species of Ecuadorian flowering tree ("Blakea attenboroughi"), one of the world's largest-pitchered carnivorous plants ("Nepenthes attenboroughii"), a Madagascan ghost shrimp, the millimetre-long Attenborough's goblin spider and one of only four species of long-beaked echidna, the critically endangered "Zaglossus attenboroughi", discovered by explorer and zoologist Tim Flannery in the Cyclops Mountains of New Guinea in 1998.
In September 2009, London's Natural History Museum opened the Attenborough Studio, part of its Darwin Centre development.
Lectures.
In 1973 he was invited to deliver the Royal Institution Christmas Lecture on "The Language of Animals".
Views and advocacy.
Environmental causes.
Attenborough's programmes have often included references to the impact of human society on the natural world. The last episode of "The Living Planet", for example, focuses almost entirely on humans' destruction of the environment and ways that it could be stopped or reversed. Despite this, he has been criticised for not giving enough prominence to environmental messages. Some environmentalists feel that programmes like Attenborough's give a false picture of idyllic wilderness and do not do enough to acknowledge that such areas are increasingly encroached upon by humans.
The future of life on earth depends on our ability to take action. Many individuals are doing what they can, but real success can only come if there's a change in our societies and our economics and in our politics. I've been lucky in my lifetime to see some of the greatest spectacles that the natural world has to offer. Surely we have a responsibility to leave for future generations a planet that is healthy, inhabitable by all species.
Attenborough has subsequently become more vocal in his support of environmental causes. In 2005 and 2006, he backed a BirdLife International project to stop the killing of albatross by longline fishing boats. He gave public support to WWF's campaign to have 220,000 square kilometres of Borneo's rainforest designated a protected area. He also serves as a vice-president of BTCV, vice-president of Fauna and Flora International, president of Butterfly Conservation and president of Leicestershire and Rutland Wildlife Trust. In 2003 he launched an appeal on behalf of the World Land Trust to create a rainforest reserve in Ecuador in memory of Christopher Parsons, the producer of "Life on Earth" and a personal friend, who had died the previous year. The same year, he helped to launch ARKive, a global project instigated by Parsons to gather together natural history media into a digital library. ARKive is an initiative of Wildscreen, of which Attenborough is a patron. He later became patron of the World Land Trust, and an active supporter. He supported Glyndebourne in their successful application to obtain planning permission for a wind turbine in an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and gave evidence at the planning inquiry arguing in favour of the proposal.
Attenborough has repeatedly said that he considers human overpopulation to be the root cause of many environmental problems. In "The Life of Mammals", he made a plea for humans to curb population growth so that other species will not be crowded out. In 2009, he became a patron of Population Matters (formerly known as the Optimum Population Trust), a UK charity advocating sustainable human populations.
In the past, we didn't understand the effect of our actions. Unknowingly, we sowed the wind and now, literally, we are reaping the whirlwind. But we no longer have that excuse: now we do recognise the consequences of our behaviour. Now surely, we must act to reform it — individually and collectively, nationally and internationally — or we doom future generations to catastrophe.
Interview in the "Radio Times" 23–29 June 2007</ref>
</ref>
Religion and creationism.
David Attenborough, 2003. "Wild, wild life." "Sydney Morning Herald", 25 March. Attenborough has also told this story in numerous other interviews.</ref>
He has explained that he feels the evidence all over the planet clearly shows evolution to be the best way to explain the diversity of life, and that "as far as [he's] concerned, if there is a supreme being then he chose organic evolution as a way of bringing into existence the natural world."
In a BBC Four interview with Mark Lawson, Attenborough was asked if he at any time had any religious faith. He replied simply, "No." He has also said "It never really occurred to me to believe in God".
In 2002, Attenborough joined an effort by leading clerics and scientists to oppose the inclusion of creationism in the curriculum of UK state-funded independent schools which receive private sponsorship, such as the Emmanuel Schools Foundation.
In 2009, Attenborough stated that the Book of Genesis, by saying that the world was there for people to dominate, had taught generations that they can "dominate" the environment, and that this has resulted in the devastation of vast areas of the environment. Attenborough further explained to the science journal "Nature", "That's why Darwinism, and the fact of evolution, is of great importance, because it is that attitude which has led to the devastation of so much, and we are in the situation that we are in."
Also in early 2009, the BBC broadcast an Attenborough one-hour special, "Charles Darwin and the Tree of Life". In reference to the programme, Attenborough stated that "People write to me that evolution is only a theory. Well, it is not a theory. Evolution is as solid a historical fact as you could conceive. Evidence from every quarter. What is a theory is whether natural selection is the mechanism and the only mechanism. That is a theory. But the historical reality that dinosaurs led to birds and mammals produced whales, that's not theory." He strongly opposes creationism and its offshoot "intelligent design", saying that a survey that found a quarter of science teachers in state schools believe that creationism should be taught alongside evolution in science lessons was "really terrible".
In March 2009, Attenborough appeared on "Friday Night with Jonathan Ross". Attenborough stated that he felt evolution did not rule out the existence of a God and accepted the title of agnostic saying, "My view is: I don't know one way or the other but I don't think that evolution is against a belief in God."
Attenborough has joined evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins and other top scientists in signing a campaign statement coordinated by the British Humanist Association (BHA). The statement calls for "creationism to be banned from the school science curriculum and for evolution to be taught more widely in schools."
BBC and public service broadcasting.
</ref>
</ref>
If you could demonstrate that the BBC was grossly extravagant there might be a case for saying OK take it away. But in fact the BBC per minute in almost every category is as cheap as you can find anywhere in the world and produces the best quality. If you take the money away, which part of the BBC will you remove? The BBC has gone through swingeing staff cuts. It has been cut to the bone, if you divert licence fee money elsewhere, you cut quality and services. There is always that threat from politicians who will say your licence fee is up for grabs. We will take it. There is a lot of people who want to see the BBC weakened. They talk of this terrible tax of the licence fee. Yet it is the best bargain that is going. Four radio channels and god knows how many TV channels. It is piffling.
</ref>
</ref>
</ref>
</ref>
I have to say that there are moments when I wonder — moments when its two senior networks, first set up as a partnership, schedule simultaneously programmes of identical character, thereby contradicting the very reason that the BBC was given a second network. Then there are times when both BBC One and BBC Two, intoxicated by the sudden popularity of a programme genre, allow that genre to proliferate and run rampant through the schedules. The result is that other kinds of programmes are not placed, simply because of a lack of space. Do we really require so many gardening programmes, make-over programmes or celebrity chefs? Is it not a scandal in this day and age, that there seems to be no place for continuing series of programmes about science or serious music or thoughtful in-depth interviews with people other than politicians?
</ref>
Parodies and artistic portrayals.
Attenborough's accent and hushed, excited delivery have been the subject of frequent parodies by comedians, most notably Spike Milligan, Marty Feldman and "The Goodies". Attenborough is portrayed by Michael Palin in the final episode of "Monty Python's Flying Circus", where he searches the African jungle for the legendary Walking Tree of Dahomey ("Quercus Nicholas Parsonus"), sweating excessively and accompanied by native guides wearing saxophones. David Attenborough has also been parodied in a series of GEICO insurance commercials, showing a nature show host, clearly patterned on Attenborough.
"Time Flies", a sketch by David Ives, features a pair of anthropomorphic mayflies engaging in a courtship ritual, while watching themselves on television in a documentary narrated by David Attenborough.
In 2013 it was announced in, Speech Patterns Unlimited, magazine. that a whisper had now been given the title, The Attenborough Whisper, this 'whisper' is to be used in all Natural Life broadcasts in the future, and is known as P.W.henceforth.
The character of Nigel Thornberry, a nature documentarian on Nickelodeon's The Wild Thornberrys is strongly influenced by Attenborough.
He has also been parodied by the Australia 1980s sketch show The Comedy Company where Ian McFadyen portrays a character called David Rabbitborough, who goes about examining the "wildlife" of various Australian urban stereotypes.
The video game "Discworld", based on the series of books by Terry Pratchett, parodies his unique delivery to explain different aspects of the Discworld Universe, such as L-Space.
Mythbusters host Adam Savage often imitates Attenborough when speaking about his co-host Jamie Hyneman, which Jamie verified in the YouTube Special Episode.
Filmography.
David Attenborough's television credits span seven decades and his association with natural history programmes dates back to "The Pattern of Animals" and "Zoo Quest" in the early 1950s. His most influential work, 1979's "Life on Earth", launched a strand of nine authored documentaries with the BBC Natural History Unit which shared the "Life" moniker and spanned 30 years. He narrated every episode of the long-running BBC series "Wildlife on One" and in his later career has voiced several high-profile BBC wildlife documentaries, among them "The Blue Planet" and "Planet Earth". He became a pioneer in the 3D documentary format with "Flying Monsters" in 2010.
Books.
David Attenborough's work as an author has strong parallels with his broadcasting career. In the 1950s and 1960s his published work included accounts of his animal collecting expeditions around the world, which became the "Zoo Quest" series. He wrote an accompanying volume to each of his nine "Life" documentaries, along with books on tribal art and birds of paradise. His autobiography, "Life on Air", was published in 2002, revised in 2009 and is one of a number of his works which is available as a self-narrated audiobook. Attenborough has also contributed forewords and introductions to many other works, notably those accompanying "Planet Earth", "Frozen Planet", "Africa" and other BBC series he has narrated.
Audio recordings.
In addition, Attenborough has recorded some of his own works in audiobook form, including "Life on Earth", "Zoo Quest for a Dragon" and his autobiography "Life on Air: Memoirs of a Broadcaster".
