John McClane (born May 23, 1955 in Plainfield, New Jersey) is a fictional character and the protagonist of the "Die Hard" film series. He is portrayed by Bruce Willis.
Development and description.
John McClane was originally based on the fictional character Detective Joe Leland from Roderick Thorp's bestselling novel, "Nothing Lasts Forever", along with another character, Frank Malone from Walter Wager's novel "58 Minutes" (later adapted as "Die Hard 2") and is somewhat based on and inspired by Dirty Harry. "Die Hard" villain Hans Gruber describes him as "just another American... who thinks he's John Wayne," to which McClane replies that he "was always partial to Roy Rogers." He is described as being a foul-mouthed, wisecracking, no-nonsense New York cop with an itchy trigger finger and a never-say-die maverick spirit.
McClane's marriage is in a constant state of crisis, his vigilantism and disregard for authority have put him in danger of losing his job more than once, and he is a chain-smoker who is described as "two steps away from becoming a full blown alcoholic", which McClane jokingly upgrades to only "one step".
McClane is consistently portrayed as a reluctant hero who, with little or no assistance from others, is required against his wishes to thwart the elaborate plans of a group of like-minded villains because no one else is in a position to do so. The trailer for the first "Die Hard" film states, "The last thing McClane wants is to be a hero, but he doesn't have a choice." In the second film, he is told "You're the wrong guy in the wrong place at the wrong time", to which he replies, "The story of my life." In the fourth film, he says he gets involved in dangerous situations "because there is nobody else to do it."
Depiction.
In the first "Die Hard" film in 1988, John McClane is an Irish American detective with the New York City Police Department and has been an officer for 11 years. At the beginning of the first film, he is recently separated from his wife Holly Gennero (Bonnie Bedelia), who is using her maiden name. Holly moved to Los Angeles several months earlier to pursue a career, leading to their separation when McClane stayed behind (to officially cope with some open cases but unofficially because he didn't expect her to last). They have two children, Lucy and John. On Christmas Eve, McClane visits his wife at her workplace at the Nakatomi Plaza. Simultaneously, Hans Gruber (Alan Rickman) initiates his plan to steal $640 million in bearer bonds and takes the Nakatomi Company employees, including Holly, hostage, posing as terrorists to draw attention away from the theft, their final plan being to blow up the building and make it appear as though they died with the hostages in the explosion. McClane escapes detection and manages to hide throughout the building, killing the terrorists one by one. When McClane meets the terrorists' leader, Hans Gruber, a climactic battle ensues and McClane throws Gruber out the window.
After the events of "Die Hard", McClane moved to Los Angeles, was promoted to lieutenant and was transferred to the Los Angeles Police Department. During this time, McClane appears to have become a national hero. Dialogue in the second film reveals that he was featured in People Magazine, did a spot on Nightline, and was referred to (by Colonel Stuart) as "the policeman hero who saved the Nakatomi hostages" along with a local news crew.
In the second film, "Die Hard 2", which takes place on Christmas Eve, McClane discovers that mercenaries have seized control of Washington Dulles International Airport in Dulles, Virginia, 25 miles west of Washington, D.C.. They take control of the airport's communications and threaten to cause plane crashes unless their demands are met. Holly is traveling on one of the planes and is stranded as her plane circles overhead. McClane discovers a conspiracy between the mercenaries and an active military unit to rescue a notorious dictator from being imprisoned for crimes against humanity. He foils their plans and provides a visual landing signal for the circling aircraft by exploding the plane the villains were using for their exit strategy.
In the third film, "Die Hard with a Vengeance", McClane is back in New York. He is now separated from his wife, suspended from the police force, and a borderline alcoholic. A terrorist who goes only by the name "Simon" (Jeremy Irons) threatens to blow up various locations in the city unless McClane will play his twisted version of Simon says. McClane must solve a number of riddles and challenges in order to keep the bombs from going off. He receives the reluctant help of Zeus Carver (Samuel L. Jackson), a shopkeeper from Harlem who had saved McClane after the first challenge "Simon" had put him through, when Simon forces Carver to continue assisting McClane. The FBI finally reveals that "Simon" is in fact Simon Peter Gruber, the brother of Hans Gruber, who is attempting to kill McClane in revenge for his brother's death in the first film. In a subsequent revelation, McClane discovers that revenge is only a timely and clever cover story to conceal the true purpose behind his terrorist activities: the forced depletion of New York's Federal Reserve, having gained access to the bank during the game by setting off a bomb in a location that damaged the underground vault. With the help of Carver, McClane tracks Simon to the Canadian border. There, in a decisive final confrontation with the latter in a helicopter, McClane puts an end to Simon's plan with a handgun and a power line.
In the fourth film, "Live Free or Die Hard" (Entitled "Die Hard 4.0" in releases outside North America), which takes place on Independence Day, McClane is assigned to take hacker Matt Farrell (Justin Long) into FBI custody (McClane is mentioned as having been on the force for 30 years at the time of this film). In this film his rank, besides being a senior detective, is detective lieutenant. They soon discover that a group of terrorists led by Thomas Gabriel (Timothy Olyphant), are conducting a fire sale, systematically taking out the nation's infrastructure (including power plants, traffic lights, transportation, and financial markets). McClane and his wife are divorced and McClane is not on speaking terms with his daughter, Lucy (Mary Elizabeth Winstead). During the course of the film Lucy is kidnapped by the terrorists as leverage against McClane. McClane's previous actions seem mostly forgotten, as Farrell was unaware of his past and McClane is somewhat cynical about what he did. With help from Farrell, McClane manages to yet again thwart a disaster, Farrell countering Gabriel's hacks while McClane eliminates his men, culminating in McClane shooting through his own shoulder to kill Gabriel. His actions also seem to restore his relationship with his daughter or at least help restore it as the two are back on speaking terms again and Lucy introduces herself as Lucy McClane to Farrell when in the past she introduced herself as Lucy Gennero and apparently told guys her father was dead.
In the fifth film, "A Good Day to Die Hard", McClane travels to Russia, to help his son John, Jr. (Jai Courtney), who has been imprisoned and who has been working for the CIA. Known to McClane as Jack, he has devised a plan to use the ex-partner of a high-ranking Russian official named Chagarin (Sergei Kolesnikov), to bring him down. The partner, Yuri Komarov (Sebastian Koch) is the target of Chagarin, after he is said to have a file that could incriminate Chagarin. McClane confronts Jack and Komarov in the middle of a chase involving Chagarin's thugs. As they went to the CIA safe house, Chagarin's henchmen, led by his main enforcer Alik (Radivoje Bukvić), attacked the safe house, but McClane holds them off allowing himself, Jack and Komarov to escape. They headed to the hotel and got the key to the vault where file Komarov said is kept in, at the ballroom. They also met up with Komarov's daughter Irina (Yuliya Snigir). But she betrays them to Alik. McClane and Jack escaped death as they survived the betrayal. As they go to Chernobyl to rescue Komarov and get the file where it's kept at, McClane and Jack learn that Komarov was actually using them and the vault actaully contains weapons-grade uranium canisters. Komarov had Chagarin assassinated as well. As Jack goes after Komarov, McClane goes after Irina. After Jack kills Komarov, both he and McClane survived the suicide attack by Irina on the helicopter. His actions seem to mend the relationship with his son as Jack shows his repects for his father.
Family.
Holly Gennero.
Holly M. Gennero (formerly Holly M. Gennero-McClane) is the wife of John McClane. Over the course of the series, their relationship becomes more and more strained. They have two children together, Jack and Lucy. Holly is portrayed by actress Bonnie Bedelia in the first two films, "Die Hard" and "Die Hard 2".
In "Die Hard", Holly works at the skyscraper Nakatomi Plaza in Los Angeles, which is home to a Japanese corporation. Her marriage to John has been estranged ever since she took up her new job and he refused to relocate with her from New York. Holly lives in L.A. with their children. They quickly get into an argument over why Holly chooses to use Gennero (her maiden name) at work and are separated for most of the first film while John fights Hans Gruber's terrorists. However in "Die Hard 2", they seem to be on better terms. 
Although Holly does not appear in "Die Hard with a Vengeance", she is mentioned in conversation and McClane makes an attempt to telephone her and her voice is heard briefly on the phone. She still resides in Los Angeles and is still married to McClane. In "Live Free or Die Hard", cyber-terrorist Thomas Gabriel notes that McClane and Holly are divorced.
Lucy Gennero-McClane.
Lucy McClane (also known as Lucy Gennero) is John's daughter, born in 1982. She is played as a child by Taylor Fry in the first "Die Hard" film and as an adult by Mary Elizabeth Winstead in the fourth film "Live Free or Die Hard" and the fifth film "A Good Day to Die Hard". 
In "Live Free or Die Hard", Lucy tells her boyfriend that McClane is dead and styles herself as "Lucy Gennero", using her mother's maiden name. She is later kidnapped by cyberterroist Thomas Gabriel to be used as leverage against McClane, and proves to be resilient, even going so far as to aid McClane by telling him the positions of Gabriel's men, and killing one of them when McClane is incapacitated. By the end of the film, she starts referring to herself as "Lucy McClane". Winstead will reprise her role for a cameo appearance in "A Good Day to Die Hard", where she warns her father "not to screw up" when he travels to Russia. She later calls him while he's in the middle of a car chase and he has to hang up and meets his plane when he returns with Jack and she happily reunites with them. Since "Live Free Or Die Hard" she and John have apparently mended their relationship.
Prior to "Live Free or Die Hard", Lucy was featured in the video game "" where she is a member of the Los Angeles Police Department.
John McClane Jr. (Jack McClane).
John "Jack" McClane Jr. is John's son, who is born in 1984. He briefly appears as a child by Noah Land in the first "Die Hard" movie. 
In "Live Free or Die Hard", cyber terrorist Thomas Gabriel refers to him by the name "Jack". In early drafts of the script of "Live Free or Die Hard", John Jr. was set to be in the film. 
On February 22, 2012, it was announced that Jai Courtney would play on the role of John Jr. (Jack) in the fifth film "A Good Day to Die Hard". Prior to Courtney's casting, Liam Hemsworth, Aaron Paul, James Badge Dale and D.J. Cotrona were considered for the role. 
Jack appears as a CIA agent, stationed in Russia to retrieve Yuri Komarov, a political prisoner who had evidence against Viktor Chagarin via a file at Chernobyl. In order to get close to Komarov, he did an assassination on a Russian millionaire and then requested to testify against Komarov for a shorter sentence. John McClane, having found out about Jack's arrest, and unaware of his mission or his ties to the CIA, ended up arriving in Russia. Similar to Lucy Gennerro-McClane in "Live Free or Die Hard", Jack McClane was estranged with his father. Eventually, he regained some respect for his father and both father and son made amends, and also took down Komarov and Irina upon discovering their true plot of retrieving uranium canisters. Jack personally killed Komarov by throwing him down into the rotorblades of Irina's helicopter after the latter remarked that John McClane will die.
Catchphrase.
Throughout the films, McClane is known for his catchphrase, "Yippee-ki-yay, motherfucker". He frequently says it to taunt his adversaries, or in the moments before killing them. 
McClane adopts the phrase in the first film, "Die Hard", when Hans Gruber—the main antagonist of the film—describes McClane as a "cowboy" and asks if he thinks he stands a chance against Gruber and his accomplices, to which McClane replies, "Yippee-ki-yay, motherfucker". At the end of the film, before his death at the hands of McClane, Gruber echoes the phrase as he prepares to kill McClane before McClane overpowers him.
McClane repeats the phrase in the two following films. At the end of "Die Hard 2", he delivers it before lighting a trail of fuel to destroy the airplane that the antagonists are in, and at the end of "Die Hard with a Vengeance", he says it in a low voice after shooting down the helicopter which the main antagonist, Simon Gruber, is flying.
In the fourth film, "Live Free or Die Hard", McClane is held captive by cyberterrorist Thomas Gabriel. Gabriel taunts him, claiming that McClane's tombstone will read "always in the wrong place in the wrong time", to which McClane replies, "How about 'yippee-ki-yay, motherfu—'?" as he shoots himself to kill Gabriel. The last two syllables are drowned out in the gunshot since there was a significant absence of use of the word "fuck" in the film, the only film in the series to receive a PG-13 rating, before pulling the trigger. In the unrated version, the "Yippee-ki-yay, motherfucker" line was left uncensored before McClane shoots and kills Gabriel through his shoulder.
The fifth film, "A Good Day to Die Hard", features McClane uttering the catchphrase before driving a truck out of an airborne helicopter in the final confrontation in Chernobyl.
Reception.
"Empire" ranked him number 12 on their list of the "100 Greatest Movie Characters of All Time". In a survey by MTV, "accomplished" filmmakers, actors and fans voted on the "Greatest Movie Badass of All Time". McClane came in third, behind only Ellen Ripley and Dirty Harry. In April 2009, "Entertainment Weekly" ranked John McClane sixth in list of the top twenty "All-Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture", describing "Bruce Willis' wisecracking, terrorist-foiling New York cop" character as "the anti-Bond". The magazine called the characters portrayed by Keanu Reeves in "Speed", Wesley Snipes in "Passenger 57", and Jean-Claude Van Damme in "Sudden Death" as "copycat descendants" of John McClane.
Bruce Willis was called "an excellent casting choice as a sardonic action hero."
