Gold Rush (formerly Gold Rush Alaska) is a reality television series that airs on Discovery Channel, with reruns also airing on TLC. The show's third season began airing on October 26, 2012. 
The show focuses on the mining of gold placer deposits found in Alaska and the Klondike, by various teams of miners.
Overview.
Season 1.
The first season (show named Gold Rush: Alaska) featured six men from Sandy, Oregon (a small town 30 miles southeast of Portland) who, due to the economic downturn, have lost their jobs. They decided on an all-stakes gamble – travel to Porcupine Creek, Alaska and prospect for gold. Most of the people on the show have little or no previous gold mining experience and must learn on the job.
Season 2.
For season 2 (show renamed to Gold Rush), Todd missed a lease payment, and "Dakota" Fred Hurt buys the claim out from owner Earl Foster, not needing to break the lease due to the missed payment. The season explores the Hoffman crew's new mine at Quartz Creek, in the Klondike region of the Yukon, Canada as well as "Dakota" Fred's operation at the site of the original Hoffman mine, Porcupine Creek, and Parker Schnabel's attempts to mine his grandfather's property at Big Nugget Mine.
Season 3.
The third season began in October 2012. The Hoffman crew returned to the Klondike to once again mine the Quartz Creek site but also brought on additional crewmen to simultaneously work another site in the area to try to reach a goal of 1000 ounces. Parker Schnabel returned to the Big Nugget Mine site with larger and more efficient equipment while "Dakota" Fred Hurt and his crew returned to the Porcupine Creek site.
Other programming.
Aftershows & Specials.
Numerous "aftershows" and specials have been produced that document behind the scenes action as well as interviews with miners and crew. 
Gold Rush: The Jungle.
Between the second and third seasons Todd Hoffman and several crew members traveled to a remote site in Guyana in South America to determine the feasibility of opening up an operation there during the Klondike offseasons. The trip was covered in a single one hour episode. Although they did discover gold on the claim site, it was not of a sufficient quantity to cover the high expenses of mining the remote site which was accessible only by hiking through a trackless jungle after a harrowing river passage. Given the low probability of profitability, Hoffman chose not to pursue the venture.
Reception.
As of its first season finale, "Gold Rush Alaska" was the most-watched Friday night program in all of US television among males 18-49 and 25-54. For 13 consecutive weeks in its second season, "Gold Rush" continued to hold Friday's top rating in the demographic of men 18-49.
