Lena Headey (born 3 October 1973) is an English actress. Headey's performance in a one-off show when she was 17 caught the attention of a casting agent, who took a photo and asked her to audition. Eventually she got a supporting role alongside Jeremy Irons and Ethan Hawke in the 1992 British drama film "Waterland" and went on to appear with higher-profile actors in major films such as "The Remains of the Day" (1993), "The Jungle Book" (1994), "Onegin" (1999) and "Aberdeen" (2000).
After working steadily as an actress getting small and supporting roles in films throughout the 1990s, she found fame for her lead performances in big-budget films like the fantasy film "The Brothers Grimm" (2005), in which she acted opposite Matt Damon and Heath Ledger, the action period film "300" (2007), portraying the role of Queen Gorgo and the adventure and biographical feature "The Red Baron" (2008).
She is known for playing the starring role Sarah Connor on Fox's television spin-off of James Cameron's "Terminator" film series "" (2008–09). Beginning in 2011, she appeared as Cersei Lannister in HBO's television series "Game of Thrones".
Background.
Headey was born in Bermuda, where her father, John, a Yorkshire police cadet, was stationed. She grew up there and in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire. Headey had her first taste of acting as a pupil at Shelley College and was noticed at 17 when she was spotted performing in a school production at the Royal National Theatre being picked for a role opposite Grant Warnock in the 1992 film "Waterland". 
Headey has suffered bouts of clinical depression since the age of 15 and she said in an interview: "I was diagnosed when I was 15, and it comes and goes. I may suffer from it once or twice a year, but I now recognise it and deal with it. I don't use medication because I'm so worried about becoming dependent on it, but I can understand people who do, because you go through the most horrendous feelings of isolation."
Career.
Early roles.
At the age of 17, Headey performed in a one-off show and afterwards a casting agent took a photo and asked her to audition. Later, she got a supporting role in the British drama "Waterland", in which she had the opportunity to work with actors who had been in the business several years before her. She landed a small role in "The Remains of the Day", which came out in 1993 and received eight Academy Awards nominations.
She played Katherine in Disney's "The Jungle Book", released in 1994. The film had positive reviews and earned nearly $44 million in the United States. Headey, alongside her co-stars received favourable reviews with James Berardinelli praising their "solid performances". On the set of "The Jungle Book", she met her boyfriend of nine years, actor Jason Flemyng.
After a string of film roles, she appeared opposite Vanessa Redgrave in the 1997 romantic drama "Mrs Dalloway". Headey landed a supporting role in a higher-profile film titled "Onegin", which starred Ralph Fiennes and Liv Tyler. The following year, she had the starring role in the drama "Aberdeen". Headey received several good reviews for her performance in the film. She also had roles in 2000's "Gossip" and 2001's "The Parole Officer".
She received the Silver Iris Award for Best Actress at the 2001 Brussels European Film Festival for her role in "Aberdeen". In 2003, she was also nominated for the Chlotrudis Award for Best Actress for her performance. In 2002, she had a role in the mystery drama "Possession" alongside Gwyneth Paltrow and Aaron Eckhart.
Rise to prominence.
Headey co-starred with Matt Damon and Heath Ledger in Terry Gilliam's "The Brothers Grimm", which was released in August 2005. The film received mixed reviews. In an interview Headey spoke about her character in the film: "I loved the fact that she was a tomboy. That is what attracted me to her, that she wasn’t this predictable female character in this big film. You meet her and she is masking who she is. I loved that her environment dictated who she is. She lives and grows up and survives in the forest. Terry and I talked about how her instincts are almost animalistic and she can see 360 degrees around her. She is aware of what is going on. That is how she is grounded. She is of the earth".
In 2005 she starred with actress Piper Perabo in the films "The Cave" and "Imagine Me & You". "The Cave" was not well received by critics and did poorly at the box office.
The British romantic comedy-drama "Imagine Me & You" received a limited release and earned positive reviews. Many critics praised Headey's performance as a lesbian in the film; Mick LaSalle from "San Francisco Chronicle" stated that the actress "has a forthright, irresistible appeal and a face and especially a smile that suggest intelligence, integrity and lots of fun".
Headey played Queen Gorgo in Zack Snyder's "300", based on Frank Miller's graphic novel. Headey had to do nude scenes in the film. "It’s always weird the thought of taking your clothes off in front of 20 people and then to have it projected in front of many more", she told IndieLondon during an interview. "I think it was necessary because we only get that scene to establish their relationship. It is a very obvious moment but I think it does it in quite a beautiful way."
In addition to her film work, Headey starred in Fox's "", a television spin-off of James Cameron's popular "Terminator" franchise. Headey played Sarah Connor from January 2008 to April 2009. The show ran for 31 episodes in two seasons until its cancellation in May 2009. "Variety" praised "Headey's gritty performance as Sarah – managing to be smart, resourceful and tough, yet melancholy and vulnerable as well" and that the Chronicles "continue to deliver", getting "considerable mileage out of the constant peril" facing the characters. She was nominated twice for the Saturn Award for Best Actress on Television for the role.
Low-profile films.
Recent roles include the German film "The Red Baron" (known in Germany as "Der rote Baron"), a biographical film of the legendary World War I fighter pilot Manfred von Richthofen, in which she appeared alongside Matthias Schweighöfer and Joseph Fiennes. Her character was the love interest Käte Otersdorf, a nurse who may or may not have had a romance with Richthofen (Schweighöfer) in real life. She also appeared as the stuffy Miss Dickinson in the 2007 release of the "St. Trinian's" series (for which she received third billing for a relatively minor role). She starred in the Ridley Scott produced "Tell-Tale", a film based on the short story "The Tell-Tale Heart" by Edgar Allan Poe. The movie went straight to DVD on 25 May 2008.
She also starred in the 2008 horror film "The Broken". The film was directed by Academy Award-nominated Sean Ellis. The film was about "a woman who suspects she's being followed around London by a murderous doppelganger". "The Broken" was screened at the midnight portion of the 2008 Sundance Film Festival, and generally got average reviews. Some critics praised Headey's performance, including Kim Koynar of "Cinematical" who wrote that Headey "largely carries the film, and does so quite ably".
She landed the lead part in another horror film titled "Laid to Rest", which was first screened in 2008. However, the film went straight to video on 21 April 2009 and earned mixed reviews. Critic Mark H. Harris for "About.com" stated that the film "has a great look and boasts an impressive cast," referring to both Headey and co-star Thomas Dekker. Headey had a part in a short film called "The Devil's Wedding". She provided her voice for an episode of the Cartoon Network TV show "The Super Hero Squad Show".
2010 onwards.
Headey has wrapped shooting the first two seasons of the HBO series "Game of Thrones", based on the first and second books of the series "A Song of Ice and Fire" by George R.R. Martin, where she plays the cruel queen, Cersei Lannister. She had a guest appearance in the hit TV show "White Collar" in the episode "Taking Account" in which she played the role of Sally. She is nominated for a Scream Award in the category of Best Fantasy Actress.
In 2012, she appeared in the 3D action science-fiction film "Dredd" alongside Karl Urban and Olivia Thirlby. Her character is Madeline Madrigal (Ma-Ma), the leader of a drug dealing gang, and the project's primary villain. "Dredd" is a film adaptation of "2000 AD" character Judge Dredd. The film was directed by Pete Travis with a script by Alex Garland. In May and June 2012, Lena filmed the fantasy adventure movie "Mariah Mundi and the Midas Box" throughout South West England, playing the role of "Monica", the film is schedule for release in 2013.
Media.
She has appeared on the covers of "TV Guide", "g3", "Sunday Mirror" and Germany's "Filmstar". She ranked No. 64 on the "Maxim" magazine Hot 100 of 2007 list. She was listed No. 4, No. 10 and No. 3 in afterellen.com's list Hot 100 in 2007, 2008 and 2009 respectively. In 2008, Headey spoke out against animal abuse in an advert for animal welfare group PETA.
Personal life.
Headey was once engaged to Johnny Cicco, and dated actor Jason Flemyng for nine years. She and Flemyng met during the filming of "The Jungle Book", and she has a tattoo of his name in Thai on her arm. She married musician Peter Loughran in May 2007. Headey and Loughran have a son, Wylie Loughran, who was born on 31 March 2010. Headey and Loughran separated in 2011 and she filed for divorce in Los Angeles Superior Court on 20 July 2012.
She is close friends with actress Piper Perabo. She is a vegetarian, and has campaigned on behalf of animal rights. She practices boxing and yoga. "I also started Bikram Yoga." She said in an interview: "A few years ago I used to box in London and that held me in good stead".
