Richard Starkey (born 7 July 1940), commonly known by his stage name Ringo Starr, is an English musician and actor who gained worldwide fame as the drummer for the Beatles. When the band formed in 1960, Starr was a member of another Liverpool band, Rory Storm and the Hurricanes. He joined the Beatles in August 1962, taking the place of Pete Best. In addition to his drumming, Starr is featured on lead vocals on a number of successful Beatles songs (in particular, "With a Little Help from My Friends", "Yellow Submarine", and the Beatles' version of "Act Naturally"). He is credited as a co-writer of the songs "What Goes On", "Flying", and "Dig It" and as the sole writer of "Don't Pass Me By" and "Octopus's Garden".
As a musically creative drummer for the Beatles, Starr's contribution to their music has received high praise from notable drummers. Starr described himself as "your basic offbeat drummer with funny fills". Drummer Steve Smith said that Starr's popularity "brought forth a new paradigm" where "we started to see the drummer as an equal participant in the compositional aspect" and that Starr "composed unique, stylistic drum parts for the Beatles' songs". In 2011, Starr was picked as the fifth-best drummer of all-time by "Rolling Stone" readers.
Starr is the most documented and critically acclaimed actor among the Beatles, playing a central role in several of their films, and appearing in numerous other films, both during and after his career with them. After their break-up in 1970, Starr achieved solo musical success with several singles and albums, and recorded with each of his fellow ex-Beatles as they too developed their post-Beatle musical careers. He has also been featured in a number of TV documentaries, hosted TV shows, narrated the first two series of the children's television series "Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends" and portrayed "Mr. Conductor" during the first season of the PBS children's television series "Shining Time Station". Since 1989, Starr has toured with twelve variations of Ringo Starr & His All-Starr Band.
Early life.
Ringo Starr was born on 7 July 1940, at 9 Madryn Street, Dingle, Liverpool, Lancashire, England, the son of Elsie (née Gleave) and Richard Starkey, a confectioner. His paternal grandfather was born with the surname "Parkin", and later adopted his stepfather's surname, "Starkey". Starr's parents split up when he was three years old, and his mother married Harry Graves 8 years later, who encouraged Starr's interest in music. When he was three years old, Starr's family moved to a smaller house at 10 Admiral Grove. Starr attended an Evangelical Anglican church during his childhood. He was afflicted by illness for much of his early years. When aged six, he had appendicitis, which developed complications, causing him to fall into a coma. At thirteen, he developed chronic pleurisy and was admitted to a sanatorium, where he stayed for two years. After this extended hospital visit he did not return to school. As a result of the periods of hospitalisation, Starr fell behind his peers scholastically, and as a result he was ineligible to attend a grammar school or even sit its Eleven plus qualifying examination. Earlier, Starr attended St Silas, a Church of England primary school in High Park Street, close to his home in Admiral Grove; singer Billy Fury attended the school at the same time. Later, Starr attended Dingle Vale Secondary Modern School (now Shorefields Technology College), leaving in 1955. While there, he showed an aptitude for art and drama as well as practical subjects including mechanics. Starr's health problems had another enduring effect in the form of allergies and sensitivities to food, and when the Beatles travelled to India in 1968, he took his own food with him.
As with John Lennon, Paul McCartney and George Harrison, Starr became interested in Liverpool's skiffle craze. In 1957, he and his friend Eddie Miles formed the Eddie Clayton Skiffle Group. In 1959, he joined the Raving Texans, now adopting the stage name "Ringo Starr" because of the rings he wore and because it sounded "cowboyish", and his drum solos were billed as "Starr Time". By October 1960, the band was renamed Rory Storm and the Hurricanes, and while they were performing in Hamburg, Starr met the Beatles. On 16 October 1960 he drummed in Hamburg with Lennon, McCartney and Harrison, recording with them for the first time to back Hurricanes' singer Lu Walters.
After returning to the UK, Starr sat in for Pete Best as the Beatles' drummer on 18 August 1961 and 5 February 1962. The Beatles removed Best as their drummer on 16 August 1962, after Best had played in the early recording sessions at EMI Studios.
Starr's first performance as a member of the Beatles was on 18 August 1962, at a Horticultural Society dance at Port Sunlight. After Starr's appearance at the Cavern Club performance the following day, Best's fans were upset at his sacking, holding vigils outside Best's house and fighting at the club, shouting 'Pete forever! Ringo never!' George Harrison received a black eye from one of the fans.
When he arrived at EMI Studios for the second time on 11 September, Starr was surprised to find session drummer Andy White there, having been commissioned by producer George Martin. Using sessions drummers familiar with studio techniques was a regular procedure for studio recordings in those days. Starr's view at the time was that Andy White was brought in because he thought George Martin viewed him as crazy. Of the 4 September rehearsal session, Starr stated, "He Martin thought I was crazy and couldn't play. Because when we were doing 'Please Please Me', I was actually playing the kit and in one hand I had a tambourine and a maracas in the other, because I was trying to play the percussion and the drums at the same time, because we were just a four piece band". Starr also stated, "I thought, 'That's the end, they're doing a Pete Best on me.'"
By 1963, Starr was well known and accepted as the Beatles' drummer. His first mentioning in "The Times" was in context of "Questions for Christmas": "What instrument do the following play: a) Nell Gotkovsky [...] e) Ringo Starr [...] h) Ravi Shankar?"
1962–1970: the Beatles.
Vocals.
Starr generally sang at least one song on each studio album as part of an attempt to establish the vocal personality of all four members. In many cases, Lennon or McCartney wrote the lyrics and melody especially for him, as they did for "Yellow Submarine" from "Revolver" and "With a Little Help from My Friends" on "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band". These melodies were tailored to Starr's limited baritone vocal range. Starr's backing vocals are heard on songs such as "Maxwell's Silver Hammer" and "Carry That Weight". He also is the lead vocalist on "Don't Pass Me By" and "Octopus's Garden", his first and second solo compositions, respectively. In addition, he also sang lead on "I Wanna Be Your Man", "Boys", "Matchbox", "Honey Don't", "Act Naturally", "What Goes On" (on "Rubber Soul", and for which he received co-composing credits along with Lennon and McCartney), and "Good Night" (on the "White Album").
Composition.
Starr's unusual turns of phrase, or "Ringoisms" as they became known, such as "a hard day's night" and "tomorrow never knows", inspired the Beatles, particularly John Lennon, who then turned them into songs. Recalling this, McCartney said, "Ringo would do these little malapropisms, he would say things slightly wrong, like people do, but his were always wonderful, very lyrical ... they were sort of magic". As well as inspiring his bandmates' creativity in this way, Starr occasionally contributed lyrics to unfinished Lennon-McCartney songs, such as the line ""darning his socks in the night when there's nobody there"" in "Eleanor Rigby". Frustrated at times of being the odd man out in the group in regard to songwriting, Starr commented in "The Beatles Anthology" that when he presented a song to the Beatles, it would often sound to the other three Beatles like a popular song of the day. Starr did eventually begin composing, and is credited with "Don't Pass Me By" (on "The White Album") and "Octopus's Garden" (on "Abbey Road") as sole songwriter.
His disgust with the band's tensions and boredom at waiting around to contribute during the sessions for the "White Album" caused him to quit the group temporarily. He spent two weeks with actor Peter Sellers on the latter's yacht, "Amelfis", in Piraeus, where he wrote "Octopus's Garden". When he returned two weeks later, he found that flowers had been placed all over his drum kit. Starr's name also appears as a co-writer for the "Rubber Soul" track "What Goes On" along with Lennon and McCartney, while the songs "Flying" (on the "Magical Mystery Tour" album) and "Dig It" (on "Let It Be") are listed as being written by the entire group. On issued material after the break-up, Starr wrote "Taking a Trip to Carolina" from the second "bonus" CD of "Let It Be... Naked", and received joint songwriting credits with the other three Beatles for "12-Bar Original", "Los Paranoias", "Christmas Time (Is Here Again)", "Suzy Parker" (heard in the "Let It Be" film), "Jessie's Dream" (heard in the "Magical Mystery Tour" film) and the Beatles' version of "Free as a Bird".
1964 illness.
In June 1964, the Beatles were scheduled to tour Denmark, the Netherlands, Asia, Australia and New Zealand. On 3 June, the day before the tour, Starr became ill during an early morning photo session at a portrait studio in Barnes, London. Stricken with a 102-degree fever and tonsillitis, he was rushed to the hospital. This bout with tonsillitis necessitated a stay in hospital and a few days of recuperation at home. During this time, Starr was temporarily replaced for the Sweden, Denmark, Netherlands, Hong Kong and Adelaide concert dates by 24-year-old session drummer Jimmie Nicol. Starr was discharged from the hospital and he rejoined the band in Melbourne on 15 June 1964. Epstein then accompanied Nicol to the Melbourne airport where he gave him a check and a gold Eterna-matic wrist watch inscribed: "From the Beatles and Brian Epstein to Jimmy – with appreciation and gratitude." Ultimately, Starr had his tonsils removed during the Beatles' Christmas holiday period later in the year. Starr later admitted that he feared that he would be permanently replaced during his illness.
Drumming skills.
While Starr himself has been the first to acknowledge the technical limitations of his drumming for the Beatles, the overall effect of his contribution has received high praise from notable drummers. Starr said, "Whenever I hear another drummer I know I'm no good. I'm no good on the technical things ... I'm your basic offbeat drummer with funny fills. The fills were funny because I'm really left-handed playing a right-handed kit. I can't roll around the drums because of that." Martin's version was, "Ringo hit good and hard and used the tom-tom well, even though he couldn't do a roll to save his life", although Martin later added, "He's got tremendous feel. He always helped us to hit the right tempo for a song, and gave it that support — that rock-solid back-beat — that made the recording of all the Beatles' songs that much easier." In 1968, Martin praised Starr's drumming on "Sgt. Pepper," calling him "probably ... the finest rock drummer in the world today." Lennon said, "Ringo's a damn good drummer. He always was a good drummer. He's not technically good, but I think Ringo's drumming is underrated the same way as Paul's bass playing is underrated." McCartney sent Starr a postcard on 31 January 1969 (the day after the band's performance on the roof of Apple Studios), stating: "You are the greatest drummer in the world. Really." Readers of "Rolling Stone" magazine voted Starr as the fifth-greatest drummer of all time.
Many drummers acknowledge Starr as an influence, including Steve Gorman of the Black Crowes, Don Henley of The Eagles, Dave Grohl of Nirvana, Jen Ledger of Skillet, Max Weinberg of the E Street Band, Danny Carey of Tool, Liberty DeVitto of Billy Joel's band, Nicko McBrain of Iron Maiden, Eric Carr of Kiss, Phil Rudd of AC/DC, Orri Páll Dýrason of Sigur Rós, original/former Dream Theater drummer Mike Portnoy, Pedro Andreu of Heroes del Silencio and others.
In his extensive survey of the Beatles' recording sessions, Mark Lewisohn confirmed that Starr was both proficient and remarkably reliable and consistent. According to Lewisohn, there were fewer than a dozen occasions in the Beatles' eight-year recording career where session "breakdowns" were caused by Starr making a mistake, while the vast majority of takes were stopped owing to mistakes by the other three members. Starr is considered to have influenced various modern drumming techniques, such as the matched grip, tuning the drums lower, and using muffling devices on tonal rings, as well as placing the drums on high risers for visibility as part of the band.
For the band's second recording session with Starr as a member on 11 September 1962, producer George Martin replaced the studio-inexperienced Starr with session drummer Andy White to record takes for what would be the two sides of the Beatles' first single, "Love Me Do" backed with "P.S. I Love You". Starr played tambourine on "Love Me Do" and maracas on "P.S. I Love You" for this session. McCartney took over the drums on "Back in the U.S.S.R." and "Dear Prudence" from the "White Album" (1968) after Starr had walked out, and also played the drums on "The Ballad of John and Yoko", recorded on 14 April 1969, since only he and Lennon were immediately available to record the song. Starr commented that he was lucky in being "surrounded by three frustrated drummers".
After the Beatles.
1970s.
After the announcement of the break-up of the Beatles on 10 April 1970, Starr released two albums before the end of that year. "Sentimental Journey" featured Starr's renditions of many pre-rock standards and included the arranger talents of Quincy Jones, Maurice Gibb, George Martin and McCartney, among others. His next album, "Beaucoups of Blues", put Starr in a country context, and included renowned Nashville session musician Pete Drake. He scored hit singles with "It Don't Come Easy" (1971) (U.S. No.4) and "Back Off Boogaloo" (1972) (U.S. No.9), the latter of which was his biggest UK hit, peaking at No.2. He achieved two No.1 hits in the U.S., with "Photograph" (co-written with Harrison) and "You're Sixteen" (written by the Sherman Brothers of "Mary Poppins" fame).
He participated in the Concert for Bangladesh, organised by Harrison in 1971, as well as drumming on Harrison's "All Things Must Pass" and "Living in the Material World", Lennon's "John Lennon/Plastic Ono Band", and Yoko Ono's early solo work. Starr then made his debut as a film director with the T. Rex documentary "Born to Boogie". Starr became firm friends with T. Rex frontman Marc Bolan and during the period of filming the documentary, Starr released the single "Back Off Boogaloo".
In 1971, he started a furniture company with designer Robin Cruikshank. Starr's own avant-garde designs included a flower-shaped table with adjustable petal seats and a donut-shaped fireplace. The 1973 album "Ringo", produced by Richard Perry, with participation by the other three former Beatles on different tracks, was commercially successful. The album "Goodnight Vienna" followed the next year and was also successful. Hits and notable tracks from these two albums included "Photograph" and "You're Sixteen" both reaching number one on the US charts, "Oh My My" (US No.5) and "I'm the Greatest" (written by Lennon) from "Ringo", and "Only You (And You Alone)" (US No.6) and "No No Song" (US No.3) from 1974's "Goodnight Vienna". In late 1975, these singles and others were collected for Starr's first greatest hits compilation, "Blast from Your Past", which was the last album released on Apple Records. During this period he became romantically involved with Lynsey de Paul. He played tambourine on a song she wrote and produced for Vera Lynn, "Don't You Remember When", and he inspired another De Paul song, "If I Don't Get You the Next One Will", which she described as being about revenge after he missed a dinner appointment with her because he was asleep in his office.
Starr's recording career subsequently diminished in commercial impact, although he continued to record and remained a familiar celebrity presence. Starr signed with Atlantic Records in the mid-1970s, and in 1976 the album "Ringo's Rotogravure" was released. Although yielding two minor hit singles, "A Dose of Rock 'n' Roll" (US No.26) and a cover of "Hey! Baby" (US No.74) the album achieved moderate sales but reached a respectable No.28. This caused the label to revamp Starr's formula; the results were a curious blend of disco and 1970s pop. The album "Ringo the 4th" (1977) was a commercial disaster, reaching no higher than No.162 on the charts. Afterward, Starr soon signed with Portrait Records. His stint with Portrait began on a promising note: 1978 saw the release of "Bad Boy", as well as a network TV special. However, neither were very popular, with "Bad Boy" reaching a disappointing No.129 on the US charts. Consequently, Starr did not release another album with Portrait Records.
In 1975, Starr founded his own record label called Ring O'Records, telling "Circus" magazine he thought "the record company thing is going to be a gas". The only thing he didn't like about it was "the contract signing thing. If I had my way, everyone would be tied to my company by word of mouth but the solicitors won't have it." He mentioned the implicit trust the Beatles had in Brian Epstein and "it's that trust I want my artists to have in me." The first album to be produced for the label was a re-make of the "Ringo" album, rearranged for synthesiser by David Hentschel.
The company wound up failing because Ringo didn't like the "going to meetings" aspect of things, saying "you'd usually have meetings to decide about the next meeting". The other problem was – while he thought the company had some good artists – the records weren't selling, therefore it was costing him money. It was for those reasons he had to wind up the company. On 23 July 1989, Ringo Starr & His All-Starr Band gave their first performance to an audience of ten thousand in Dallas, Texas. The band consisted of Starr and a varying assortment of musicians who had been successful in their own right with popular songs at different times. The concerts interchanged Starr's singing, including selections of his Beatles and solo songs, with performances of each of the other artists' well-known material, the latter incorporating either Starr or another musician as drummer.
In 1989, Starr and his daughter Lee Starkey appeared together in a TV ad as part of the "New Generation of Olds" campaign featuring the catchphrase "This is not your father's Oldsmobile."
1990s.
The success of the initial All-Starr tour led to the release of "Ringo Starr and His All-Starr Band", a compilation of live performances from the tour, in the fall of 1990. In the same year, Starr recorded a version of the song "I Call Your Name" for a television special marking the 10th anniversary of John Lennon's death and the 50th anniversary of his birth. The track, produced by Jeff Lynne, features a supergroup composed of Lynne, Tom Petty, Joe Walsh and Jim Keltner.
In 1991, he made an animated appearance as himself in "the Simpsons" episode "Brush with Greatness" and contributed an original song, "You Never Know", to the soundtrack of the John Hughes film "Curly Sue". Starr released his first studio album in nine years, 1992's "Time Takes Time". The album was produced by four of the top producers in music: Phil Ramone, Don Was, Jeff Lynne and Peter Asher, and featured guest appearances by various stars including Brian Wilson and Harry Nilsson.
In 1997, Starr guested on drums on two songs on the McCartney album "Flaming Pie". McCartney had written a song about Starr's ex-wife Maureen Starkey Tigrett ("Little Willow") and asked Starr if he'd play on another ("Beautiful Night"). The day after the "Beautiful Night" session, the two recorded a jam session, which developed into another "Flaming Pie" song, "Really Love You," notable for being the first song ever credited to McCartney/Starkey and officially released on an album. In 1998, he released two albums on the Mercury label. The studio album "Vertical Man" marked the beginning of a nine-year "partnership" with Mark Hudson, who produced the album and, with his band the Roundheads, formed the core of the backing group for the album. In addition, many "famous guests" joined on various tracks, including Martin, McCartney, and—in his final appearance on a Starr album before his death—Harrison. Most of the songs were written by Starr and the band. The Roundheads and Joe Walsh joined Starr for his appearance on "VH1 Storytellers", which was released as an album under the same name. On the show, he performed greatest hits and new songs, and told anecdotes relating to them.
2000s.
In 2000, he appeared in a television commercial for Charles Schwab Investments. As he sits with a group of young musicians trying to find a word that rhymes with "elation", Ringo suggests such financial terms as "dividend reinvestment participation", "market capitalisation" and "asset allocation". As the song "Money" plays in the background, the musicians stare at him in confusion. He finally says, "What? Too many syllables?"
In 2002, Starr was inducted into the Percussive Arts Society Hall of Fame joining an elite group of percussive inductees, which includes Buddy Rich and William F. Ludwig, Sr. and Jr.
On 29 November 2002 (the first anniversary of George Harrison's death), Starr performed "Photograph" and a cover of Carl Perkins' "Honey Don't" at the "Concert for George" held in the Royal Albert Hall, London. According to the official "Concert for George" website, "Ringo Starr caught everyone with a tear in their eye with a rendition of 'Photograph', a composition he wrote with George, which seemed to sum up how everyone felt." The song includes the lines, "Every time I see your face / it reminds me of the places we used to go / But all I've got is a photograph / and I realise you're not coming back any more".
In 2003, Starr formed Pumkinhead Records with All-Starr Band member Mark Hudson. The label was not prolific, but their first signing was Liam Lynch, who produced a 2003 LP entitled "Fake Songs".
Starr was an "honorary Santa Tracker" and voice over for the London stop in Father Christmas's annual Christmas Eve journey in 2003 and 2004 as depicted in the annual NORAD tracks Santa program. According to NORAD officials, he was "a Starr in the east" who helped guide North American Aerospace Defense Command's Santa-tracking tradition.
In September 2005, Liverpool City Council decided to bulldoze 9 Madryn Street, Starr's birthplace, as it had 'no historical significance', despite a previous reprieve back in July. The LCC later announced that the building would be taken apart brick by brick and preserved after all.
In 2006, Starr featured on the Jerry Lee Lewis duet album, "Last Man Standing"; he performed a cover, with Lewis, of Chuck Berry's "Sweet Little Sixteen". It was also announced he would be the star in a Pow! Entertainment animated film and comic book produced by comics creator Stan Lee.
In the 24 December 2007 issue of "Time" (European edition), Starr was profiled in a three-page article focusing on his happiness in life and his music. The article mentioned the "Liverpool 8" album, but only briefly. It also stated that Starr and Dave Stewart were collaborating on writing a musical, to be called "The Hole in the Fence", and discussed Starr's then-upcoming performance in Liverpool on 11 January 2008.
In January 2008, the studio album "Liverpool 8", produced by Dave Stewart, Mark Hudson and Starr himself, was released. Mark Hudson was the initial producer of the record but was replaced by Stewart after a falling out with Starr. (The album's production credits read, "Produced by Ringo Starr and Mark Hudson; Re-Produced by Ringo Starr and David Stewart." All of the songs but one were written with members of the Roundheads, although Stewart also has several co-writing credits.) Starr's attorney Bruce Grakal told journalist Peter Palmiere that the partnership between Hudson and Starr was over and they would never work together again. This happened after Hudson dropped out of the 2006 tour as musical director to do the TV show "".
According to Palmiere, Hudson now claims that the split was over Starr's insistence on using synthesised sounds, for which Stewart is known, whereas Hudson wanted real guitars, pianos, strings etc.
On 10 October 2008, Starr posted a video on his website stating that he would not be signing autographs after 20 October 2008. He stated that he is too busy and that anything after that date sent to any address will not be signed.
On 4 April 2009, Starr reunited with McCartney at the David Lynch "Change Begins Within" Benefit Concert at Radio City Music Hall. After separate performances from Starr and other artists, McCartney's set came last, and towards the end he announced "Billy Shears", whereupon Starr joined him to perform "With a Little Help from My Friends" and, with all performers, "I Saw Her Standing There" and "Cosmically Conscious". In late May 2009, it was announced that Starr will collaborate with Bob Dylan and Paul McCartney to record some new tracks to record an entire album. 
Starr appeared on-stage at Microsoft's 1 June 2009 E3 press conference with Yoko Ono, McCartney and Olivia Harrison to promote "" video game.
Starr remains the only Beatle not to top the UK singles charts as a solo artist, although he did chart two number one singles in the US. He is also the only Beatle not to top the UK album listings, his highest position being No.7, achieved in the UK with both "Sentimental Journey" and "Ringo"; the latter reached No.2 in the US charts, giving Starr his highest album position there. In the USA, Starr's Apple singles fared rather well. Of all four members of The Beatles – in their respective solo careers – he has the second most consecutive top ten singles in the US with seven in a row: "It Don't Come Easy" (No.4), "Back Off Boogaloo" (No.9), "Photograph" (No.1), "You're Sixteen" (No.1), "Oh My My" (No.5), "Only You (And You Alone)" (No.6) and "No No Song" (No.3). McCartney has the most with eight in a row.
In November 2009, Starr once again performed the voice of Thomas the Tank Engine for "The Official BBC Children in Need Medley". This is the first No.1 UK hit Starr has been involved in since the Beatles disbanded in 1970 (not counting guest appearances on other singles by other artists).
2010s.
On 12 January 2010, he released his fifteenth studio album "Y Not". On 13 January 2010, Starr and his band performed "Walk With You" from the album on "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart", and closed out the show with a rousing rendition of "With a Little Help from My Friends". Starr also appeared on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", performing with Ben Harper. Starr was also featured on "The Jay Leno Show", where he played "The Other Side of Liverpool". On 22 January 2010, Starr appeared on "" as a Celebrity phone operator. Starr appeared at the 52nd Grammy Awards with Norah Jones to present 'Record Of The Year' to Kings Of Leon on 31 January 2010.
On 11 April 2010, Starr appeared on "Weekend Wogan", a live radio show on BBC 2 Radio presented by Sir Terry Wogan, to promote his album "Y Not" in the UK and on 12 April 2010 he appeared on "Loose Women", a lunchtime chat show on ITV. On 13 April 2010 Starr appeared on CNN's "Connect the World" on CNN International. On 7 July 2010, Starr celebrated his 70th birthday at Radio City Music Hall, New York with another All-Starr Band concert, topped with friends and family joining him on stage including Yoko Ono and his son Zak, and Paul McCartney as a surprise guest.
On 13 May 2011, Starr appeared on "The One Show" on BBC One, where he announced that he was working on a new album featuring a song called "In Liverpool". Starr contributed a cover of Buddy Holly's "Think It Over" for the tribute album "", which was released on 6 September 2011. On 30 January 2012, he released the album, "Ringo 2012". On 27 March 2012 was released Ray Wylie Hubbard's new album "The Grifter's Hymnal", on which Ringo also played.
In late 2012, Ringo announced that his All-Starr Band will tour the Pacific Rim during 2013 with select dates in New Zealand, Australia and Japan, for the first time since 1996 in Japan and the first time ever in New Zealand and Australia.
Personal life.
Starr married Maureen Cox on 11 February 1965 and they had three children: Zak (born 13 September 1965), Jason (born 19 August 1967) and Lee (born 11 November 1970). The couple divorced in 1975, and Cox died in 1994. In 1980, on the set of the film "Caveman", he met actress Barbara Bach, well known for her role as Major Anya Amasova (female lead and main 'Bond girl') in "The Spy Who Loved Me". They were married on 27 April 1981, just a few weeks after the release of "Caveman". In 1985, Starr was the first of The Beatles to become a grandfather upon the birth of Zak's daughter, Tatia Jayne Starkey.
Zak Starkey is also a drummer, who until August 2008 was a semi-official member of Oasis—one of the many bands influenced by the Beatles. Starr arranged for Zak to receive drumming instruction from Zak's idol, the Who's drummer Keith Moon, who was Zak's godfather and a close friend of Starr's. Zak also performs with the Who live (such as during the Super Bowl XLIV Halftime show in 2010) and sometimes in the studio. Zak has performed with his father during some All-Starr Band tours. 
Like fellow ex-Beatle McCartney, Starr is a vegetarian, albeit for different reasons. McCartney is vegetarian for ethical reasons, but in Starr's case it is because of stomach problems he had in the past. As a child, Starr was left-handed until he became ambidextrous when his grandmother forced him to write with his right hand because she thought it was a witch spell for people to be left handed.
In the Sunday Times Rich List 2011, Starr was listed at number 56 with an estimated personal wealth of £150m. Starr and Bach split their time between homes in Cranleigh, Surrey; Los Angeles; and Monte Carlo.
Films.
Aside from the Beatles' films "A Hard Day's Night" (1964), "Help!" (1965), "Magical Mystery Tour" (1967), "Yellow Submarine" (1968), "Let It Be" (1970), Starr has acted in several films such as "Candy" (1968), "The Magic Christian" (1969) (alongside Peter Sellers), "Blindman" (1971), "Son of Dracula" (1974) and "Caveman" (1981).
Starr directed and appeared in "Born to Boogie" (1972), a concert film featuring Marc Bolan and T.Rex.
For the 1979 documentary film on the Who, "The Kids Are Alright", Starr appeared in interview segments with fellow drummer Keith Moon. He starred as Larry the Dwarf in Frank Zappa's "200 Motels" (1971). His voice is also featured in Harry Nilsson's animated film "The Point!" (1971).
He appeared in "The Last Waltz", the Martin Scorsese film about the 1976 farewell concert of the Band, a favourite of the Beatles.
He co-starred in "That'll Be the Day" (1973) as a Teddy Boy. He played 'The Pope' in Ken Russell's "Lisztomania" (1975), and a fictionalised version of himself in the Paul McCartney-penned "Give My Regards to Broad Street" in 1984.
In 1972, Ringo made a brief cameo appearance in a "Monty Python's Flying Circus" episode called "Mr. and Mrs. Brian Norris' Ford Popular". Starr also appeared as himself, and downtrodden alter-ego Ognir Rrats, in "Ringo" (1978), an American-made television comedy film based loosely on "The Prince and the Pauper".
Awards and recognition.
In the Queen's Birthday Honours of 12 June 1965, Starr and the three other Beatles were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire (MBE); they received their insignia from Queen Elizabeth II at an investiture at Buckingham Palace on 26 October. He and the other Beatles were cumulatively nominated for a BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer for their performances in the 1964 film "A Hard Day's Night". The Beatles won the Academy Award for 'Best Original Song Score' for the 1970 film "Let It Be". Each Beatle received an Oscar statuette.
The minor planet 4150 Starr, discovered on 31 August 1984 by Brian A. Skiff at the Anderson Mesa Station of the Lowell Observatory, was named in his honour. Starr was nominated for a 1989 Daytime Emmy Award for 'Outstanding Performer in a Children's Series' for his role as Mr. Conductor in the television series "Shining Time Station".
All four of the Beatles were elected to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame when the group was inducted in 1988. Since then, Lennon (1994), McCartney (1999) and Harrison (2004) have been inducted for their solo careers as well. As of 2012, Starr remains the only Beatle not inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame for his solo career, though it had been announced on 5 September 2007 that he would be on the ballot for membership. 
During the 50th Grammy Awards, Starr, George Martin and Giles Martin accepted the Best Compilation Soundtrack award for "Love". On 9 November 2008, Starr accepted a Diamond Award on behalf of the Beatles during the 2008 World Music Awards ceremony in Monaco. On 8 February 2010, Starr was honoured with the 2,401st star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame by the Hollywood Chamber of Commerce. It is located at 1750 North Vine Street, in front of the Capitol Records building, as are the stars for Lennon, McCartney and Harrison.
All-Starr Band editions.
To date, Starr has toured with eleven versions of his All-Starr Band, where "everybody on stage is a star in their own right." The band has consistently toured for over a decade, and, in similar fashion to Bill Wyman's Rhythm Kings, rotates its line-up depending on the musicians' projects at a given time.
External links.
