David Khari Webber "Dave" Chappelle (; born August 24, 1973) is an American comedian, screenwriter, television/film producer, actor, and artist. Chappelle began his film career in the film "" in 1993 and continued to star in minor roles in the films "The Nutty Professor", "Con Air", and "Blue Streak". His first lead role in a film was in "Half Baked" in 1998. In 2003, he became widely known for his popular sketch comedy television series, "Chappelle's Show", which ran until his abrupt retirement from the show in 2005. Chappelle is ranked forty-third in "Comedy Central Presents: 100 Greatest Stand-Ups of All Time".
Early life.
Chappelle was born David Khari Webber Chappelle in Washington, D.C. on August 28, 1973. His father, William David Chappelle III, was a professor at Antioch College in Yellow Springs, Ohio. His mother, Yvonne (née Reed), was a professor at Howard University, Prince George's Community College, and the University of Maryland and is also a Unitarian Universalist minister. Chappelle grew up in Silver Spring, Maryland and attended Woodlin Elementary School. During young Chappelle's formative years, his comic inspiration came from various comedians, particularly Eddie Murphy and Richard Pryor.
After his parents separated, Chappelle stayed in Washington with his mother while spending summers with his father in Ohio. In 1991, he graduated from Washington's Duke Ellington School of the Arts where he studied theatre arts.
Chappelle moved to New York City to pursue a career as a comedian. He gathered the courage to perform at Harlem's famed Apollo Theater in front of the infamous "Amateur Night" audience. The performance resulted in him being booed off the stage. Chappelle has described the experience as the moment that gave him the courage to continue his show business aspirations. He quickly made a name for himself on the New York comedy circuit, even performing in the city's parks. At the age of 19, Chappelle made his film debut as "Ahchoo" in Mel Brooks' "". In the same year, Chappelle was offered the role of Benjamin Buford "Bubba" Blue in "Forrest Gump". Concerned the character was demeaning and the movie would bomb, he turned down the part. He parodied the film in the 1997 short "Bowl of Pork," where a dim-witted black man is responsible for the Rodney King beating, the LA riots and OJ Simpson being accused of murder. Chappelle played another supporting movie role in the 1994 film "Getting In".
He attracted the attention of TV network executives and developed numerous pilots but none of them were picked up for series. In 1995, he made a guest appearance in an episode of ABC's highly rated sitcom "Home Improvement". The storyline had Chappelle and real-life friend and comedian Jim Breuer ask Tim Taylor for advice on their girlfriends. The characters' single outing in the episode proved so popular that ABC decided to give them their own spin-off sitcom titled "Buddies". However, after taping a pilot episode, Jim Breuer was fired and replaced with actor Christopher Gartin. "Buddies" premiered in March 1996 to disappointing ratings. The show was cancelled after only four episodes out of thirteen that were produced. Nine years later, in May 2005, ten of the episodes were released on a single-disc DVD to capitalize on Chappelle's new-found fame.
After the failure of "Buddies", Chappelle starred in another pilot. According to Chappelle, the network was uncomfortable with the African-American cast and wanted white actors added. Chappelle resisted and subsequently accused the network of racism. Shortly after this incident, Chappelle's father died. Chappelle returned to Ohio and considered leaving the entertainment business.
He later appeared as a nightclub comedian in the 1996 comedy "The Nutty Professor" starring Eddie Murphy, one of his major comedic influences. He also had a minor role in 1997's "Con Air". At the beginning of 1998, he did a stand-up performance for HBO Comedy Half-Hour. He and Neal Brennan co-wrote the 1998 cult stoner film "Half Baked", Chappelle's first starring role, about a group of marijuana-smoking friends trying to get their friend out of jail. That same year, he appeared in "Pilots and Pens Lost", a 1998 episode of "The Larry Sanders Show"'s sixth season, in which he and the executives of the show's nameless television network satirized the treatment to which scriptwriters and show creators were subjected, as well as the executives' knee-jerk tendencies toward racial stereotypes. In December of that year Chappelle appeared as Tom Hanks' friend and confidant in "You've Got Mail". In 1999, he appeared in the Martin Lawrence film "Blue Streak".
In 2000, Chappelle recorded his first hour-long HBO special, "Dave Chappelle: Killin' Them Softly", in Washington, DC. He followed this up with an appearance as "Conspiracy Brother" in the 2002 racial satire "Undercover Brother".
2003–2006: Standup and "Chappelle's Show".
In 2003, Chappelle debuted his own weekly sketch comedy show on Comedy Central called "Chappelle's Show". The show parodied many aspects of American culture including racial stereotypes, politics and pop culture. Along with comedy skits, the show also featured musical performances by mostly hip-hop and soul artists.
Chappelle's pointed social and political commentary quickly helped the show garner critical and commercial success as well as controversy. Richard Pryor, one of Chappelle's comedic influences, was a fan of the show and stated that he had "passed the torch" to Chappelle. Chappelle received two Emmy nominations for the show. Additionally, the DVD set became the best-selling DVD of a television show to date, overtaking the previous best-selling, "The Simpsons" first season DVD. It had sold over 3 million copies. Due to the show's popularity, Comedy Central's parent company Viacom reportedly offered Chappelle a $55 million contract (giving Chappelle a share of DVD sales) to continue production of "Chappelle's Show" for two more years while allowing him to do side projects. Chappelle had stated that sketches are not his favorite form of comedy, and that the characteristics of the show's format were somewhat like short films.
In June 2004, based on the popularity of the "Rick James" sketch, it was announced that Chappelle was in talks to portray Rick James in a biopic from Paramount Pictures (also owned by Viacom). James's estate disagreed with the proposed comical tone of the film and put a halt to the talks.
In 2004, Chappelle recorded his second comedy special, this time airing on Showtime - "Dave Chappelle: For What It's Worth", at San Francisco's Fillmore Auditorium.
Season three turbulence.
Season 3 was scheduled to air on May 31, 2005, but in that month, Chappelle stunned fans and the entertainment industry when he abruptly left during production of the third season of "Chappelle's Show" and took a trip to South Africa. Chappelle has since stated that he was unhappy with the direction the show had taken.
Return.
In June 2005, Chappelle performed impromptu stand-up shows in Los Angeles. He then went on a tour that began in Newport, Kentucky, not far from his Ohio home. He also made a surprise appearance on HBO's "Def Poetry" where he performed two poems, titled "Fuck Ashton Kutcher" and "How I Got the Lead on "Jeopardy!."" He was interviewed for "Inside the Actors Studio" on December 18, 2005 at Pace University's Michael Schimmel Center for the Arts. The show premiered on February 12, 2006. Chappelle stated that the death of his father in 1998 had an impact on his decision to go to South Africa. By throwing himself into his work, he had not taken a chance to mourn his father's death. He also said the rumors that he was in drug or psychiatric treatment only persuaded him to stay in South Africa.
Chappelle also said that he felt some of his sketches were "socially irresponsible." He singled out the "pixie sketch" in which pixies appear to people and encourage them to reinforce stereotypes of their races. In the sketch, Chappelle is wearing blackface and is dressed as a character in a minstrel show. According to Chappelle, during the filming of the sketch, a white crew member was laughing in a way that made him feel uncomfortable and made him rethink the show. Chappelle said, "it was the first time I felt that someone was not laughing with me but laughing at me."
During these interviews, Chappelle did not rule out returning to "Chappelle's Show" to "finish what we started," but promised that he would not return without changes to the production, such as a better working environment. He also stated he would like to donate half of the DVD sales to charity. Chappelle expressed disdain at the possibility of his material from the unfinished third season being aired, saying that to do so would be "a bully move," and that he would not return to the show if Comedy Central were to air the unfinished material. On July 9, 2006, Comedy Central aired the first episode of "". An uncensored DVD release of the episodes was made available on July 25.
The show still plays in syndication on several television networks despite the relatively small number of episodes compared to most American syndicated television programs.
"Dave Chappelle's Block Party".
Chappelle was the star and producer of the Michel Gondry-directed documentary "Dave Chappelle's Block Party", which chronicles a Chappelle-hosted concert in the Clinton Hill neighborhood of Brooklyn on September 18, 2004. Several musical artists, including Kanye West, The Roots, Erykah Badu, Mos Def, Dead Prez and Jill Scott are featured in the movie both performing in the concert and in conversation off-stage. The most surprising highlight of the event was the "last minute" reunion of popular 1990s hip hop group The Fugees. Chappelle toured several cities in February and March 2006 to promote the film under the moniker "Block Party All-Stars featuring Dave Chappelle". Universal Pictures' genre division Rogue Pictures released the film in the United States on March 3, 2006.
2007–present.
In April 2007, Chappelle set a stand-up endurance record at the Laugh Factory Sunset Strip comedy club, beating comedian Dane Cook's record of 3 hours and 50 minutes. In December of the same year, Chappelle broke his own record with a time of 6 hours and 12 minutes. Cook reclaimed the record in January 2008, with a time of 7 hours. On November 19, 2009 Chappelle performed at the Laugh Factory in Los Angeles, where it was speculated that he would aim to take back the record. However, he was disqualified according to the club owner after he left the stage five hours into his routine.
Chappelle again appeared on "Inside the Actors Studio" and in celebration of the show's 200th episode, he humorously interviewed the show's usual host, James Lipton. The episode aired on November 11, 2008.
Personal life.
Chappelle lives with his wife Elaine, two sons, Sulayman and Ibrahim, and daughter Sonal, on a farm, just outside Yellow Springs, Ohio. He also owns several houses in Xenia, Ohio. Regarding his home in Yellow Springs, Ohio, Chappelle said at a blues and jazz festival in the town in mid-September 2006: "Turns out you don't need $50 million to live around these parts, just a nice smile and a kind way about you. You guys are the best neighbors ever. That's why I came back and that's why I'm staying."
Chappelle converted to Islam in 1998. He told "Time Magazine" in a May 2005 interview, "I don’t normally talk about my religion publicly because I don’t want people to associate me and my flaws with this beautiful thing. And I believe it is beautiful if you learn it the right way."
