DC Universe Animated Original Movies are direct-to-video film projects being created by Warner Premiere, Warner Bros. Animation, and DC Comics. Currently, fifteen feature-length films have been released with additional films slated for release. The first film was released in 2007 and in each year since two to three have been released. Additionally, five short films have been released.
Released projects.
"Superman: Doomsday".
The first of these projects was "Superman: Doomsday", which was loosely based on the popular 1992–1993 storyline "The Death of Superman" where Superman fights Doomsday in a duel to the death. It was released on September 21, 2007.
The film features the voice talents of Adam Baldwin as Superman, Anne Heche as Lois Lane, Adam Wylie as Jimmy Olsen, Ray Wise as Perry White, Swoosie Kurtz as Martha Kent, James Marsters as Lex Luthor, Cree Summer as Mercy Graves, John DiMaggio as Toyman, Tom Kenny as the Robot that works at the Fortress of Solitude, and a voice cameo by Kevin Smith as a grumpy man. The film received generally positive reviews.
"Justice League: The New Frontier".
"Justice League: The New Frontier" was based on Darwyn Cooke's 2003–2004 graphic novel "" where the heroes of Earth unite to take on an evil entity called the Centre. It was released on February 26, 2008.
The film features the voice talents of David Boreanaz as Hal Jordan/Green Lantern, Kyle MacLachlan as Superman, Lucy Lawless as Wonder Woman, Neil Patrick Harris as Barry Allen/Flash, Jeremy Sisto as Batman, Miguel Ferrer as Martian Manhunter, Brooke Shields as Carol Ferris, Phil Morris as King Faraday, Kyra Sedgwick as Lois Lane, Vicki Lewis as Iris West, Alan Ritchson as Aquaman, and Keith David as The Centre. Also, Joe Alaskey briefly voices Bugs Bunny in one scene where Martian Manhunter was taking on different shapes when watching television.
"Batman: Gotham Knight".
Tying into the release of the 2008 Batman film "The Dark Knight", "Batman: Gotham Knight" is an anthology film that tells a series of stories that take place between 2005's "Batman Begins" and "The Dark Knight", though it is not officially considered to be part of Christopher Nolan's "Batman" film series. The film was the first to feature Batman using authentic Japanese anime from four different Japanese animation studios. Notable comic talents such as Brian Azzarello, David S. Goyer, and Greg Rucka contributed stories. It was released on July 8, 2008.
Veteran Batman voice actor Kevin Conroy returned once again to play Batman with the voice talents of Jim Meskimen as Lieutenant Gordon and Deadshot, Gary Dourdan as Crispus Allen, Ana Ortiz as Anna Ramirez, David McCallum as Alfred Pennyworth, Parminder Nagra as Cassandra, Rob Paulsen as Sal Maroni, Corey Burton as Scarecrow, Kevin Michael Richardson as Lucius Fox, Jason Marsden as Thomas Wayne, Andrea Romano as Martha Wayne, and George Newbern as the Man in Black that Batman fights in the first story.
"Wonder Woman".
The solo "Wonder Woman" film dealt primarily with the origin story of Diana of Themyscira and how she became the recognizable superheroine Wonder Woman. Much of the structure of the origin story was borrowed from George Pérez's post-"Crisis on Infinite Earths" comics 1987 relaunch entitled "Gods and Mortals". Before screenwriter Michael Jelenic was brought on board for rewrites, the original script was written by former monthly "Wonder Woman" scribe Gail Simone. It was released on March 3, 2009.
The film features the voice talents of Keri Russell as Wonder Woman, Nathan Fillion as Steve Trevor, Virginia Madsen as Queen Hippolyta, Alfred Molina as Ares, Oliver Platt as Hades, Vicki Lewis as Persephone, Jason C. Miller as Thrax, John DiMaggio as Deimos, Rosario Dawson as Artemis, David McCallum as Zeus, Marg Helgenberger as Hera, and Rick Overton as the President. It was also received positively.
"Green Lantern: First Flight".
Lauren Montgomery returned from "Wonder Woman" to direct "Green Lantern: First Flight". According to Montgomery, "It’s a cop-thriller set in outer space, with very little time spent on Earth. It’s a training day sort of story where the veteran (Sinestro) space cop meets the rookie (Hal Jordan) space cop, but because the veteran has been ‘around the block’ it may have skewed his perspective a bit." The film focuses on Hal Jordan and his relationship with veteran Green Lantern Sinestro, and their relationship as pupil and teacher, until Sinestro betrays the Green Lantern Corps. It was released on July 28, 2009.
The film features the voice talents of Christopher Meloni as Hal Jordan, Victor Garber as Sinestro, Olivia d'Abo as Carol Ferris, Kurtwood Smith as Kanjar Ro, Michael Madsen as Kilowog, Tricia Helfer as Boodikka, David Lander as Ch'p, William Schallert as Appa Ali Apsa, Larry Drake as Ganthet, Malachi Throne as Ranakar, Kath Soucie as Arisia Rrab, and John Larroquette as Tomar-Re. Like its predecessors, the animated film also had a positive reception.
"Superman/Batman: Public Enemies".
"Superman/Batman: Public Enemies" is based on the first story arc, "The World's Finest", from the "Superman/Batman" monthly comic book title from 2003–2004 by Jeph Loeb and Ed McGuinness. President Lex Luthor uses the oncoming trajectory of a Kryptonite asteroid to frame Superman for the "pending destruction of the planet" and declares a $1 billion bounty on the heads of the Man of Steel and his “partner in crime,” Batman. Superheroes and super villains alike launch a relentless pursuit of Superman and Batman, who must unite to stave off the action-packed onslaught, stop the asteroid, and uncover Luthor’s devious plot. It was released on September 29, 2009.
A significant feature has Tim Daly, Kevin Conroy, Clancy Brown, and C.C.H. Pounder reprising their roles of Superman, Batman, Lex Luthor, and Amanda Waller from ', ', "Justice League" and "Justice League Unlimited". The film also features the voice talents of Xander Berkeley as Captain Atom, LeVar Burton as Black Lightning, Allison Mack as Power Girl, Ricardo Chavira as Major Force, a credit-only Jennifer Hale as Starfire, an uncredited Michael Gough as Hawkman, Corey Burton as Captain Marvel, John C. McGinley as Metallo, and Calvin Tran as the Japanese Toyman. It was also received positively.
"Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths".
Loosely based on Grant Morrison's 2000 comic book "", "Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths" dealt with a heroic Lex Luthor from an alternate universe appearing to recruit the Justice League to help save his Earth from the Crime Syndicate, a gang of villainous characters who are essentially evil versions of the Justice League. What ensues is the ultimate battle of good versus evil in a war that threatens both planets and, through a devious plan launched by Owlman, puts the balance of all existence in peril. The film was originally brought up as a possible return to the "Justice League Unlimited" animated series with the title "Justice League: Worlds Collide". However, when that series ended, the idea was modified into "Justice League: Crisis on Two Earths" by mostly retaining the same plot, but removing connections to the TV series. It was released on February 23, 2010.
The film features the voice talents of Mark Harmon as Superman, William Baldwin as Batman, Vanessa Marshall as Wonder Woman, Josh Keaton as Flash, Nolan North as Green Lantern and Power Ring, Jonathan Adams as Martian Manhunter, Brian Bloom as Ultraman, Gina Torres as Superwoman, James Woods as Owlman, James Patrick Stuart as Johnny Quick, Chris Noth as the heroic Lex Luthor, and Bruce Davison as President Slade Wilson.
"Batman: Under the Red Hood".
"Batman: Under the Red Hood" was written by comic book scribe Judd Winick. This was an adaptation of Winick's story "" from 2005 in the main "Batman" title, featured in issues #635-641. It was released on July 27, 2010.
The film features the voice talents of Bruce Greenwood as Batman, Jensen Ackles as Red Hood/Jason Todd, Neil Patrick Harris as Nightwing, John DiMaggio as Joker, Wade Williams as Black Mask, Jason Isaacs as Ra's al Ghul, Kelly Hu as Ms. Li, and Jim Piddock as Alfred Pennyworth.
"Superman/Batman: Apocalypse".
"Superman/Batman: Apocalypse", a sequel in the Superman/Batman series, was confirmed for 2010 after the positive sales of "Superman/Batman: Public Enemies". "Superman/Batman: Apocalypse" is based on the second story arc, "The Supergirl from Krypton", from the "Superman/Batman" monthly comic book title from 2004 by Jeph Loeb and Michael Turner. It was released on September 28, 2010.
A significant feature has Tim Daly, Kevin Conroy, Susan Eisenberg, and Edward Asner reprising their roles of Superman, Batman, Wonder Woman, and Granny Goodness from ', ', "Justice League" and "Justice League Unlimited". The film also features the voice talents of Andre Braugher as Darkseid, Summer Glau as Supergirl, Julianne Grossman as Big Barda, Rachel Quaintance as Lyla and Artemis, Andrea Romano as Stompa, Tara Strong as Lashina, and Salli Saffioti as Gilotina and Mad Harriet.
"All-Star Superman".
"All-Star Superman" is an adaptation of Grant Morrison and Frank Quitely's 2005–2008 comic book "All-Star Superman". It was written by writer Dwayne McDuffie and directed by Sam Liu. It was released on February 22, 2011.
The film features the voice talents of James Denton as Superman, Christina Hendricks as Lois Lane, Anthony LaPaglia as Lex Luthor, Edward Asner as Perry White, Obba Babatundé as a judge, Steven Blum as Atlas, John DiMaggio as Samson, Linda Cardellini as Nasthalthia "Nasty" Luthor, Frances Conroy as Martha Kent, Alexis Denisof as Dr. Leo Quintum, Michael Gough as Parasite, Matthew Gray Gubler as Jimmy Olsen, Finola Hughes as Lilo, Kevin Michael Richardson as Steve Lombard, and Arnold Vosloo as Bar-El.
"Green Lantern: Emerald Knights".
"Green Lantern: Emerald Knights", similar to "Batman: Gotham Knight", is an anthology film that tells a series of stories featuring various members of the Green Lantern Corps, including Abin Sur, Sinestro, Kilowog, and Mogo It was released on June 7, 2011. While not a direct sequel to "First Flight", the film uses the same character designs and includes a cameo by Ch'p, who had a speaking role in the previous film.
The film features the voice talents of Nathan Fillion as Hal Jordan, Elisabeth Moss as Arisia Rrab, Jason Isaacs as Sinestro, Kelly Hu as Laira, Henry Rollins as Kilowog, Roddy Piper as Bolphunga, Arnold Vosloo as Abin Sur, Wade Williams as Deegan, Peter Jessop as Salaak, Bruce Thomas as Atrocitus, and radio commentator Michael Jackson as Ganthet.
"Batman: Year One".
The film is an adaptation of Frank Miller's story "" from 1987 in the main "Batman" title, featured in issues #404–407. It is co-directed by Sam Liu and Lauren Montgomery. It was released on October 18, 2011, the same day as "".
The film features the voice talents of Benjamin McKenzie as Batman, Bryan Cranston as Lt. James Gordon, Eliza Dushku as Selina Kyle/Catwoman, Jon Polito as Gillian B. Loeb, Katee Sackhoff as Detective Sarah Essen, Alex Rocco as Carmine Falcone, Fred Tatasciore as Detective Arnold Flass, Liliana Mumy as Holly Robinson, and Jeff Bennett reprising his role as Alfred Pennyworth from "Young Justice".
"Justice League: Doom".
"Justice League: Doom" is a loose adaptation of Mark Waid's "JLA" story arc, "" wherein the Legion of Doom is formed to eliminate the Justice League using protocols created by Batman to take down the group should its members ever go rogue. The movie was adapted and written by Dwayne McDuffie shortly before his death in February 2011, and is directed by Lauren Montgomery. It was released on February 28, 2012. The film was dedicated in memory of McDuffie.
The film features various actors reprising their roles from ', ', "Justice League", "Justice League Unlimited" and "" respectively including Kevin Conroy as Batman, Tim Daly as Superman, Susan Eisenberg as Wonder Woman, Michael Rosenbaum as the The Flash (Barry Allen instead of Wally West), Carl Lumbly as Martian Manhunter and Ma'alefa'ak, Nathan Fillion as Hal Jordan / Green Lantern, Phil Morris as Vandal Savage, Olivia d'Abo as Star Sapphire, Alexis Denisof as Mirror Master, and David Kaufman as Jimmy Olsen with the voice talents of Bumper Robinson as Cyborg, Carlos Alazraqui as Bane, Paul Blackthorne as Metallo, Claudia Black as Cheetah, Grey DeLisle as Lois Lane, and Robin Atkin Downes as Alfred Pennyworth.
"Superman vs. The Elite".
On July 22, 2011 during a Comic-Con screening of "Batman: Year One", DC announced their 2012 slate of movies. "Superman Versus The Elite" is the second 2012 release and is based on "What's So Funny About Truth, Justice & the American Way?" The film features George Newbern reprising his role as Superman from "Justice League", "Justice League Unlimited", "The Batman", and "", while David Kaufman reprises his role as Jimmy Olsen, It features the voice talents of Pauley Perrette as Lois Lane, Robin Atkin Downes as Manchester Black, Marcella Lentz-Pope as Vera Black, Fred Tatasciore as Perry White, Catero Colbert as Coldcast, Melissa Disney as Menagerie, Andrew Kishino as Hat, and Tara Strong as young Vera Black. The film was directed by Michael Chang and written by Joe Kelly.
"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns".
On April 14, 2011, it was revealed that a two-part animated adaptation of Frank Miller's "The Dark Knight Returns" was in the works. Several previous "Batman" veterans will be involved. The film will feature the voice talents of Peter Weller as Batman, Ariel Winter as Carrie Kelley, Michael Emerson as Joker, Mark Valley as Superman, Wade Williams as Two-Face, Michael McKean as Dr. Wolper, David Selby as Commissioner Gordon, and Gary Anthony Williams as The Mutant Leader. The film was directed by "Man of Steel" storyboarder Jay Oliva. "Part 2" was released on January 29, 2013.
Upcoming projects.
"Superman: Unbound".
At the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con, actress Molly Quinn confirmed that she would be voicing Supergirl in an animated adaptation of the 2008 story arc "Superman: Brainiac" by Geoff Johns and Gary Frank, stating that the film would be released in 2013. Matt Bomer will be voicing Clark Kent/Superman, along with Quinn's "Castle" co-star Stana Katic as Lois Lane and John Noble as Brainiac. Additional voices in the cast include Frances Conroy reprising her role as Martha Kent, Wade Williams as Perry White, Diedrich Bader as Steve Lombard, Stephen Root as Zor-El, and Alexander Gould as Jimmy Olsen.
"Justice League: The Flashpoint Paradox".
On April 25, 2012, DCAU Batman voice actor Kevin Conroy let it slip that he had just recorded his lines for the animated movie version of DC Universe-changing "Flashpoint".
DC Showcase.
"DC Showcase" is a series of short films focusing on DC characters who normally are unable to have a feature unto themselves. They are released as a co-feature with the main DC Universe Animated Original Movies. DC animation producer Alan Burnett has said that most shorts will be ten minutes. All upcoming shorts are to be directed by Joaquim Dos Santos. Expanded versions of the first three shorts were collected in a compilation titled "DC Showcase Original Shorts Collection" which was released on November 9, 2010 along with a new 22-minute short titled "".
Unannounced projects.
Beyond the list of announced projects, creators involved in various levels at DC Comics have brought up names of possible future projects such as a Flash movie. Bruce Timm has stated that he would like to do Aquaman and Green Arrow animated movies, and DC's executive editor Dan DiDio has expressed interest in seeing the popular 2007-2008 "Sinestro Corps War" comic storyline adapted. Timm also expressed a desire to create a Batman film based on "".
Cancelled projects.
"The Teen Titans: The Judas Contract" was planned as the third DC Universe Animated Original Movie, to be released after ' (2007) and ' (2008). It was announced in 2006 but later put on hold. This film was to be based on "The Judas Contract" story from 1984 featured in "Tales of the Teen Titans" #42-44 and "Teen Titans Annual" #3 by Marv Wolfman and George Pérez. Warner Brothers Animation writer/producer Bruce Timm confirmed in April 2010 that there were no current plans to revive the project.
With the slower sales of the Wonder Woman film, plans for a sequel were shelved, as well as a planned animated film based on the 2003 mini-series "". Timm has also said that there are no plans for an Aquaman film.
