"Snow White" is a German fairy tale known across much of Europe and today one of the most famous fairy tales worldwide. The original version collected by the Brothers Grimm in 1812 is entitled as (in modern orthography "Schneewittchen") as tale no. 53. The final version of the tale was finished in 1857 under consisting title and registration number. 
The fairy tale features such elements as the magic mirror, the poisoned apple, the glass coffin, and the seven dwarfs, who were first given individual names in the Broadway play "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" (1912) and then given different names in Walt Disney's 1937 film "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs". The Grimm story, which is commonly referred to as "Snow White", should not be confused with the story of "Snow White and Rose Red" (in German ""Schneeweißchen und Rosenrot""), another fairy tale collected by the Brothers Grimm.
In the Aarne-Thompson folklore classification, tales of this kind are grouped together as type 709, Snow White. Others of this kind include "Bella Venezia", "Myrsina", "Nourie Hadig" and "Gold-Tree and Silver-Tree".
Story.
At the beginning of the story, a queen sits sewing at an open window during a winter snowfall when she pricks her finger with her needle, causing three drops of blood fall onto the snow on the ebony window frame. Admiring the beauty of the resulting color combination, she says to herself: "Oh, how I wish that I had a daughter that is as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as that wood of the window frame". Soon after, the queen indeed gives birth to a baby girl as white as snow, as red as blood, and with hair as black as ebony. They name her Snow White, and not long after, the queen dies.
After a year has passed, the King takes a new wife, who is beautiful but also unutterably wicked and vain. The new Queen possesses a magical mirror, which she asks every morning: "Magic mirror in my hand, who is the fairest in that land?". The mirror always replies: "My Queen, you are the fairest in that land." The Queen is always pleased with that, because the magic mirror never lies. But, when Snow White reaches the age of seven, she becomes as beautiful as the day and even more beautiful than the Queen and when the Queen asks her mirror, it responds: "My Queen, you are the fairest here so true. But Snow White is a thousand time more beautiful than you."
This gives the queen a great shock, and she becomes yellow and green with envy, and from that hour her heart turns against Snow White, and with every following day she hates Snow White more and more. Envy and pride, like ill weeds, grow in her heart taller every day, until she has no peace day or night. The Queen orders a huntsman to take Snow White into the deepest woods to be killed. She demands as proof that Snow White is dead, he returns with her lungs and liver. The huntsman takes Snow White into the forest. After raising his knife, he finds himself unable to kill her as she sobs heavily and begs him: "Oh, dear huntsman, don´t kill me! Leave me with my life, I will run into the forest and never come back!". The huntsman leaves her behind alive, convinced that the girl would be eaten by some wild animal. He instead brings the Queen the lungs and liver of a young boar, which is prepared by the cook and eaten by the Queen.
After meandering through the forest for days, Snow White discovers a tiny cottage belonging to a group of seven Dwarfs. Since no one is at home, she eats some of the tiny meals, drinks some wine and then tests all the beds. Finally the last bed is comfortable enough for her and she falls asleep. When the Dwarfs return home, they immediately become aware that someone sneaked in secretly, because everything in their home is in disorder. During their loud discussion about who sneaked in, they discover the sleeping Snow White. The girl wakes up and explains to them what happened and the Dwarfs take pity on her, saying: "If you will keep house for us, and cook, make beds, wash, sew, and knit, and keep everything clean and orderly, then you can stay with us, and you shall have everything that you want." They warn her to be careful when alone at home and to let no one in when they are away delving in the mountains. 
Meanwhile, the Queen asks her mirror once again: "Magic Mirror in my hand, who is the fairest in that land?" The mirror replies: "My Queen, you are the fairest here so true. But Snow White beyond the mountains at the seven Dwarfs is thousand times more beautiful than you." The Queen is horrified to learn that the huntsman has betrayed her and that Snow White is still alive. She keeps thinking about how to get rid of Snow White, then she disguises herself as an old peddler. The Queen then walks to the cottage of the Dwarfs and offers colourful, silky stay-laces and convinces the girl to take the most beautiful stay-lace as a present. Then the Queen laces it so tight that Snow White faints, causing the Queen to leave her for dead. But the Dwarfs return just in time and Snow White revives when the Dwarfs loosen the lace.
Next morning the Queen consults her mirror anew and the mirror reveals Snow White's survival. Now infuriated, the Queen dresses as a comb seller and convinces Snow White to take a beautiful one as a present. She brushes Snow White's hair with a poisoned comb and the girl faints again, but she is revived by the Dwarfs. And the next morning the mirror tells the Queen, that Snow White is still 'thousand times more beautiful' than its mistress. Now the Queen nearly has a cardiac arrest in shock and rage. As a third and last try, she secretly consults the darkest magic and makes a poisoned apple, and in the disguise of a farmer's wife, she offers it to Snow White. The girl is, at first, hesitant to accept it, so the Queen cuts the apple in half, eating the white (harmless) part and giving the red (poisoned) part to Snow White. The girl eagerly takes a bite and falls into a state of suspended animation, causing the Queen to triumph. This time, the Dwarfs are unable to revive the girl, because they can´t find the source of Snow White's poor health and, assuming that she is dead, they place her in a glass coffin.
Time passes, and a Prince traveling through the land sees Snow White. He strides to her coffin, and enchanted by her beauty, instantly falls in love with her. The Dwarfs succumb to his entreaties to let him have the coffin, and as his servants carry the coffin away, they stumble on some roots. The tremor caused by the stumbling causes the piece of poisoned apple to dislodge from Snow White's throat, awakening her. The Prince then declares his love for her, and soon a wedding is planned. The couple invites every Queen and King to come to the wedding party, including Snow White's stepmother. Meanwhile, the Queen, still believing that Snow White is dead, again asks her magical mirror who is the fairest in the land. The mirror says: "You, my Queen, are fair so true. But the young Queen is a thousand times fairer than you."
Appalled in disbelief and with her heart full of fear and doubts, the Queen is, at first, hesitant to accept the invitation, but she eventually decides to go. Not knowing that this new queen was indeed her stepdaughter, she arrives at the wedding, and her heart fills with the deepest of dread when she realizes the truth. As a punishment for her attempted murders, a pair of glowing-hot iron shoes are brought forth with tongs and placed before the Queen. She is forced to step into the burning shoes and to dance until she drops dead. 
Variations.
In their first edition, the Brothers Grimm published the version they had first collected, in which the villain of the piece is Snow White's jealous "mother". In a version sent to another folklorist prior to the first edition, additionally, she does not order a servant to take her to the woods, but takes her there herself to gather flowers and abandons her; in the first edition, this task was transferred to a servant. It is believed that the change to a stepmother in later editions was to tone down the story for children.
Disney's variation of Snow White gave the Dwarfs names and included magical, moving trees and a singing Snow White. 
From other European traditions.
Many other variations of the story exist across Europe. In some of these variations the dwarfs are robbers, while the magic mirror is a dialog with the sun or moon.
In a version from Albania, collected by Johann Georg von Hahn, the main character lives with 40 dragons. Her sleep is caused by a ring. The beginning of the story has a twist, in that a teacher urges the heroine to kill her evil stepmother so that she would take her place. The origin of this tale is debated; it is likely no older than the Middle Ages. In fact there are possibly two Albanian versions of Snow White: one where her stepmother tries to kill her, and another where her two jealous sisters try to kill her. "The Jealous Sisters" is another Albanian fairy tale. In both fairy tales the death is caused by a ring.
Adaptations.
Modern variations of the story include Tanith Lee's short story "Red as Blood" (published in her story collection of the same title) and Neil Gaiman's short story "Snow, Glass, Apples". 
Other writers who have made use of the theme include Donald Barthelme (in his novel "Snow White"), Gregory Maguire (in his novel "Mirror Mirror"), Jane Yolen (in her story "Snow in Summer," published in "Black Swan, White Raven"), Debra Doyle & James D. Macdonald (in their story "The Queen's Mirror," published in "A Wizard's Dozen"), Anne Sexton (in her poem "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs," published in "Transformations"), Gail Carson Levine (in "Fairest"), Jim C. Hines (in his "Princesses" series) and A. S. Byatt (in her essay "Ice, Snow, Glass," published in "Mirror, Mirror on the Wall").
Snow White is one of the principal characters in Fables (comics), a monthly comic book series created by writer Bill Willingham and published by DC Comics's Vertigo imprint. 
Video games.
Snow White is featured as a playable character in "Fairytale Fights". She is shown in "" and makes a cameo appearance in the first "Kingdom Hearts", voiced by Kurumi Kobato in Japanese and by Carolyn Gardner in English.
Theorized real-life influence.
In 1986 Bartels, a German scholar, published an analysis suggesting that the folktale of Snow White was based upon Maria Sophia Margaretha Catherina von Erthal, who was born in Lohr am Main in 1725. Like Snow White, Maria Sophia was a noble girl, but whereas Snow White's father was a king, Maria Sophia's father, Philipp Christoph von Erthal, was only a superior magistrate, representing the Prince Elector of Mainz in Lohr. The castle of the Prince Elector of Mainz in Lohr was his official residence and home of his family. After the death of her birth mother in 1741, Maria Sophia’s father remarried in 1743. The stepmother, Claudia Elisabeth von Reichenstein, was domineering and employed her new position to the advantage of her children from her first marriage. 
A mirror now called “The Talking Mirror” is located the Spessart Museum in the Lohr Castle, where Maria Sophia was born. It was a product of the famous Lohr Mirror Manufacture (Kurmainzische Spiegelmanufaktur). These mirrors became a favorite gift at European crown and aristocratic courts.
Snow White and Rose Red.
There is another Brothers Grimm tale called "Snow White and Rose Red" which also includes a character called Snow White. However, this Snow White is a completely separate character from the one found in this tale. The original German names are also different: "Schneewittchen" and "Schneeweißchen". There is actually no difference in the meaning (both mean "snow white"), but the first name is more influenced by the dialects of Low Saxon while the second one is the standard German version, implying a class difference between the two Snow Whites.
