The Croods is a 2013 American 3D computer-animated adventure comedy film produced by DreamWorks Animation and distributed by 20th Century Fox. It will star Nicolas Cage, Ryan Reynolds, Emma Stone, Catherine Keener, Clark Duke, and Cloris Leachman. The film is set in the prehistoric era, when a man's position as a "Leader of the Hunt" is threatened by the arrival of a prehistoric genius who comes up with revolutionary new inventions like fire.
"The Croods" is being written and directed by Kirk DeMicco and Chris Sanders, and produced by Kristine Belson and Jane Hartwell. It is set to be released in theaters on March 22, 2013. As part of the distribution deal, this will be the first film from DreamWorks Animation to be distributed by 20th Century Fox, since the departure of Paramount Pictures in 2012. 
Plot.
Surviving in a volcanic world is tough enough, but caveman Grug gets a rude awakening when an earthquake forces him to leave behind the only world he knows. With his family in tow, he ventures out into the volatile world in search of a new home. The situation becomes even more complicated when Grug's family — in particular his oldest daughter, Eep — falls for a nomad named Guy they encounter on their dangerous journey. This quirky, imaginative stranger's search for 'tomorrow' is at odds with Grug's reliance on the traditions of yesterday.
Production.
The film was originally being made by Aardman Animations as a part of a five-film deal with DreamWorks Animation. Announced in 2005 under the working title "Crood Awakening", and as a stop motion film, John Cleese and Kirk DeMicco wrote the first few drafts of the script. With the departure of Aardman in beginning of 2007, the rights for the film reverted to DreamWorks.
In March 2007, Chris Sanders, the director of "Lilo & Stitch", joined DreamWorks to direct the film, with intentions to significantly rewrite the script. In September 2008, it was reported that Sanders took over "How to Train Your Dragon" putting "The Croods" on hold and thus postponing its original schedule for a year to a then planned March 2012. The film's final title, "The Croods", was revealed in May 2009, along with new co-director, Kirk DeMicco. In March 2011, the film got another delay, being pushed back a year to March 1, 2013, and finally settled at March 22.
Release.
"The Croods" had its world premiere in the out of competition section at the 63rd Berlin International Film Festival on February 15, 2013. It is scheduled to premiere in the United States on March 22, 2013. It will be the first DreamWorks Animation film to be distributed by 20th Century Fox, after the departure of Paramount Pictures in 2012.
Video game.
A video game based on the film, titled "The Croods: Prehistoric Party!", is under development by Torus Games, and will be published by D3 Publisher. It is set for release on Wii U, Wii, Nintendo 3DS and Nintendo DS on March 19, 2013. The game will enable players to take the members of the Croods family on an adventure through 30 party-style mini-games.
