Lyoto Carvalho Machida () (born May 30, 1978) is a Brazilian mixed martial artist from Salvador, Brazil who fights as a Light Heavyweight in the Ultimate Fighting Championship. He is currently ranked as the #3 Light Heavyweight fighter in the world in the official UFC fighter rankings. He is currently ranked as the #3 light heavyweight fighter in the world by Sherdog.
Biography.
Early life.
Lyoto was born in the city of Salvador as the third son of the highly ranked head of the Brazilian branch of the Japan Karate Association, Shotokan karate master Yoshizo Machida. Yoshizo moved to Brazil from Japan when he was 22 years old. There he met and married Lyoto's mother, Ana Claudia. Growing up in Belém, Lyoto began training in karate earning his black belt at the age of 13.
He also began training in sumo at twelve and Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu at fifteen. He won a number of amateur karate tournaments, including the 2001 Pan American Karate tournament.
He was the runner-up in the 2000 Brazilian Sumo Championships in the 115 kg division. As an adult, he became Brazilian Champion twice, and placed second in the South American Championship. He defeated American black belt Jiu-Jitsu fighter Rafael Lovato Jr. at "L.A. Sub X". In addition to his sumo and karate achievements, he has a college degree in Physical Education. Lyoto's brother, Chinzo, is a Shotokan vice-champion (Australia 2006), losing only to number-one ranked Shotokan master Koji Ogata. Lyoto and Chinzo fought in a Karate Final 10 years ago in which Lyoto gave Chinzo a cheek scar that still exists today. His other brothers include Kenzo Machida, a TV journalist for one of Brazil's biggest TV stations, and Take Machida.
Mixed martial arts career.
Machida began his career in mixed martial arts under the management of legendary pro wrestler and MMA pioneer Antonio Inoki in Japan. On May 2, 2003, he defeated Kengo Watanabe by decision in his professional debut on a card promoted by New Japan Pro Wrestling in Tokyo. In his second fight, he defeated Stephan Bonnar by technical knockout due to a cut in the inauagral event promoted by Jungle Fight in Manaus, Brazil.
On December 31, 2003, he took part in Inoki's annual event "Inoki Bom-Ba-Ye 2003", where he met Rich Franklin in an openweight bout in which both men weighed at 214 lbs. In front of over 40,000 fans at Kobe Wing Stadium in Kobe, Machida defeated Franklin via KO in the second round. He rocked Franklin with a punches to the face which forced the referee to stop the fight at 1:03 into the round.
Following this, Machida went on to compete for the K-1 promotion. At the "K-1 Beast 2004 in Niigata" event on March 14, 2004, he defeated Michael McDonald, a Canadian kickboxer making his MMA debut, with a forearm choke in the first round. On May 22, 2004 at "K-1 MMA ROMANEX" at the Saitama Super Arena, he beat fellow karateka Sam Greco by split decision. Despite both fighters' striking backgrounds, the match was mostly fought on the mat with Machida controlling the grapplng. When K-1 began promoting Hero's, a series of fight cards featuring only MMA bouts rather than cards mixed with kickboxing matches, Machida was transferred there. He took on former UFC Welterweight Champion B.J. Penn on March 26, 2005 in Saitama at "Hero's 1" in an openweght fight. Machida weighed in at while Penn weighed in at . Machida won by unanimous decision.
Ultimate Fighting Championship.
Machida made his UFC debut on the preliminary card of "UFC 67" against Sam Hoger and won by unanimous decision. He followed up with a main-card debut at "UFC 70" and won a unanimous decision against David Heath. He next faced judo practitioner and Pride Fighting Championship veteran Kazuhiro Nakamura at "UFC 76". Machida won by unanimous decision and Nakamura would later test positive for marijuana.
At "UFC 79", Machida faced the highly touted Rameau Thierry Sokoudjou, a judo practitioner who had earned his UFC debut after two quick upset victories over Pride veterans Antonio Rogerio Nogueira and Ricardo Arona. Machida scored the first stoppage of his UFC career by submitting Sokoudjou with an arm triangle choke in the second round.
Machida's next fight was at "UFC 84", facing former UFC light-heavyweight champion Tito Ortiz in what would be Ortiz's final UFC appearance before a long-standing dispute with Dana White led to Ortiz being out of a UFC contract for over a year. Machida frustrated Ortiz with lateral movement and counterstriking while successfully defending against the former champion's takedowns. In the closing minute of the third round Machida knocked Ortiz down with a knee to the body. As Machida moved in to finish the fight, Ortiz almost locked in a triangle choke before transitioning to an armbar attempt. Machida managed to escape and win a unanimous decision, and all judges scored the fight 30–27 in his favor.
The Machida Era.
Machida then met light heavyweight champion Rashad Evans in another clash of undefeated fighters at "UFC 98". Machida scored an early knockdown in the first-round, while Evans struggled to make any progress. His performance earned him "Knockout of the Night" honors with a $60,000 bonus for the second time. This victory continued his undefeated streak in his MMA career and was also Evans' first career loss.
Machida was set to face Quinton Jackson in his first title defense, but Jackson opted to coach the tenth season of "The Ultimate Fighter" instead. Pride Fighting Championship's 2005 Middleweight Grand Prix winner Mauricio "Shogun" Rua was then selected as Machida's first title defense which took place on October 24, 2009, at UFC 104, with Machida winning a unanimous decision victory, 48–47 from all three judges, with one stating that Machida "landed the more damaging strikes throughout the fight" and was the more "effective aggressor".
Post Machida Era.
Out of the three judges, Hamilton gave Machida Rounds 2, 3 and 4. Peoples and Rosales each gave Machida the first three rounds. One of the judges (Nelson Hamilton) later commented in a post-fight interview that his line of sight was obstructed for much of the action in Round 4, and that after reviewing footage of the round, he likely would have scored the round to Rua. However, since the verdict was unanimous, retroactively changing the score for this judge would still have resulted in a 2–1 split decision in favor of Machida. Hamilton also commented that he felt the commentary had led many fans to believe Shogun had won the fight decisively, when it was a very close, technical and difficult fight to score for all three judges. In spite of this, a significant amount of the audience, who had not heard the commentary, booed the decision after it was delivered, voicing their support for Rua. Writers for a number of sports websites and magazines also claimed they felt Rua had won.
There were also MMA fighters in attendance who, after the bout, voiced support for the decision. Among them were several of Machida's training partners, including Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira, Anderson Silva, Junior dos Santos, Jose Aldo and Rafael Cavalcante.
A FightMetric analysis of the fight suggested that Rua had been more aggressive and had landed more blows to the head and legs than Machida, while CompuStrike reported that Rua landed almost twice as many strikes as Machida did. Both FightMetric and CompuStrike explicitly state on their websites that they are not intended to be used to judge MMA events, and are merely a way to track a fighter's activity.
Because of the controversy surrounding the close decision, on May 8, 2010, at UFC 113 in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, Machida and Mauricio Rua faced each other again, seven months after their original fight. It was a very much anticipated rematch. Both fighters started aggressively and scored significant points in striking exchanges, with Machida scoring two takedowns during the round. Rua showed strong defense on the ground, spinning to attempt a knee bar before both fighters returned to their feet. At 3:30 of round 1, Rua swayed to avoid a hook left and landed a powerful counter overhand right to the temple, which knocked Machida down. Rua then took the full mount and proceeded to finish with ground-and-pound knocking Machida out, making him the new Light Heavyweight Champion at 3:35 in round 1, with Machida suffering his first career MMA loss.
Back to contention and title shot.
Machida then faced Quinton Jackson at UFC 123. The decision in this fight ultimately came down to the scoring of the first round, as there is near-unanimous agreement that Rampage narrowly won the second round while Machida decisively won the third round of the fight. During the first round Machida landed several leg kicks and some counter punches while Rampage predominantly landed from the clinch, utilizing stomps and punches to Machida's side. Both Compustrike and Fightmetric records show that Rampage out-struck Machida when counting blows such as stomps and elbows to the thigh in the clinch, while Machida landing more strikes during the standup exchanges (this was also the case when it came to Rampage's clinch-control and aggression to Machida's effective movement. In the second round, Compustrike and Fightmetric records again show Rampage as the busier overall fighter, and Rampage also scored a takedown. The cleanest and most significant blow of the second round was also an uppercut landed by Rampage. In the third round, Machida landed a counter left that stunned Rampage and followed it with a flurry of punches, kicks and knees that backed Jackson into the cage. When Rampage tried to retaliate, Machida scored a takedown, eventually gaining full mount and attempted a submission. At the end of the bout, Rampage was declared the winner via split decision (29–28, 29–28, 28–29). Fighters such as Anderson Silva, Randy Couture and Mauricio Rua in a post-fight interview days later, all thought that Machida won the fight. In an interview after the fight, Rampage expressed to Joe Rogan that the fairest thing would be to offer Machida an immediate rematch as he felt he had also lost the fight. However, since UFC President Dana White personally felt that Rampage won the fight (winning rounds 1 & 2), he denied the possibility of an immediate rematch. This generated some controversy, as White previously awarded an immediate rematch to Rua in spite of a unanimous judgment decision awarded to Machida in that fight.
UFC President Dana White had indicated in January 2011 that Machida was under pressure to perform in his upcoming bout against UFC Hall-of-Famer Randy Couture, saying, "this is a must-win for him.". Machida defeated Couture at UFC 129 in Toronto via KO with a jumping front kick that earned "Knockout of the Night" honors. Dana White has commented that Machida's performance versus Randy Couture put him back into the mix at the top of the division, but stated that he is not yet the next in line for a title shot. Machida was briefly linked to a rematch with Rashad Evans at UFC 133, replacing an injured Phil Davis. However, Dana White claimed that Lyoto Machida wanted "Anderson Silva money" and the UFC scheduled Tito Ortiz for the fight with Evans.
Machida was in talks to face Phil Davis at UFC 140 but the fight wouldn't end up happening due to Davis needing more time to recover from knee surgery. Instead, Machida faced Jon Jones on December 10, 2011 at UFC 140 for the UFC light heavyweight title, replacing an injured Rashad Evans. After a first round that saw Machida rock Jones, Machida was taken down and cut by an elbow. In the second round, Machida was knocked down with a straight left counter and then caught in a standing guillotine and choked unconscious.
Machida then faced Ryan Bader on August 4, 2012 at UFC on Fox 4. In a dominant performance throughout the contest, Machida finished Bader with a counter right hand at the 1:32 mark in the second round. As a result, Machida was expected to earn another title shot.
Following the cancellation of UFC 151, the rematch between Machida and current UFC Light Heavyweight Champion Jon Jones was expected to take place at UFC 152, but Machida declined the fight citing that he did not have ample time to prepare, and was replaced by Vitor Belfort. As a result of turning down a fight at UFC 152 against Jones, it was later confirmed by the UFC that Machida no longer has an immediate title shot.
Machida faced Dan Henderson on February 23, 2013 at UFC 157. Machida won by split decision and is currently the top contender for the winner of Sonnen-Jones for the UFC Light Heavyweight Championship.
Fighting style.
Machida uses a unique, unorthodox style in MMA that combines elements from his diverse training background. Machida has received both praise and criticism for backpedaling in his fights while winning on points. It is based mainly on Shotokan karate and Brazilian Jiu Jitsu, but also integrates techniques from wrestling and Sumo, which Machida says makes him "fully prepared for any situation" in the Octagon. Often described as "elusive", Machida relies on cautious and precise counter-striking that frustrates his opponents into making mistakes. Machida has earned considerable respect from MMA fans, fighters, and commentators for his effectiveness and winning ways. At the same time, his cerebral and conservative style is sometimes deemed boring and unsatisfying to watch. Machida has drawn fire from fans, and criticism from MMA commentators for his limited aggression and many decision victories. In response to these criticisms, Machida said, "If you don't like it, sorry. I always try to win." He also stated that he believes fans are coming to appreciate the efficiency of his style just like they came to appreciate Royce Gracie's jiu-jitsu.
Machida defied expectations at "UFC 94," where he earned a "Knockout of the Night" honor for his first-round stoppage of then undefeated Thiago Silva. Machida noted that he started to include weight training in his preparation for the bout. Commentators hailed the knockout as a step in the right direction toward building interest in him as a potential champion. In addition, Machida showcased his improved English skills during interviews for the event, which gave him the ability to connect with fans more easily. Machida's limited English was previously seen as a marketing liability. After knocking out Rashad Evans at UFC 98, in the post fight in-ring interview with Joe Rogan, Machida announced to his fans, "Karate is back! Machida Karate!" Many fans have referred to his style as "Machida Karate" since then.
In the November issue of the MMA Unltd magazine, Machida once again mentioned the phrase "Machida Karate", claiming that it was based on a very traditional form which is very different from modern sports karate. He also said that the Karate we see nowadays has lost many techniques over the years in which it was practiced, and that his style was one of the very few that still kept those techniques. "My style is Machida Karate and it is a very traditional form", he said, "It differs from sports karate which we usually see in Karate schools and competitions as it has many elements which were lost in the style including the use of knees, elbows, takedowns and even some submissions". Lyoto is a black belt in Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu under Walter Broca.
Personal life.
Machida's wife is named Fabyola. The couple have a son named Taiyo who was born in September 2008.
References.
win by split design
