Babel is the second studio album by British indie folk band Mumford & Sons. As with "Sigh No More", the album was produced by Markus Dravs. It was released on 21 September 2012 in Ireland, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, Norway, Australia and New Zealand. It was released on 24 September 2012 in the United Kingdom, Scandinavia, Spain, Italy, Eastern Europe, South America, and on 25 September 2012 in the United States and Canada. 
Upon its release, "Babel" debuted at number one on both the UK Albums Chart and the US "Billboard" 200. It became the fastest selling album of 2012 in the UK, selling over 159,000 copies in its first week, and was the biggest selling debut of any album in 2012 in the US at the time, selling 600,000 in its first week. The album received generally positive reviews from music critics and was nominated in the category of "Album of the Year" for both the Brit Award and Grammy Award, winning the latter.
Background.
In late 2010, Mumford & Sons had already begun road-testing new material that they had been working on. Most of these songs, including "Broken Crown" and "Below My Feet", had already been played live on numerous occasions before the album's release. Mumford & Sons decided not to change their sound on "Babel", which is the follow-up to 2009's highly successful "Sigh No More", which elevated them to international fame. They did, however, admit that they purposely took their time in order to perfect the sound that they had already developed. After a year of speculation, it was finally announced via their official website on Monday, 16 July 2012 that their new album "Babel" would be released in the UK on 24 September, and the following day in the US. A final track list and album art were also revealed, as well as a 30-second promo.
"Babel" was made available for preorder on the band's official website on Monday, 23 July, when it was announced that the album would also be released as a vinyl LP and a deluxe edition with additional tracks.
Singles.
The album's official lead single is "I Will Wait". The band premiered the song on Zane Lowe's BBC Radio 1 show on 7 August 2012. On 29 August 2012, Mumford & Sons recorded their live performance of "I Will Wait" at Red Rocks Amphitheatre in Colorado. The performance was released on 9 September as the band's official video for the song.
The album's second single is "Lover of the Light". The music video was released on 5 November and stars actor Idris Elba who also wrote and directed the short film. The song was officially released on 3 December 2012.
Commercial performance.
Babel debuted at number one in the UK selling 159,000 copies and becoming the fastest selling album of 2012. It also sold 573,000 copies in the UK in 2012. 
The album debuted at number one on the US "Billboard" 200, selling 600,000 copies, the second biggest debut of the year behind Taylor Swift's album, Red. As of February 2013, the album has sold 1,860,000 copies in the US. The album also debuted at number one on the Canadian Albums Chart selling 75,000 copies.
Critical reception.
"Babel" received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 63, based on 33 reviews. "Mojo" found it to be "more than just a decent nu-folk album," but also "a great pop album." "Clash" called "Babel" a "rip-roaring record" with catchy hooks and "not much depth," but "some good tunes". Davis Inman of "The A.V. Club" found the entire album "sonically impeccable", even though Mumford's imagery seems "like go-to words in a lazy songwriter's starved lexicon." "Q" called it an "ultimately comfortable listening, befitting folk sounds of a resolutely un-freak variety." Melissa Maerz of "Entertainment Weekly" viewed that the music will convince listeners who cannot appreciate "lyrics this earnest", as the band "has mastered the emotional gut-punch of quiet/loud dynamics". Kelly O'Brien of "State" praised the band's "unrestrained ardour and zealous poetry", and wrote that they "manage to play loudly and boisterously, without ever making the descent into cacophony." Will Hermes of "Rolling Stone" cited the band's lyrics as the album's defining characteristic, writing that they use "church flavor" to "supersize and complicate love songs."
In a mixed review, Kevin Perry of "NME" called it an "average", "middle of the road" album and a "a retooled, streamlined adaptation" of "Sigh No More". Greg Kot of the "Chicago Tribune" found its songwriting "pedestrian" and felt that the "loud-quiet-loud dynamic" of both the singing and the music "becomes repetitive." Allmusic's James Christopher Monger felt that its "incredibly spirited" songs "bark much louder than they bite" and found most of the album "delivering its everyman message with the kind of calculated spiritual fervor that comes from having to adapt to the festival masses as opposed to the smaller club crowds." Chuck Eddy of "Spin" panned the band's "U2-style evangelism" and wrote that they "don't seem remotely musically curious. Andy Gill of "The Independent" accused Mumford of "wallowing self-absorption" and observed a "general absence of metaphor and metonymy". Kitty Empire of "The Observer" called "Babel" "an anodyne record, lacking the shivery authority of Laura Marling's work", and viewed the band's "lack of nuance" as counterintuitive, writing that "folk is a malleable resource, and here it is stripped of all politics or witness-bearing, becoming an exercise in romantic exegesis for nice men with mandolins."
Accolades.
"Rolling Stone" ranked "Babel" number 11 in their list of the 50 Best Albums of 2012. The album was nominated for four Grammy Awards, winning Album of the Year at the 55th Annual Grammy Awards. "Babel" is also nominated for the Brit Award for British Album of the Year at the 2013 BRIT Awards.
Personnel.
Mumford and Sons
Additional musicians
