Here Comes the Boom is a 2012 American sports comedy film directed by Frank Coraci, written by Allan Loeb, Kevin James and Martin Solibakke, and starring Kevin James. The film was released on October 12, 2012, in North America.
Plot.
Former collegiate wrestler Scott Vohs (Kevin James) is a 42-year-old bored and disillusioned biology teacher at the failing Wilkinson High School. Budget cutbacks at the school jeopardize the continuation of its music program, which would result in its teacher, Marty (Henry Winkler), being laid off. Concerned for both his colleague and his students, Voss attempts to raise the $48,000 necessary to keep the music program alive. At first, he works as a night instructor for a citizenship class. One of his students, Niko (Bas Rutten), approaches him to get some outside tutoring and Voss reluctantly agrees. When he arrives at Niko's apartment, he realizes that Niko was a former mixed martial arts (MMA) fighter. While watching UFC at Niko's apartment, Voss learns that the loser of the fight receives $10,000, which gives him the idea of raising the money by fighting in MMA himself.
Voss then begins fighting in small MMA fights and gradually gaining more and more money for the school.
Vohs eventually gets a dinner date with Bella Flores (Salma Hayek), and they share many moments together showing much affection for each other, while Vohs' passion for teaching is rekindled.
Voss then gets an offer to fight at the UFC, but Niko turns it down for Scott. When Scott angrily confronts Niko, Niko states that he was sorry and that the only reason he turned it down was because he was jealous. Niko himself was asked to fight at the UFC and eagerly accepted, but while he was training, he hurt his neck and that was it for him. They both go back and accept the offer. Voss and his crew travel to the MGM Grand Las Vegas for the UFC event. He then learns that the teacher entrusted with the funds has been embezzling both from the winnings and the school, meaning all his effort so far has been lost. Knowing he can get $50,000 if he wins the fight, he takes the risk. 
The event turns out to be a hypothetical UFC 176 rematch of Carwin vs. Dos Santos and he manages to win his UFC fight, gets $50,000 for his victory, and saves the music program at his school. In the closing scene, Niko and all the students of the citizenship class become American citizens.
A side plot involves Scott's brother, an unhappily-married unhappily-employed painter, becoming a chef for the father of one of Scott's students, so that she doesn't have to spend her free time helping in the restaurant. This allows her to pursue her dream of music, while he pursues his dream of cooking. The family situations of both are shown improved by the new arrangement, as well.
Production.
Filming began on March 28, 2011, in and around the Boston, Massachusetts, area. Filming continued on through May 25, 2011, in Lowell and Quincy, Massachusetts, where it wrapped shortly there after, by early June 2011.
Reception.
The film has received mixed reviews from critics. Rotten Tomatoes has a score of 39% based on 90 reviews with the consensus stating: ""Here Comes the Boom" benefits from Kevin James's genial presence, but the film doesn't deliver enough laughs to live up to its title or enough satisfying plot to make up the difference." Another review aggregator Metacritic gave the film a 40/100 approval rating based on 26 reviews falling under the "generally unfavorable reviews" 
In its opening weekend, the movie earned $11.8 million in the domestic box office and as of February 1, 2013, the film has earned $69 million worldwide.
Here Comes The Boom has been chosen as one of ten best films for family audiences by the 21st Annual Movieguide Awards on February 15, 2013.
