Jack the Giant Slayer (previously titled Jack the Giant Killer) is an upcoming fantasy—adventure film based on the "Jack the Giant Killer" and "Jack and the Beanstalk" fairy tales. The film is directed by Bryan Singer and stars Nicholas Hoult, Eleanor Tomlinson, Stanley Tucci, Ian McShane, Bill Nighy and Ewan McGregor with a screenplay written by Darren Lemke, Christopher McQuarrie and Dan Studney. The film tells the story of Jack, a young farmhand who must rescue a princess from a race of giants after inadvertently opening a gateway to their world.
Development of "Jack the Giant Slayer" began in January 2009 with the hiring of D. J. Caruso to direct film. By August, Caruso was replaced by Singer, who hired McQuarrie to rework the script in April 2010. The main characters were cast between February and March 2011, and principal photography began in April 2011 in England with locations in Somerset, Gloucestershire and Norfolk. Release of the film was moved back in post production to allow more time for special effects and marketing. 
"Jack the Giant Slayer" is scheduled to be released on March 1, 2013 in 2D and 3D.
Premise.
When Jack, a young farmhand, accidentally opens a gateway to the world of Giants an ancient war restarts as the giants, thought only of as legend, try to reclaim the world they lost centuries ago. Jack is forced into a fight to not only save his own life, but that of those in the kingdom and that of the princess. 
Production.
Development.
In January 2009, New Line Cinema hired D. J. Caruso to direct "Jack the Giant Killer", which is described as an adult look at the "Jack and the Beanstalk" legend. The script was written by Darren Lemke and subsequently rewritten by Mark Bomback. By August 2009 it was being reported that Bryan Singer might be replacing Caruso and became official in September 2009.
In April 2010, Singer re-teamed with screenwriter, Christopher McQuarrie to rework the screenplay. Singer and McQuarrie have previously collaborated on "Public Access", "The Usual Suspects", "Apt Pupil" and "Valkyrie". Singer stated, "Chris McQuarrie did a significant re-write for me. He brought a different structure. It was very much a page-one situation; a different storyline. It involved the same characters, but some we juggled around and switched around. He just brought a very different perspective".
In May 2010 it was reported that production of the film would be delayed until February 2011. The report cited Singer's interest in being able to pre-visualize scenes with the digital giants in-camera with the live-action actors (a la James Cameron's "Avatar") and the need for more time to work out the complex process as reasons for the delay.
Pre-production.
In October 2010, New Line gave Bryan Singer the green-light to begin pre-production work on "Jack the Giant Killer" with production scheduled to begin the following spring. In November 2010 Singer began screen testing for the male and female leads. Aaron Johnson, Nicholas Hoult and Aneurin Barnard were up for the young farmer role and Adelaide Kane, Lily Collins and Juno Temple were testing for the part of the princess.
In December 2010, Singer that, "I’m very much looking forward to using the EPIC Red for my next movie "Jack the Giant Killer" which will be shot in, what else, 3D. The camera’s incredibly compact size and extraordinary resolution are ideal for the 3D format. But more importantly "Jack the Giant Killer" is my first movie set in a time before electricity. The EPIC’s extraordinary exposure latitude will allow me to more effectively explore the use of natural light".
In February 2011, it was reported that Stanley Tucci had been cast as the villain, an adviser to the king with designs on usurping power. Also included in the report was news that Bill Nighy and John Kassir will play Fallon, the two-headed leader of the giants; Nighy gets to play the big head while Kassir will play the small head. Also in February, Nicholas Hoult was offered the lead role. Singer stated that he liked him since "Skins" and was very supportive of his casting in "". Later in the same month, Ewan McGregor joined the cast as the leader of the king’s elite guard, who helps fight giants.
In March 2011, Eleanor Tomlinson was cast opposite Nicholas Hoult as the princess. Also in March, Ian McShane was cast to play the princess' father, King Brahmwell. Two days later New Line and Warner Bros. announced a release date of June 15, 2012.
Filming.
Principal photography began on April 12, 2011 in the British countryside. In May 2011, production moved to Somerset, England for two weeks with filming scheduled in Wells, Cheddar and secret locations in the county including scenes filmed at Wells Cathedral. Also in May, scenes were shot at Puzzlewood in the Forest of Dean near Coleford, Gloucestershire. Puzzlewood, which features unusual tree and rock formations has previously been used for filming of the BBC TV series "Doctor Who" and "Merlin". The same forest is said to have inspired J. R. R. Tolkien to write "The Hobbit". Later in the same month, filming took place at Norwich Cathedral in Norwich, Norfolk.
About the performance-capture process Singer stated, "It's fascinating... It takes you back to play-acting as a kid in your living room because you are running around and having to imagine that you are in Gantua and imagine that there are these weapons and all these giant things. But there's nothing when you are there other than styrofoam and blocks. It forces the actors to regress to when they would play-act as kids or do minimalist theatre. But in that way it's fascinating - I can see why Robert Zemeckis and James Cameron have started to shoot pictures this way".
Post-production.
In January 2012, Warner Bros. moved back the release date by nine months to March 22, 2013. It had been set to open June 15, 2012. "The Hollywood Reporter" stated "Warner can likely afford the move because of Christopher Nolan's "The Dark Knight Rises", which opened in July. And moving the film back gives the studio more time for special effects, as well as a chance to attach trailers for it to Peter Jackson's Christmas tentpole """. In October 2012, Warner Bros. again moved the release date, this time to March 1, 2013, three weeks earlier than the previous date. Warner Bros also changed the title of the film to "Jack the Giant Slayer".
