Unorthodox Jukebox is the second studio album by American recording artist Bruno Mars, released on December 6, 2012 by Atlantic Records. On December 4, 2012, the album was available to listen to in its entirety for a week before the release. Mars co-wrote the album and worked with producers including The Smeezingtons, Mark Ronson, Jeff Bhasker, Emile Haynie, Supa Dups, Diplo, Benny Blanco, Paul Epworth.
The album's lead single, "Locked Out of Heaven", was a commercial and critical success, topping the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart for six consecutive weeks and charting inside the top ten in more than twenty countries across the world.
Background and recording.
Mars stated in an interview with "Billboard": "This is me going into the studio and recording and writing whatever I want. This album represents my freedom. I've had big record label presidents look me in the face and say, 'Your music sucks, you don't know who you are, your music is all over the place, and we don't know how to market this stuff. Pick a lane and come back to us.' That was disgusting to me, because I'm not trying to be a circus act. I listen to a lot of music, and I want to have the freedom and luxury to walk into a studio and say, 'Today I want to do a hip-hop, R&B, soul or rock record'. He further added, "We took some master chefs into the kitchen with no master plan... It was either going to be a disaster, or we were going to come out with something incredible." During an interview with "Rolling Stone" magazine, Mars commented "It turned into this soulful, experimental, electronic, hard-to-explain thing... That's the reason behind the album title". He wanted to create something unexpected with the follow up of his debut album, "Doo-Wops & Hooligans" (2010). 
The album includes production from Mark Ronson, Jeff Bhasker, Emile Haynie, Diplo, as well as The Smeezingtons. Mars noted that the album will be more musically varied and that he refuses to "pick a lane". Mars has also been in studio with Benny Blanco and Paul Epworth. Regarding his production contributions, Blanco said: "I got a really cool song with him. Me and Paul just got together and Bruno wrote an amazing song on top of it. It kind of all came together." Discussing the song, Blanco states, "It's like some throwback Nina Simone type shit, like 'Sinnerman.' " However, it's unknown if these songs will be featured on Mars second album. Mars also worked with guests like jazz artist Esperanza Spalding, and electronic producer Diplo. Mars claims to have taken each producer "beyond their comfort zone". On the recording of the song "When I Was Your Man" Mars stated, "I'm never singing another ballad again,' but that came from the gut – it's the most honest, real thing I've ever sang... When there are no safe bets, that's when I feel my blood move." Mars also claims that "Diplo has all the sounds in his computer to make the club go wild" to which Diplo replied "In our generation, he's the most talented guy I've worked with".
Music and lyrics.
A pop and R&B album, "Unorthodox Jukebox" also incorporates rock, soul, and reggae styles. Andrew Chan of Slant Magazine observes "synthy '80s flourishes" in Mars' "approximations of R&B and reggae" on the album and likens his use of a "diluted form of vintage soul as the foundation for middle-of-the-road pop-rock" to Adam Levine and Gavin DeGraw. "Locked Out of Heaven" features booming synthesizers, a four-on-the-floor chorus, and a rock/reggae style similar to The Police. Music journalist Simon Price finds Mars' style on the album more comparable to Wham!, particularly on songs such as "Treasure" and "When I Was Your Man". Matt Diehl of "Rolling Stone" compares the disco-influenced "Moonshine" to French electronic duo Daft Punk, while Allmusic's Tim Sendra calls "If I Knew" a "Sam Cooke-inspired" ballad.
Mars' lyrics veer between the traditional notions of romance exhibited on "When I Was Your Man" and the male chauvinist sentiments on songs such as "Natalie" and "Gorilla". The latter song contains a reference to his 2010 arrest for cocaine possession ("Got a body full of liquor with a cocaine kicker") and is described by Mars as being about "good old animalistic sex". For "Unorthodox Jukebox", Mars hoped to "let loose" and discuss darker, more risqué subject matter, while drawing on the "danger" embraced by pop artists such as Michael Jackson and Prince. Music journalist Kitty Empire argues that his songwriting values "narrative arc and internal logic". Jody Rosen views that "Mars sings endlessly about sex – wild, wind-swept, Wagner­ian sex", and that he relies on "grand statements, soap-opera plotlines and actual-opera melodrama."
Singles.
"Locked Out of Heaven" was released as the lead single from the album on October 1, 2012. It peaked at number one on the US ""Billboard" Hot 100", becoming Mars' fourth number-one single on that chart. It also peaked at number one in Canada and the US Pop Songs chart. Elsewhere, it peaked inside the top ten in more than twenty countries. It received positive response from music critics who praised its reggae, rock and funky beat and the lyrics talking about passion in a "tidy and impeccable" way. "When I Was Your Man" was released as the third and final promotional single on December 4, 2012 from the album and was released as the second official single on January 15, 2013.
Promotional singles.
"Young Girls" was released as the first promotional single on the iTunes Store in the United States on November 6, 2012 prior the release of the album. "Moonshine" was released as the second promotional single on November 19, 2012.
Promotion.
Mars performed "Locked Out of Heaven" and "Young Girls" for the first time on "Saturday Night Live" on October 20, 2012. Then, he performed the same songs on November 7, 2012 at the 2012 "Victoria's Secret Fashion Show". The performance later aired on December 4, 2012 on CBS. On November 24, 2012, Mars appeared on the ninth season of the British "X Factor" where he performed "Locked Out of Heaven". On December 12, 2012, he performed "Locked Out of Heaven" during the semi-finals of the second season of the American "X Factor". Mars performed "When I Was Your Man" on "The Voice" during the final show of the third season on December 17, 2012.
Critical reception.
"Unorthodox Jukebox" received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 70, based on 16 reviews. Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" felt that its "bombast" is "the stuff of great pop" and called it "a record that makes the competition sound sad and idea-starved by comparison." Matt Cibula of PopMatters complimented its hooks and found the album to be "sung and arranged just as perfectly as his earlier work ... a truly accomplished and slick pop album". Melissa Maerz of "Entertainment Weekly" commented that "his talent for crafting little pop perfections of all stripes is undeniable". Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" called its songs "exceptionally drawn and lush". 
Dan Hyman of "Spin" called the album "utterly engaging" and felt that Mars' lyrics "get a desperately needed kick in the pants". BBC Music's Matthew Horton found the album "appealing, generally engaging and all shot through with the confidence of a man who must feel he's got the hit parade Midas touch." Jason Lipshutz of "Billboard" viewed that the album "succeeds in mixing its safer stylistic choices with its relatively bold ideas." Ryan Reed of "Paste" commented that Mars "still plays the sweetheart card well, but he's proven himself way more interesting as a badass." Although she felt that Mars "remains a ", Kitty Empire of "The Observer" observed "a little more hooliganism" than on his first album and felt that, "despite its title, deserves your grudging respect".
In a mixed review, Allmusic's Tim Sendra criticized Mars as an "icky hater" and wrote that his "opinion of the opposite sex seems to have taken a nosedive" after "being a sweet romancer" on his first album. Andy Gill of "The Independent" felt that, "although Bruno Mars is a talented chap, he's forced to demean his abilities by echoing other artists' former glories" on the album. Slant Magazine's was similarly ambivalent towards Mars' "variety-show mimicry" and viewed his "workmanlike" singing as both a "minor limitation" and "the key to his appeal", ultimately calling the album "a reasonably listenable exercise in genre fetishization." Tony Clayton-Lea of "The Irish Times" wrote that its songs "may be in serious hock to their sources, but Mars has a snappy way with rhythms and rhymes. No killer, then, but no filler, either."
Commercial performance.
In the United States, the album debuted at number two on the "Billboard" 200 with 192,000 copies sold in its first week. In the United Kingdom, "Unorthodox Jukebox" debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart on first-week sales of 136,000 copies. It was the UK's fastest selling album by a recording artist in 2012.
Track listing.
(*) denotes co-producer
Personnel.
Credits for "Unorthodox Jukebox" adapted from liner notes.
