Richard William "Wil" Wheaton III (born July 29, 1972) is an American actor and writer. He portrayed Wesley Crusher on the television series "", Gordie Lachance in the film "Stand by Me", Joey Trotta in "Toy Soldiers" and a recurring role as a comically petty version of himself on the sitcom "The Big Bang Theory". He blogs at Wil Wheaton Dot Net and has written WWdN: In Exile.
Early life.
Wheaton was born in Burbank, California, to Debbie (née O’Connor), an actress, and Richard William Wheaton, Jr., a medical specialist. He has a brother, Jeremy, and a sister, Amy. Both appeared uncredited in the episode "" of "Star Trek: The Next Generation".
Career.
Acting.
Wheaton made his acting debut in the 1981 TV film "A Long Way Home", and his first cinema role was as Martin Brisby in the 1982 animated film "The Secret of NIMH", the movie adaptation of Robert C. O'Brien's "Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH". He had a minor role in the 1984 movie "The Last Starfighter" as Louis' friend but it was cut out. He first gained widespread attention in 1986 as Gordie Lachance in "Stand by Me", the film adaptation of Stephen King's "The Body". 
"Star Trek".
From 1987 to 1990, he played Wesley Crusher in the first four seasons of '. This became a recurring role later in the series. Although his "Star Trek" character, and by extension Wheaton himself, was disliked by a vocal group of Trekkies during "TNGs first run, he commented about his critics in an interview for WebTalk Radio: From Star Trek: Next Generation to Geek Blogger. webtalkguys.com</ref> Wheaton's popularity among "Star Trek" fandom is covered in a number of web comics. "ArcaneTimes" of March 25, 2005 offers a sympathetic position. "Something Positive" presents a range of opinions as part of the storyline "Mike's Kid". "Abstruse Goose" tries to distinguish between the character and the actor.
Post-"Star Trek".
In 1991, he played Joey Trotta in the film "Toy Soldiers". After leaving "Star Trek", Wheaton moved to Topeka, Kansas, to work for NewTek, where he helped to develop the Video Toaster 4000, doing product testing and quality control. He later used his public profile to serve as a technology evangelist for the product. Wheaton said this was a period of growth in his life, and living away from Los Angeles helped him deal with anger issues. He came back to Los Angeles, attended acting school for five years, then re-entered the acting world. In the late 1990s, Wheaton appeared in several independent films, including the award-winning "The Good Things", in which he portrays a frustrated Kansas tollbooth worker; it was selected Best Short Film at the 2002 Deauville Film Festival. He received the Best Actor award at the 2002 Melbourne Underground Film Festival for his performance in "Jane White Is Sick & Twisted".
Voice work.
He has worked as a voice actor in cartoons, video games, audiobooks, and anime, beginning with the role of young Martin Brisby in The Secret of NIMH at age 10. His most noteworthy credits include the roles of Aqualad in the cartoon "Teen Titans", the voice of radio journalist Richard Burns in ', Kyle in the Nickelodeon cartoon, "Kyle + Rosemary", himself and various other characters on both "Family Guy" and "Seth MacFarlane's Cavalcade of Cartoon Comedy", the second Blue Beetle, Ted Kord, on ' in the episode "Fall of the Blue Beetle!", Yakumo in "", Menma in "Naruto", Hans in "Slayers Evolution-R" and Aaron Terzieff in "Mobile Suit Gundam Unicorn". He appeared as himself in a skit on nerdcore rapper MC Frontalot's 2008 album "Final Boss" attempting to be a rapper, whose rhymes only involved shellfish. He later collaborated with Frontalot on "Your Friend Wil", a track from the 2010 album "Zero Day" on the subject of Wheaton's Law. Wheaton and Frontalot have both appeared at the Penny Arcade Expo (PAX). Wheaton has also narrated a number of bestselling audiobooks, mostly in the science-fiction and fantasy category, including "Ready Player One" by Ernest Cline, "Redshirts" by John Scalzi, and books 6–10 of the "Chronicles of Amber" series by Roger Zelazny.
TV and web series guest appearances.
He was a contestant on a 2001 episode of "The Weakest Link" featuring "Star Trek" actors attempting to win money for charity. Wheaton's had guest appearances on the November 23, 2007 episode of the TV series "Numb3rs", and the October 22, 2008 episode of the series "Criminal Minds". He has also appeared in Internet presentations, including a cameo in a comedy sketch ("Lock Out") for LoadingReadyRun (and a reprise of the same the following year in CommodoreHustle 4), and the May 30, 2008 episode of the Internet series "Gorgeous Tiny Chicken Machine Show". Wheaton appears in seasons three, four and five of the web series "The Guild" as Fawkes, the leader for a rival guild known as Axis of Anarchy. He also appears in seasons two, three and four of the TV series "Leverage", as rival computer hacker Colin "Chaos" Mason, antagonist to Leverage team hacker Alec Hardison. He appeared in "The Creepy Candy Coating Corollary" (2009), the fifth episode of the third season of the situation comedy "The Big Bang Theory", playing a fictionalized version of himself, as the focus of Sheldon Cooper's ire for not having attended a "Star Trek" convention at which his appearance was scheduled. He later appeared on the show in episodes "The Wheaton Recurrence", which involves a bout at a bowling alley, and "The 21-Second Excitation" at a screening of "Raiders of the Lost Ark". Wheaton returned in Season Five of "The Big Bang Theory" in the episode "The Russian Rocket Reaction". In it, Leonard Hofstadter gets invited to Wheaton's house-party, provoking Sheldon's anger. However, his conflict with Wheaton is brought to an end when Sheldon turns up to the party and Wheaton gives him a signed Wesley Crusher action figure which Brent Spiner opens, causing Sheldon to put Spiner on his list of "Mortal Enemies". He also makes an appearance in the episode "The Stag Convergence" as a guest to Howard Wolowitz's bachelor party. In season six of "The Big Bang Theory" the Wheaton character agrees to appear in an episode of 'Sheldon Cooper Presents: Fun with Flags', and insults Sheldon's girlfriend Amy. While dealing with this dilemma Sheldon unwittingly becomes drunk and tries to start a fist-fight with Wheaton's character. He appears in twelve episodes as a recurring, guest-starring role on "Eureka", playing Dr. Isaac Parrish, the head of the Non-Lethal Weapons Lab at Global Dynamics and a thorn in Fargo's side.
Live shows.
Wheaton has performed improvisational and sketch comedy at the ACME Comedy Theater in Hollywood. He has a traveling sketch comedy/improv troupe called "EarnestBorg9" that performs science fiction-related comedy at conventions. Wheaton is one of the three headline acts of the w00tstock shows, appearing in nearly all of them when his filming schedule has allowed.
Hosting.
From September 2006 to September 2007, he hosted a Revision3 syndicated video podcast called "InDigital" along with Jessica Corbin and veteran host Hahn Choi. Wheaton hosted a NASA video on the Mars "Curiosity" rover which landed on Monday August 6, 2012.
Writing.
Wheaton runs his own weblog, Wil Wheaton Dot Net. Between 2001 and fall 2004, he operated a message board, known as "The Soapbox" or "Paracosm", as part of the blog site. Two collections of writings taken from postings to the message board have been published, titled "Boxer Shorts" (ISBN 1-932461-00-0) and "Boxer Shorts Redux" (ISBN 1-932461-03-5). He contributes regularly to the Los Angeles-based Metroblogging site. In June 2005, he became that month's featured Tech writer for the SuicideGirls Newswire. He had a monthly column, entitled "Wil Save," in the Dungeons & Dragons-based magazine "Dungeon"; in May 2005, he ceased writing it. From January 2005 to October 2006, he wrote a column for "The Onion AV Club" about early video games, called "Games of Our Lives." On December 12, 2008, he returned to his role as Geek in Review editor, with his editorials being published every second Wednesday of the month.
In spring 2003, he founded the independent publishing company Monolith Press and released a memoir entitled "Dancing Barefoot". Monolith Press was "founded on the idea that publication should not be limited by opportunity." Most of the entries are extended versions of his blog entries. "Dancing Barefoot" sold out three printings in four months. In winter 2003 Wheaton signed to publisher Tim O'Reilly with a three-book contract. O'Reilly acquired "Dancing Barefoot", and published his extended memoirs, "Just a Geek", in summer of 2004. He has since written about his bitterness regarding how the book was marketed, believing it was pitched as a "Star Trek" book when he intended it as more of a personal memoir. In February 2009, he released "Sunken Treasure: Wil Wheaton's Hot Cocoa Box Sampler". As a chapbook, it contains several small extracts of various different projects, including two short stories from Ficlets, an ACME comedy sketch, and a Criminal Minds production diary. Instead of using traditional publishing, Wheaton decided to self-publish using Lulu Publishing, something he has continued to do with all his publications since. Since publishing with Lulu, he has made all of his books available as both paperbacks and digital downloadable files. Later that same year, Wheaton released "Memories of the Future: Volume 1", a humorous critique of the first thirteen episodes of "". "Memories" features a review of each episode, as well as an account of Wheaton's own experiences with and memories of that episode. Closing up 2009, Wheaton published "Happiest Days of Our Lives", to which his son, Ryan, contributed by writing the afterword.
Politics.
Wheaton described himself as a liberal in 2005. In September 2006 he criticized George W. Bush's antiterrorism plan: "Shame on President Bush. Shame on his Republican allies in Congress." In a column that he wrote for Salon.com in 2005, "The Real War on Christmas", Wheaton attacked conservative commentators like Bill O'Reilly, Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity for influencing the political views of his parents, with whom Wheaton found himself unable to have political discussions during family get-togethers on holidays like Christmas. Wheaton's parents were very offended by the article, and he posted a lengthy apology on his site and an interview in which his parents clarified their political views. On August 24, 2007, he gave the keynote for the yearly Penny Arcade Expo, which was subsequently made available online. He stepped in following a public battle between the formerly-scheduled keynote debate participants, noted anti-games activist Jack Thompson and Hal Halpin, the president of the Entertainment Consumers Association (ECA). Much of Wheaton’s address focused on the debate over violence in video games. He also gave the keynote at PAX East 2010 in Boston, Massachusetts. He supported Barack Obama in the 2008 Presidential Election and opposed Proposition 8, calling it "nothing but hate and discrimination".
Games.
In 2003, Wheaton mentioned his love for the game of poker on his blog. The following year, he began writing more extensively about his poker-playing experiences, including stories about playing Texas hold 'em tournaments locally and in Las Vegas. Eventually, he worked up to regular play, including a run at the 2005 World Poker Tour Championships. On June 23, 2005, Wheaton accepted an invitation to join Team PokerStars. He went on to play in that year's World Series of Poker and was the guest speaker for the 2005 B.A.R.G.E Banquet. In June 2007, he announced he would no longer be on Team Pokerstars due to changes in the U.S. legal system that would cause poker sites to have to focus on European and Asian markets and held a farewell Pokerstars tournament on June 5, 2007, which he titled "So Long and Thanks for All the Chips". Wheaton is a "Dungeons & Dragons" player, and played during the PAX 2010 event using the 4th edition rules. Wheaton, along with webcartoonists Jerry Holkins and Mike Krahulik of Penny Arcade, and Scott Kurtz of PvP, played in front of a live audience. The game was hosted and recorded by Wizards of the Coast with Chris Perkins as the dungeonmaster. Wheaton also played "D&D" 4th edition at the PAX 2011 event using the 4th edition rules, and used the "D&D Next" play test rules at PAX Prime 2012. Wheaton also hosts the web series TableTop, where he explains how to play various card, board and dice games, then plays a round with celebrity guests.
Comic book.
Wheaton made a guest appearance in the comic book "PS 238". He appears as himself, but with the power of telekinesis. A PS 238 teacher, Alloy, is his adoring fan. Wheaton's debut comic book "The Guild: Fawkes" which he wrote alongside Felicia Day was released on May 23 2012.
Audiobooks.
Wheaton recorded the audio CD of "" by Bill Willingham, which was released on December 8, 2009. as well as the audio CD of "Ready Player One" written by Ernest Cline. Wheaton narrates many audiobooks, including "Ready Player One" by Ernest Cline, "Masters of Doom" by David Kushner, "Fuzzy Nation" & "Redshirts" by John Scalzi (and other Scalzi works), and "Byways" part of METAtropolis: Cascadia by Tobias Buckell. Wheaton has also recorded several of his non-self-published books as downloadable audiobooks. These include "Just a Geek", "The Happiest Days of Our Lives", and his Criminal minds diary from "Sunken Treasure". He also released excerpts of "Memories of The Future: Vol 1" as free podcasts.
Personal life.
Wheaton was roommates with Chris Hardwick for some time at UCLA. They met at a showing of "Arachnophobia" in Burbank, California. Wheaton married Anne Prince in 1999 and lives in Arcadia, California with her and her two sons from a previous relationship. When one son was 19, he asked Wheaton to legally adopt him, which he did.
