The seventh series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who originally started airing on 1 September 2012 and has been scheduled to air across 2012 and 2013, being split into two parts, as with the previous series. The series was broadcast concurrently on BBC One in the United Kingdom, BBC America in the United States, and on Space in Canada, and also on ABC in Australia, with each episode released a week after its UK and North American release. Following its premiere on 1 September 2012, the series aired weekly until 29 September 2012. Six episodes were broadcast in 2012, including the 2012 Christmas special, "The Snowmen", which aired independent of the main series, with the remaining eight episodes scheduled for broadcast, starting on 30 March 2013.
"Doctor Who"s seventh series was the show's third series in which Matt Smith, Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill played the eleventh incarnation of the Doctor and his companions Amy Pond and Rory Williams respectively. The latter two characters feature during the series' first five episodes. However, they depart in the fifth episode, after which both Gillan and Darvill left the show and were replaced by Jenna-Louise Coleman, portraying Clara Oswald. The sixth episode features a new TARDIS interior, title sequence, theme tune, and costume for the Doctor. Clara Oswald joins him for the second half of the series.
Casting.
The seventh series is the third starring Matt Smith as the eleventh incarnation of the Doctor. Karen Gillan and Arthur Darvill, who portray Amy Pond and Rory Williams respectively, departed the programme in the fifth episode. The circumstances in which the pair leave was a mutual decision from Gillan and showrunner Steven Moffat. The actress previously stated that she did not want to make return cameos to the show.
On 21 March 2012, it was announced that Jenna-Louise Coleman would replace Gillan and Darvill as the next companion. She auditioned for the role in secrecy, pretending it was for something called "Men on Waves", an anagram for "Woman Seven". Moffat chose her for the role because she worked the best alongside Smith and could talk faster than him. He stated that her character will be different from previous companions, though he attempted to keep the details of her character a secret until she debuted in the Christmas special. In "Asylum of the Daleks", Coleman appears as the character Oswin Oswald, a secret which was kept from the public before transmission. Coleman was originally given the role of a Victorian governess named Jasmine, and then for the second audition she was given both the characters of Oswin and Clara. She originally thought that the producers were looking for the right character, but later realised it was part of Moffat's "soft mystery" plan.
Guest stars include David Gyasi, Rupert Graves, David Bradley, Riann Steele as Queen Nefertiti in episode 2, Ben Browder, Adrian Scarborough, Garrick Hagon, Steven Berkoff, Ruthie Henshall, Jemma Redgrave, Michael McShane. Dougray Scott, Jessica Raine, David Warner, Liam Cunningham cast in episode 11, and Rachael Stirling and her mother Dame Diana Rigg in episode 10. Mark Williams appears in the second and fourth episodes as Rory's father. Alex Kingston returned to the series as her character River Song for Amy and Rory's final episode. Richard E. Grant and Tom Ward were cast in the 2012 Christmas special, together with young actor Cameron Strefford playing a younger version of Richard E. Grant's character.
Production.
The BBC commissioned the fourteen-episode seventh series on 8 June 2011. "The Doctor, the Widow and the Wardrobe" was executive produced by Steven Moffat, Piers Wenger and Caroline Skinner. Beth Willis left the BBC and stepped down as executive producer after series 6 and Wenger also departed following the Christmas special, leaving Moffat and Skinner as executive producers for series 7. Production of "Doctor Who" relocated to the new Roath Lock studios in Cardiff midway through production of the series on 12 March 2012; the first episode to be filmed there is the Christmas special in Block Four, with the debut of Coleman's character; however it was reported that a later episode written by Neil Cross was the first Coleman filmed. Moffat has stated that the introduction of the new companion will " the show a little bit" and "make you look at the Doctor differently".
Moffat has stated that the seventh series will be the opposite of the arc-driven nature of the sixth, consisting of mainly stand-alone stories. This was inspired by fan reactions to the title of "Let's Kill Hitler" when it was revealed at the end of "A Good Man Goes to War" with no plot details; he told the writers of the seventh series to "slut it up" with "big, huge, mad ideas" and "write it like a movie poster". Toby Whithouse, writer of the Wild West-themed third episode, stated that each episode would have more of a specific genre, and his was developed from a one-line pitch from Moffat. The stand-alone nature will mean that there are no two-part episodes or series-long story arcs. According to Dan Martin of "The Guardian", Moffat stated that the goal of the series is "compressed storytelling"; Martin remarked that "Asylum of the Daleks" told more than some of the four-parters in the classic series.
In keeping with the blockbuster theme, the title sequence features a different look to the titles and logo in the title sequence to reflect the concept of the episode. The Time Vortex in the title sequence has also been tinted blue and green. The interior of the TARDIS is redesigned starting with the Christmas special, which also features a new title sequence and variation of the theme tune. Moffat had noticed that the TARDIS' design was getting "progressively whimsical" and resembled more of a "magical place" rather than a machine. The set was designed by series production designer Michael Pickwood, who stated that the new interior was also supposed to be "darker and moodier" and provide an easier access to the "gallery" of the ship when shooting. The new design allowed the entrance to be more central, and also returned the console to the look of the designs in the classic series.
In the Christmas special the Doctor sports a new costume, tying in to the purple colour scheme, which Smith described as "a bit Artful Dodger meets the Doctor". Moffat described the new outfit as a "progression" as the Doctor was in "a different phase of his life now" and felt more "grown-up" and fatherlike. In the second half of the series, Moffat intended to show the Doctor not dressing exactly the same way each time, similar to the Third Doctor (Jon Pertwee) and the Fourth Doctor (Tom Baker), who did not wear exactly the same clothes but retained a common "look".
The seventh series began shooting on 20 February 2012. Episodes 2 and 3 were the first to enter production, directed by Saul Metzstein. Much of the Wild West episode was filmed in March 2012 in the desert area of Almería, Spain, an area which contains Wild-West style streets that have been used in the making of many Western-set films. Filming the episode in Spain was cheaper than constructing a set in the UK. The fifth episode, Amy and Rory's last, was filmed in Central Park in New York City in April 2012, as well as at Cardiff University and a cemetery in Llanelli. The fourth episode was then filmed next; the only episode in the third block of production. "Doctor Who Magazine" reported that the Christmas special would be produced by itself in Block Four. In late May 2012, Coleman was spotted at a manor in the Vale of Glamorgan, filming what was reported to be the Christmas special. However, Neil Cross's episode, reportedly the first Coleman shot, was partially filmed in Margam Country Park, South Wales around the same time; and it was reported that the manor location was also for that episode, and that Moffat was still writing the Christmas special. The Christmas special began filming the week of 6 August. Scenes for Neil Gaiman's Cyberman episode were filmed in early November 2012, showing a new design for the Cybermen.
Found script.
At the beginning of November a copy of the readthrough script of the Neil Gaiman series 7 episode was found in Cardiff, having been left in a taxi. Marked as being Eve De Leon Allen's copy and with the working title of "The Last Cyberman", arrangements were made to return the script to the BBC.
Promotion.
Smith, Gillan, Darvill, Moffat, and Skinner all promoted the series at the official "Doctor Who" convention in Cardiff in March 2012. At the convention the first trailer for the series premiered. Three promotional images of Smith and Coleman were released on 8 June, 11 June, and 13 June. New footage was shown at the 2012 San Diego Comic-Con International on 15 July, consisting of clips from the second and third episodes. The second trailer for the series aired on the BBC on 2 August, as part of the coverage of the London Olympics. The 90-second trailer and a promotional image were first be made available online the morning of 2 August. "Asylum of the Daleks" was screened at BFI Southbank on 14 August, and at the MediaGuardian Edinburgh International Television Festival during 23–25 August. On 25 August it was also screened in New York City. Following the BFI screening, around twenty high-resolution images from the first five episodes were released on the BBC's "Doctor Who" website. A teaser trailer for "Asylum of the Daleks" was released on 18 August 2012, with a longer version released on 25 August. On 29 August at midnight, the BBC released poster-style artwork for episodes 2-5.
In the week leading up to the premiere, a five part mini-adventure was released serially from 27 to 31 August, with an omnibus version shown on the BBC Red Button service on 1 September. Entitled "Pond Life" and written by Chris Chibnall, it served as a prequel to the opening adventure by exploring what Amy and Rory were up to and the effects of the Doctor on their lives.
The 2012 Children in Need appeal on 16 November 2012 featured a special prequel to "The Snowmen" titled "The Great Detective" and a trailer. On 17 December another prequel, "Vastra Investigates", was released online.
Broadcast.
The "Doctor Who" official Twitter account announced in March 2012 that it was planned that six episodes will be shown in 2012, including a Christmas Special, to be followed by eight in 2013. In July 2012, Smith stated that it would start in August, but Moffat later confirmed it was September. Part of the reason the show was moved to the autumn was because Moffat felt the darker nights suited the atmosphere of the programme, as well as the classic series originally airing in the autumn. He stated that the decision to split the series up originally came from the BBC, but he was open to anything that "shakes series up" and making the audience wait would make it seem like an "event piece".
The first episode was broadcast on 1 September 2012 on BBC One in the United Kingdom, with the fifth episode airing on 29 September 2012. The Christmas episode was broadcast on 25 December 2012 on BBC One in the United Kingdom, and the first episode of the second half of the series is due to be broadcast on 30 March 2013.
International broadcast.
The series premiered on 1 September 2012 on BBC America in the United States, and on Space in Canada. Within minutes of the first episode's UK ending, it was released onto the ABC iView service at 5:10am on 2 September 2012. It premiered 8 September 2012 on ABC1 in Australia, and on 13 September 2012 in New Zealand on Prime TV.
"The Snowmen" was broadcast on 25 December 2012 on BBC One in the UK, BBC America in the US and Space in Canada. It was broadcast at 7:30pm on ABC1 in Australia and at 8:30pm on Prime TV in New Zealand on December 26.
DVD and Blu-ray releases.
The first part of this series containing episodes 1-5 was released on DVD and Blu-ray in the UK on 29 October 2012
