Bunheads is an American television comedy-drama series created by Amy Sherman-Palladino and Lamar Damon, starring Sutton Foster. The show premiered on ABC Family on June 11, 2012 and centers on a Las Vegas showgirl who gets married on a whim and winds up teaching alongside her new mother-in-law at her ballet school. The show's title is a slang term for ballerinas or dancers who put their hair up into a bun while dancing.
Premise.
"Bunheads" is the tale of Michelle Simms, a former ballerina 'bunhead' who wound up a Las Vegas showgirl. Seeing her life and career at a dead end, she impulsively takes up the offer of marriage from her persistent admirer, Hubbell Flowers (played by Alan Ruck), and moves to his sleepy coastal town, the fictional town of Paradise in Southern California, thirty miles south of Ojai, California. Once there, Hubbell is killed in a car accident and Michelle struggles to adjust to life in a small town and teaching alongside her mother-in-law, Fanny, at her ballet school: the Paradise Dance Academy.
Cast.
Cameos.
In addition to recurring actors that carried over from Sherman-Palladino's Gilmore Girls, including Kelly Bishop, Gregg Henry and Rose Abdoo, numerous other actors previously appearing in Gilmore Girls have also appeared in episodes of Bunheads.
Development and production.
"Bunheads" first appeared on the development slate at ABC Family in September 2010, under the title "Strut", when the show received a cast-contingent pilot order. Lamar Damon wrote the script, and production was originally expected to begin in fall 2010. In September 2011, it was reported that the series was being retooled by Amy Sherman-Palladino, who would serve as executive producer. The series was given a pilot order under the new name "Bunheads".
On September 28, 2011, it was announced that Broadway star Sutton Foster was set to star in the lead role as Michelle. Filming took place in November with creator Amy Sherman-Palladino writing and directing.
On February 11, 2012, ABC Family ordered the pilot to series with a ten episode order. Following shortly, on February 15, 2012, it was announced that Kelly Bishop would join the show playing the recurring role of Fanny Flowers, the mother-in-law to Michelle.
It was announced on June 9, 2012, that singer-songwriter and "Gilmore Girls" composer Sam Phillips would score the music to "Bunheads".
On August 17, 2012, "Bunheads" received a renewal for the "back end" of the first season (eight additional episodes).
"Bunheads" returned on January 7, 2013, after "Switched at Birth".
Reception.
Critics have given a very positive reception to the show, specifically praising Amy Sherman-Palladino's distinct writing and the performances of leading ladies Sutton Foster and Kelly Bishop.
Robert Lloyd of "Los Angeles Times" thinks "ABC Family's "Bunheads" a cute summer treat. Amy Sherman-Palladino strikes again with that "Gilmore Girls" charm in "Bunheads", with Tony-winning Sutton Foster as a former showgirl mentoring budding ballerinas." "Variety"s Geoff Berkshire says "Sherman-Palladino's snappy banter and slightly melancholic characters only enrich the texture of a series perfectly pitched between comedy and drama."
"The Huffington Post"s Maureen Ryan recommends the show saying "the pilot for "Bunheads" moves at a brisk, refreshing clip and it even packs an emotional wallop or two. The relationships that are sketched out in the first hour are promising. Sherman-Palladino has long been interested in characters who are dancing as fast as they can, and in this show, she has a whole new set to play with."
"Vanity Fair"s James Wolcott titles the show a "knockout charmer" and singles out particular praise for lead Sutton Foster "revealing a knowing Carol Burnett-ish clowning flair that works beautifully on camera."
"Newsday" critic Diane Werts notes that ""Bunheads" sets multigenerational tone," and praises Sherman-Palladino's style. "Think they've all got a way with words? Some attitude? Smart pop-culture shout-outs? You betcha. "Bunheads" is from "Gilmore Girls" auteur Amy Sherman-Palladino, so it chatters just as giddily, from Gadhafi to Godzilla to Graceland."
HitFix's Alan Sepinwall calls "ABC Family's "Bunheads" a return to form for Amy Sherman-Palladino." and "Time"s James Poniewozik, though showing some minor concern for the series plot going forward, suggests, "What matters is its voice, and the spring in its step, and its first hour was just so damn enjoyable that I'll gladly season-pass this and see where the season takes it. Out of the gate, "Bunheads" has some impressive moves; I look forward to trying to keep up."
Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" says in his review of the pilot, "Summer TV just got dreamier, dancier...Sherman-Palladino has constructed "Bunheads" cannily to both fit into and transcend ABC Family's programming."
On the mixed front, David Wiegand of the "San Francisco Chronicle" thinks "Bunheads" "will take some work and it could just as easily become either annoying or likable." 
Popular entertainment website The A.V. Club ranked Bunheads number 15 on their annual "The Best TV of 2012" list writing "At its best, Bunheads scavenges real heart out of its flea-market approach to plot and character. When Foster breathes “The re-useable tote!” and Kelly Bishop replies with satisfaction, “The re-useable tote,” it’s time to be thankful Sherman-Palladino is back in business." 
The New Yorker's Emily Nussbaum included Bunheads among her favorite television shows of 2012, listing the Istanbul (Not Constantinople) dance number closing episode six as the year's most memorable TV moment, saying: "1. This. Television is always the best when it takes you by surprise.
The first season currently holds a 74 on Metacritic and is one of the more highly rated shows to premiere in 2012.
