The at sign "@" is also commonly called the at symbol, ampersat, apetail or commercial at in English—and less commonly a wide range of other terms. The fact that there is no single word in English for the symbol has prompted some writers to use the French "arobase" or Spanish and Portuguese "arroba"—or to coin new words such as "asperand", "ampersat"—but none of these has achieved wide currency.
Originally an accounting and commercial invoice abbreviation meaning "at the rate of" (e.g. 7 widgets @ $2 = $14), it was not included on the keyboard of the earliest commercially successful typewriters, but was on at least one 1889 model and the very successful Underwood models from the "Underwood No. 5" in 1900 onward. It is now universally included on computer keyboards. 
In recent years, its meaning has grown to include the sense of being "located at" or "directed at", especially in email addresses and social media, particularly Twitter.
The mark is encoded at .
History.
There are several theories about the origin of the "commercial at" character.
Whatever the origin of the @ symbol, the history of its usage is more well-known: it has long been used in Spanish and Portuguese as an abbreviation of "arroba", a unit of weight equivalent to 25 pounds, and derived from the Arabic expression of "a quarter" (الربع pronounced "ar-rubʿ"). An Italian academic claims to have traced the @ symbol to the 16th century, in a mercantile document sent by Francesco Lapi from Seville to Rome on May 4, 1536. The document is about commerce with Pizarro, in particular the price of an @ of wine in Peru. In Italian, the symbol was interpreted to mean amphora (""). Currently, the word "arroba" means both the at-symbol and a unit of weight. In Italian, the symbol represents one amphora, a unit of weight and volume based upon the capacity of the standard amphora jar, and entered modern meaning and use as "at the rate of" or "at price of" in northern Europe.
Modern uses.
Commercial.
In contemporary English usage, @ is a commercial symbol, called "at site or at rate" meaning "at" and "at the rate of". It has rarely been used in financial documents or grocers' price tags, and is not used in standard typography.
Since 23 October 2012, the At-sign is registered as a trade mark by the German Patent and Trade Mark Office – DPMA (registration number 302012038338) for @T.E.L.L. While company promoters have claimed that it may from now on be illegal for other commercial interests to use the At-sign, this only applies to identical or confusingly similar goods and no court, German or otherwise, has yet ruled on this purported illegality.
Contemporary usage.
A common contemporary use of @ is in email addresses (transmitted by SMTP), as in codice_1 (the user codice_2 located "at site" the codice_3 domain). BBN Technologies' Ray Tomlinson is credited with introducing this usage in 1971. This idea of the symbol representing "located at" in the form codice_4 is also seen in other tools and protocols; for example, the Unix shell command codice_5 tries to establish an ssh connection to the computer with the hostname codice_6 using the username codice_2.
On web pages, organizations often obscure email addresses of their members or employees by omitting the @. This practice, known as address munging, makes the email addresses less vulnerable to spam programs that scan the internet for them.
Another contemporary use of the @ symbol in American English is adding information about a sporting event. Opposing sports teams sometimes have their names separated by a v. (for ). However, the "v." may be replaced with "@" when also conveying at which team's home field the game will be played. In this case, the away team is written first.
On some online forums without threaded discussions, @ is used to denote a reply; for instance: "@Jane" to respond to a comment Jane made earlier. Similarly, in some cases, @ is used for "attention" in email messages originally sent to someone else. For example, if an email was sent from Catherine to Steve, but in the body of the email, Catherine wants to make Keirsten aware of something, Catherine will start the line "@Keirsten" to indicate to Keirsten that the following sentence concerns her. This also helps with mobile email users who cannot see bold or color in email.
In microblogging (such as Twitter and StatusNet-based microblogs), @ before the user name is used to send publicly readable replies (e.g. "@otheruser: Message text here"). The blog and client software can automatically interpret these as links to the user in question. This use of the @ symbol was also made available to Facebook users on September 15, 2009. In Internet Relay Chat (IRC), it is often shown before a user's nick to mark the operator of a channel.
@ is also used on many wireless routers/modems, where a solid green @ symbol indicates the router is connected and a solid amber @ indicates there is a problem.
Gender-neutrality in Spanish and Portuguese.
In Portuguese and Spanish, as well in other West Iberian languages where many words end in '-o' when in the masculine gender and end '-a' in the feminine, @ can be used as a gender-neutral substitute for the default 'o' ending, which some advocates of gender-neutral language-modification feel indicates implicit linguistic disregard for women. These languages do not possess a neutral gender and the masculine forms are also used traditionally when referring to groups of mixed or unknown sex. The at-sign is intended to replace the desinence '-o', including its plural form '-os', due to the resemblance to a digraph of an inner letter 'a' and an outer letter 'o'.
As an example of the @ being used for gender-inclusive purposes, we can consider the Spanish and Portuguese word "amigos". When the word represents not only male friends, but also female ones, the proponents of a gender-inclusive language replace it with "amig@s". In this sense, "amigos" would be used only when the writer is sure the group referred to is all-male. Usage of "amigas" is the same in traditional and such new forms of communication. Alternative forms for a gender-inclusive at-sign would be the slash sign ("amigos/as") and the circle-A, ("amigⒶs") maybe as a kind of "bisexual digraph." However (as) is more used, using the male first, and the feminine in brackets, amigos(as). For more about this, see Satiric misspelling.
The Real Academia Española disapproves the use of the at-sign as a letter.
Names in other languages.
In many languages other than English, although most typewriters included the symbol, the use of @ was less common before email became widespread in the mid-1990s. Consequently, it is often perceived in those languages as denoting "The Internet", computerization, or modernization in general.
Unicode variants.
Besides the in its regular size, there is also a Unicode character for a small at-sign: , located in the Small Font Variants code chart Depending on the font type this small at-sign can have the size of lower-case letter, but it is often smaller than that. In addition, the "full-width ASCII variants" code chart has .
