B.A.P (Korean: 비에이피; an acronym for Best Absolute Perfect) is a six-member hip-hop South Korean group formed in 2012 under the management of TS Entertainment. The group consists of Bang Yong Guk, Kim Himchan, Daehyun, Youngjae, Jong Up, and Zelo. On January 26, 2012, B.A.P made their recording debut with the single "Warrior", followed by the release of their debut EP, "Warrior" in February 2012. 
Career.
2011: Pre-debut.
B.A.P. was conceived and began promoting in late 2011, starting with Yong Guk, who takes the role of leader in the group. He signed to TS Entertainment and was featured on labelmate Song Jieun's song "Going Crazy". He made a solo debut on August 11, 2011, with the single "I Remember", featuring B2ST's Yang Yo-seob. A second member, Him Chan, an ulzzang multi-instrumentalist, was the second member of BAP to be introduced to the public in the form of an MC for a music show program on MTV Korea, called "The Show". And lastly, on November 23, 2011, Zelo, the third member from BAP to be publicly introduced, was introduced through a collaboration with fellow member, Bang Yong Guk, under the moniker Bang & Zelo. This time, they did it by releasing the song "Never Give Up".
2012: "Warrior", "Power", "No Mercy", "Crash", and "Stop It".
In January 2012, the group starred in a reality show, "Ta-Dah, It's B.A.P", which aired on SBS MTV. The show focused on how the six members play the role of aliens from a different planet who worked together to debut as B.A.P and invade Earth to help save their dying planet, Planet Mato.
On January 25, 2012, the group's debut single, "Warrior", was released, with "MTV Korea" describing it as "powerful and charismatic". Additionally, Nancy Lee of "Enews World" wrote "It appears B.A.P has set out to differentiate itself among the pretty-boy male idol groups currently dominating the K-Pop world with a tough, bad boy image, smashing car windows, kicking up dirt and, you know, doing as boys do." Promotion for the single began on the Korean TV show "Music Bank", followed by other Music TV appearances such as "M! Countdown", "Music Core", "Inkigayo" and "The Show". On January 28, B.A.P held its debut showcase in Seoul, attended by over 3,000 people. On February 3, 2012, the "Warrior" debuted on Billboard's World Albums Chart at #10. In South Korea, "Warrior" sold over 10,000 copies in just two days upon its release. 
In March 2012, B.A.P released a follow-up single, "Secret Love". On April 16, 2012, TS Entertainment announced that B.A.P would have a comeback with a new album on April 27, 2012. On April 20, TS Entertainment revealed the name of their comeback single, which was entitled "Power" and subsequently released a music video teaser for the song. On April 26, 2012 the music video for "Power" was released on the group's YouTube channel. The following day, B.A.P released their mini-album, "Power" on various music digital stores. After finishing up promotional activity for "Power" in Korea, the band will be on an Asian showcase tour, visiting Macao, Malaysia, Thailand, and Taiwan.
On June 27, B.A.P released the “Recording Take 2” photo book.
On July 4, B.A.P attended Malaysia's dance contest Showdown 2012 as special guests and performed Power. They also had their first Malaysia Showcase on July 6. 
On July 9, B.A.P also released their new song from their first mini-album, "Goodbye" with Matoki Cartoons. 
On July 19, B.A.P released the music video from their new first-mini album, titled "No Mercy". TS Entertainment deduced that the release of the physical first-mini album was delayed to the 25th of said month due to printing mistakes. Said album consists of five tracks: "Goodbye" "No Mercy" "Dancing in the Rain" "Voice Mail" and "What My Heart Tells Me to Do". 
SBS MTV hosted "B.A.P Day" on August 4, airing reruns of "B.A.P Diary" and "Tadah! It's B.A.P". Undisclosed videos that were recorded by B.A.P themselves were also aired. B.A.P is the third group to receive such opportunity after seniors TVXQ and Big Bang. 
On August 30, B.A.P released their repackaged version of their third EP "No Mercy", renamed "Crash". The two new songs included in the new album are "Crash" and Yong Guk's "I Remember" (feat. Daehyun) along with the five previous tracks. 
In early October, TS Entertainment stated that B.A.P are currently preparing for their new single album. On October 23nd, B.A.P released their third single album, titled "Stop It", together with a music video.
2013–present: "One Shot".
On January 10th, 2013 they released a teaser video of pre-release track for their upcoming mini album "Rain Sound" with full MV release 4 days later. 
On February 7th, 2013 they released a teaser video for their upcoming second mini album titled "One Shot", which also included "Rain Sound" as one of the songs. The mini album contains 5 newest songs with One Shot as title track. 
On February 11th, 2013 they released the 7-minute long MV for One Shot , which filming had taken placed in both Phillippines and Korea in end of January. 
On February 15th, 2013 they had their first comeback stage on Music Bank. Because of hand injury, which caused him to wear a cast, Himchan couldn't participate in One Shot's promotion for time being. 
On February 23rd- 24th B.A.P had their first solo concert "BAP LIVE ON EARTH SEOUL" at Seoul Olympic Park Hall.
Artistry.
Musical styles and image.
MTV Korea called B.A.P, "a versatile group". On their live performances, Yun Seong Yeol of "Star News Korea" commented, "They've already proved what they're showing on the stage is very distinctive. Their perfect group dance, strong charisma, Bang Yong Guk's raw rap, and Zelo's high-speed rap are in perfect harmony. And Dae Hyun and Young Jae's great voices make their performance reach the climax. As befits their aggressive moves, their performances are very intense. Even top singing groups might have to pay attention to them." Additionally, Nancy Lee of "Enews World" commented, "It appears B.A.P has set out to differentiate itself among the pretty-boy male idol groups currently dominating the K-Pop world with a tough, bad boy image, smashing car windows, kicking up dirt and, you know, doing as boys do." On their debut period, the members have all dyed their hair platinum blonde. They have personally participated in their stage ensembles, their concept, as well as writing and composing their songs on the album in order to express their unique colors. As member Yoo Youngjae pointed out, "we wanted to prevent ourselves from being too different, because we wanted a ‘team’ image on stage." When asked about the biggest difference between B.A.P and other idol groups, Yong Guk commented, "We are manly. When you look at the dances that many male idol groups dance, there are a lot of moves where their lines stand out. So there are times where they look prettier when dancing in a group, but in contrast to that, we wanted to express a powerful side more rather than give enjoyment to the eyes. That's why I think we look more different. And our music style and fashion as well.
Each B.A.P album had a rabbit on the cover. The mascot's name is "Matoki," which is short for "Mask wearing Tokki" (tokki means rabbit in Korean). On June 11, Matoki characters reflecting the personality of each member was revealed on the mascot's Facebook.
Influences.
B.A.P's musical style is heavily influenced by Hip-Hop music. B.A.P's leader Bang Yong Guk shared the group's passion for African American Music, he confessed, "We're like a white paper now, on which can have any kinds of drawing. On the contrary to this, our music is black. All members love African-American music as it has soul. If we can be born again, we want to be born as African-Americans and do their music. Yong Guk and Zelo cite 50 Cent, P. Diddy, Pharrell and other rappers as their musical influences. Additionally Yong Guk commented, "My goal from the beginning wasn't becoming a K-pop singer. But seeing Supreme Team or Dynamic Duo who have popularized hip hop music Korea, I wanted to take part in it and make my contribution to the genre’s development." Aside from being a rapper, Yong Guk is also a song-writer, having participating on composing of all B.A.P's songs in their debut album, "Warrior (EP)". Kim Himchan is a multi-instrumentalist and is influenced by Korean Traditional Music. Himchan plays various Korean traditional instruments, such as daegeum (flute-like traditional instrument), janggu (drum-like traditional instrument), kkwaenggwari and jing. In college, Himchan continued in this direction with a major in traditional arts at the Korea National University of Arts. Jung Daehyun is influenced by R&B music and cites Shin Yong Jae as his musical influence. Yoo Youngjae is influenced by R&B and Neo Soul music; cites Musiq Soulchild and Jay Park as his musical influences Moon Jong Up is influenced by dance, Hip-Hop & R&B music; he cites Chris Brown as his major influence and one of his idols, particularly in singing and dancing. Zelo is influenced by Hip-Hop and R&B music, and cites will.i.am and Kanye West as his role models. As for Korean artists, all of the members have revealed that they are fans of Jay Park and would love to have a collaboration with him.
