Ballspielverein Borussia 09 e.V. Dortmund, commonly known as Borussia Dortmund , Dortmund, or BVB, is a German sports club based in Dortmund, North Rhine-Westphalia. Borussia Dortmund plays in the Bundesliga, the top tier of the German football league system. Dortmund is one of the most successful clubs in German football history. They are the current Bundesliga champions.
Borussia Dortmund was founded in 1909 by seventeen football players from Dortmund. Borussia Dortmund have won eight German football championships, three German Cups, four German Supercups, one UEFA Champions League, one UEFA Cup Winners' Cup, and one Intercontinental Cup. Their UEFA Cup Winners' Cup win in 1966 made them the first German club to win a European title.
Since 1974, Dortmund have played their home games at Westfalenstadion. The stadium is the biggest stadium in Germany. Borussia Dortmund's colours are black and yellow. Dortmund holds a long-standing rivalry with Schalke. Matches between the two clubs are referred to as the Revierderby. In the last two decades, a strong rivalry with Bayern Munich has emerged, known as "Der Klassiker" (English: The Classic). In terms of revenue, Dortmund is the second biggest sports club in Germany and the eleventh biggest football club in the world, generating €189.1 million in 2012. Borussia Dortmund's motto is ""Echte Liebe"" (English: "True Love").
History.
Foundation and early years.
The club was founded on 19 December 1909 by a group of young men unhappy with church-sponsored "Trinity Youth", where they played football under the stern and unsympathetic eye of the local parish priest. Father Dewald was blocked at the door when he tried to break up the organizing meeting being held in a room of the local pub, "Zum Wildschütz". The founders were Franz and Paul Braun, Henry Cleve, Hans Debest, Paul Dziendzielle, Julius and Wilhelm Jacobi, Hans Kahn, Gustav Müller, Franz Risse, Fritz Schulte, Hans Siebold, August Tönnesmann, Heinrich and Robert Unger, Fritz Weber and Franz Wendt. The name "Borussia" is Latin for Prussia but was taken from the Borussia beer from the nearby Borussia brewery in Dortmund. The team began playing in blue and white striped shirts with a red sash, and black shorts. In 1913, they donned the black and yellow stripes so familiar today.
Over the next decades the club enjoyed only modest success playing in local leagues. They had a brush with bankruptcy in 1929 when an attempt to boost the club's fortunes by signing some paid professional footballers failed miserably and left the team deep in debt. They survived only through the generosity of a local supporter who covered the team's shortfall out of his own pocket.
World War II and the postwar.
The 1930s saw the rise of the Third Reich which restructured sports and football organizations throughout the nation to suit the regime's goals. "Borussia"'s president was replaced when he refused to join the Nazi Party, and a couple of members who surreptitiously used the club's offices to produce anti-Nazi pamphlets were executed in the last days of the war. The club did have greater success in the newly established Gauliga Westfalen, but would have to wait until after World War II to make a breakthrough. It was during this time that Borussia developed its intense rivalry with Schalke 04 of suburban Gelsenkirchen, the most successful side of the era (see "Revierderby"). Like every other organisation in Germany, Borussia was dissolved by the Allied occupation authorities after the war in an attempt to distance the country's institutions from the so-recent Nazi past. There was a short-lived attempt to merge the club with two others – "Werksportgemeinschaft Hoesch" and "Freier Sportverein 98" – as "Sportgemeinschaft Borussia von 1898", but it was as "Ballspiel-Verein Borussia" ("BVB") that they made their first appearance in the national league final in 1949 where they lost 2–3 to VfR Mannheim.
First national title.
The Oberliga West, a first division league which included "Borussia", dominated German football through the late 50s. In 1949 Borussia reached the final in Stuttgart against VfR Mannheim, which they lost 2–3 after extra time. The club claimed its first national title in 1956 with a 4–2 against Karlsruher SC. One year later, Borussia won with exactly the same team their second national title. After this coup the three Alfredos (Alfred Preißler, Alfred Kelbassa and Alfred Niepieklo) were legends in Dortmund. In 1963, Borussia Dortmund won the last final before the Bundesliga started. It was their third national title.
Entry to the Bundesliga.
In 1962, the DFB met in Dortmund and voted to finally establish a professional football league in Germany to begin play in August 1963 as the Bundesliga. Borussia Dortmund earned its place among the first sixteen clubs to play in the new league by winning the last pre-Bundesliga championship. Losing club 1. FC Köln also earned an automatic berth. It was Dortmund's Friedhelm Konietzka who scored the first-ever Bundesliga goal barely a minute into a match which they would eventually lose 2–3 to Werder Bremen.
In 1965, Dortmund captured its first German Cup. Dortmund had a mixed result in 1966. Dortmund won the European Cup Winners Cup 2–1 against Liverpool in extra time with the goals coming from Sigfried Held and Reinhard Libuda. Dortmund, however, surrendered a commanding position atop the Bundesliga by losing four of their last five league games and finished second, three points behind champions 1860 Munich. Ironically, much of 1860's success came on the strength of the play of Konietzka, recently transferred there from Dortmund.
The 1970s were characterized by financial problems and relegation from the Bundesliga in 1972 and the opening of the Westfalenstadion, named after its home "Land", Westphalia in 1974. The club earned its return to Bundesliga in 1976.
Dortmund continued to suffer from financial problems through the 1980s. "BVB" narrowly avoided being relegated again in 1986 by winning a third decisive play-off-game against Fortuna Köln after finishing the regular season in 16th place.
Dortmund did not enjoy any significant success again until a 4–1 German Cup win in 1989 against Werder Bremen. It was Horst Köppel's first trophy as a manager.
Golden age – the 1990s.
After a tenth place finish in the Bundesliga in 1991, manager Horst Köppel was let go and manager Ottmar Hitzfeld was hired.
In 1992, Hitzfeld led Borussia Dortmund to a second place finish in the Bundesliga and could have won the Bundesliga had VfB Stuttgart not won their last game to win the Bundesliga instead.
Along with a fourth place finish in the Bundesliga, Dortmund in 1993 made it to the UEFA Cup final, which they lost 6–1 on aggregate to Juventus. In spite of this result, Borussia walked away with DM25 million under the prize money pool system in place at the time for German sides participating in the Cup. Cash flush, Dortmund was able to sign players who later brought them numerous honours later in the 1990s.
Dortmund finished in fourth in the Bundesliga in 1994.
Dortmund won the Bundesliga in 1995.
Dortmund won the Bundesliga in 1996. Dortmund player Matthias Sammer was named European Footballer of the Year in the 1996 season.
In a memorable 1997 UEFA Champions League Final in Munich, Dortmund faced a Juventus team featuring Zinedine Zidane. Karl-Heinz Riedle put Dortmund ahead shooting under the goalkeeper from a cross by Paul Lambert. Riedle then made it two with a bullet header from a corner kick. In the second half, Alessandro Del Piero pulled one back for Juventus with a back heel. Then 20-year old substitute and local boy Lars Ricken latched on to a through pass by Andreas Möller. Only 16 seconds after coming on to the pitch, Ricken chipped Angelo Peruzzi in the Juventus goal from over 20 yards out with his first touch of the ball. With Zinedine Zidane unable to make an impression for Juventus against the close marking of Lambert, Dortmund lifted the trophy with a 3–1 victory.
Dortmund then went on to beat Brazilian club Cruzeiro 2–0 in the 1997 Intercontinental Cup Final to become world club champions. Borussia Dortmund were the second German club to win the Intercontinental Cup.
21st century and Borussia "goes public".
At the turn of the millennium, Borussia Dortmund became the first—and so far the only—publicly traded club on the German stock market.
In 2002, Borussia Dortmund won their third Bundesliga title. Dortmund had a remarkable run at the end of the season to overtake Bayer Leverkusen, securing the title on the final day. Manager Matthias Sammer became the first person in Borussia Dortmund history to win the Bundesliga as a player and manager. In the same season, Borussia lost the final of the 2002 UEFA Cup to Dutch side Feyenoord.
Dortmund's fortunes then steadily declined for a number of years. Poor financial management led to a heavy debt load and the sale of their Westfalenstadion ground. The situation was compounded by failure to advance in the 2003 Champions League when the team was eliminated on penalties in the qualifying rounds by Club Brugge. 2003, Bayern Munich loaned €2 million to Dortmund for a couple of months to pay their payroll. Borussia was again driven to the brink of bankruptcy in 2005, the original €11 value of its shares having plummeted by over 80% on the Frankfurter Wertpapierbörse (Frankfurt Stock Exchange). The response to the crisis included a 20% pay cut to all players.
The team still plays at Westfalenstadion, named after its home region of Westphalia. To reduce debts, the stadium was renamed "Signal Iduna Park", after a local insurance company, in 2006 under a sponsorship agreement that runs until 2016. The stadium is currently the largest football stadium in Germany with a capacity of 80,720 spectators, and hosted several matches in the 2006 World Cup, including a semi-final. Borussia Dortmund enjoys the highest average attendance of any football club in Europe, at 80,478 per match (2010–11).
Dortmund suffered a miserable start to the 2005–06 season, but rallied to finish seventh. The club failed to gain a place in the UEFA Cup via the Fair Play draw. The club's management recently indicated that the club again showed a profit; this was largely related to the sale of David Odonkor to Real Betis and Tomáš Rosický to Arsenal.
In the 2006–07 season, Dortmund unexpectedly faced serious relegation trouble for the first time in years. Dortmund went through three coaches and appointed Thomas Doll on 13 March 2007 after dropping to just one point above the relegation zone. Christoph Metzelder also left Borussia Dortmund on a free transfer.
In the 2007–08 season, Dortmund lost to many of the smaller clubs in the Bundesliga. That season was one of the worst in 20 years. Nevertheless, Dortmund reached the German Cup Final against Bayern Munich, where they lost 2–1 in extra time. The final appearance qualified Dortmund for the UEFA Cup because Bayern already qualified for the Champions League. Thomas Doll resigned on 19 May 2008 and was replaced by Jürgen Klopp.
Return to prominance.
In the 2009–10 season, Dortmund qualified for the UEFA Europa League and finished fifth in the Bundesliga. The team missed an opportunity to qualify for the Champions League by failing to beat eighth placed VfL Wolfsburg and 14th placed SC Freiburg in the final two matches of the campaign. Nonetheless, they demonstrated a renewed charisma and passion under the direction of coach Jürgen Klopp.
Entering the 2010–11 season, Dortmund fielded a young and vibrant roster which looked better. On 4 December 2010, Borussia became "Herbstmeister" (Autumn Champion), an unofficial accolade going to the league leader at the winter break. They did this three matches before the break, sharing the record for having achieved this earliest with Eintracht Frankfurt (1993–94) and 1. FC Kaiserslautern (1997–98). On 30 April 2011, the club beat 1. FC Nuremberg 2–0 at home, while second-placed Bayer Leverkusen lost, leaving Dortmund eight points clear with two games to play. This championship equaled the seven national titles held by rivals Schalke 04, and guaranteed a spot in the 2011–12 UEFA Champions League group stages.
One year later, Dortmund made a successful defense of its Bundesliga title with a win over Borussia Mönchengladbach, again on the 32nd matchday. By the 34th and final matchday, Dortmund set a new record with the most points—81—ever gained by a club in one Bundesliga season. The club's eighth championship places it third in total national titles and players will now wear two stars over their uniform crest in recognition of the team's five Bundesliga titles. Notable names from the winning roster include Lucas Barrios, Mario Götze, Neven Subotić, Mats Hummels, Robert Lewandowski, Shinji Kagawa, Łukasz Piszczek, Jakub Błaszczykowski, Kevin Großkreutz, Ivan Perišić, and İlkay Gündoğan. The club capped its successful 2011–12 season by winning the double for the first time by beating Bayern Munich 5–2 in the final of the DFB-Pokal. Borussia Dortmund are one of four German clubs to win the Bundesliga and DFB-Pokal double along with Bayern Munich, 1. FC Köln, and Werder Bremen.
Stadium.
Borussia Dortmund's stadium, the Westfalenstadion, is currently named Signal Iduna Park. The stadium is the biggest stadium in Germany and the sixth biggest in Europe. Westfalenstadion replaced the Stadion Rote Erde, which is located next door.
After the increasing popularity of Borussia Dortmund in 1965, the club planned to make a new stadium replacing the Stadion Rote Erde. The city of Dortmund was then picked as a host city for the 1974 FIFA World Cup, giving Borussia Dortmund money to build a new stadium.
The Westfalenstadion has undergone several renovations throughout the years to increase the size of the stadium, including an expansion of the stadium for the 2006 FIFA World Cup. In 2008, Borussia Dortmund opened the "Borusseum", a museum about Borussia Dortmund, in the stadium. In 2011, Borussia Dortmund installed a black solar system on the roof of Signal Iduna Park from Q-Cells. Before the next season five new video walls were installed, one on the outside of the Nordtribüne and four in the stadium.
Players.
First-team squad.
On loan.
"For recent transfers, see List of German football transfers summer 2012 and List of German football transfers winter 2011–12."
