Chennai Express is an upcoming 2013 Indian romance comedy film directed by Rohit Shetty and produced by Gauri Khan under her production banner Red Chillies Entertainment. The film features Shahrukh Khan and Deepika Padukone in lead roles. This is the second collaboration between Khan and Padukone after the 2007 blockbuster "Om Shanti Om" and the first collaboration between Khan,Shetty and Sainath Dukkipati. "Chennai Express" is about a man's journey from Mumbai to Rameshwaram and what happens along the way. Principal photography began on 27 September 2012. Filming began in October 2012 and is expected to wrap-up by April 2013.
Production.
Development.
Khan and Shetty had originally planned to team up for a remake of the 1982 film "Angoor". After "Singham", Shetty had begun writing the script of the film but left it mid-way. Incidentally, he had the script of "Chennai Express" ready to be narrated to Khan as a back-up due to the difficulty of obtaining the actor's filming dates. Upon being narrated the script, Khan was impressed with the idea of "Chennai Express" and agreed to star in it before the "Angoor" remake. With this development, the remake of "Angoor" was pushed back.
When Rohit was asked about the story of the film, he said, "It's a hard-core commercial film with a romantic angle. The story is about this man's travel from Mumbai to Rameshwaram and what happens during the journey. There is a lot of romance keeping Shah Rukh in mind but it will also be a typical Rohit Shetty film with cars blowing up and lots of action."
Casting.
Khan was the first actor to be approached with the script, and hence the first lead actor to be signed on to the film. Incidentally, Shetty stated that despite the title, Khan would not play the role of a South Indian in the film. The casting of the lead heroine was speculated for a good deal of time. Names such as Kareena Kapoor, Asin Thottumkal and Deepika Padukone were rumored by the media. In an interview, a visibly angry Shetty denied all rumors surrounding the leading heroine, stating that the cast would be finalized in April 2012 and that he was going to cast an established actress as the leading lady. However, in August it was officially announced that Deepika Padukone had been signed to play the lead opposite Khan. Principal photography began on 27 September 2012 and shooting started soon afterwards. Rohit Shetty wanted Manorama to play Deepika Padukone's aunt and Sainath Dukkipati to play the role of deepika's brother and neighbour in this film. Sathyaraj was later cast to play the role of Deepika's father and the main antagonist of "Chennai Express".
Marketing.
First look.
"Chennai Express" first look posters were unveiled on 1 January 2013 to coincide with New Year's day celebrations. The posters were heavily talked about and shared on social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter. The title of the film trended on Twitter for almost two days as many people expressed their opinions about the first look.
Controversy.
While most South Indian critics praised "Chennai Express" for incorporating their breed of cinema into mainstream Bollywood, some Tamil bloggers claimed that the "Chennai Express" posters stereotyped their culture. They stated that Khan's portrayal of a South Indian character again after his film "Ra.One" would present them in a negative light around the world due to Khan's massive global fan base. However, the "Chennai Express" team were quick to point out that Khan was not playing a South Indian in the film but was playing a man from Mumbai who tries to adjust to South Indian culture. A representative from the film's distributor, UTV Motion Pictures, added that the film's writer was K. Subaash whose earlier works included the highly-acclaimed "Sathriyan" and "Sabaash". The spokesperson asserted that measures were taken in order to not demean any person or culture.
Khan also spoke out on the rumors and said "Chennai Express" was "not against any ethnic group or makes fun. It has a very interesting concept that in our country there are so many languages, cultures...and the idea is that love conquers all that. Whole idea is very positive. I read on tabloids that we are making fun of South India but we are not. It's a journey of two people who are in love, through parts of the country where they come in touch with different cultures. At the end of it all, it's a film that respects all cultures and shows love can conquer all in a comic way".
Pre-release business.
Shahrukh Khan did not charge a set fee for this film as it was his wife's home production. The distribution rights to "Chennai Express" were sold to T-Series and UTV Motion Pictures.
