Paul Wesley (born Paul Wasilewski; July 23, 1982) is an American actor best known for his roles as Stefan Salvatore in The CW television drama "The Vampire Diaries" and as Aaron Corbett in the ABC Family miniseries "Fallen".
Early life.
Wesley was born in New Brunswick, New Jersey, to Polish parents Agnieshka and Thomas Wasilewski, and grew up in Marlboro Township, New Jersey. He has one older sister, Monika, and two younger sisters, Julia and Leah. In addition to English, he also knows Polish, having spent four months every year in Poland until the age of 16. 
Wesley attended Christian Brothers Academy in Lincroft, New Jersey and Marlboro High School for a period during his high school years. During his junior year in high school, Wesley was cast in the soap opera "Guiding Light" as character Max Nickerson. He transferred from Marlboro High School to Lakewood Prep School in Howell, New Jersey because the school was able to accommodate his acting schedule. He graduated from there in 2000 and then started college at Rutgers University in New Jersey but left after one semester with his parents' support when more roles were offered to him, and he realized he could make a career out of acting.
Career.
In 2005, he began to credit himself as Paul Wesley. When asked why he changed his professional name to Paul Wesley, he replied, "My birthname is too hard to pronounce! I asked my family's permission to change it, and it really helped my career."
He has had a number of roles on shows such as "24", "8 Simple Rules", "American Dreams", "Army Wives", "Cane", "Everwood", "Guiding Light", "Smallville", "The O.C." and "Wolf Lake". He also starred opposite Amber Tamblyn in CBS' "The Russell Girl" and had the lead role in "Fallen" miniseries. 
He also had a minor role in "Roll Bounce" starring Bow Wow. 
Wesley is currently starring as vampire Stefan Salvatore in "The Vampire Diaries" which premiered September 2009 on The CW. In the series, he plays a younger brother to Damon Salvatore (played by Ian Somerhalder) as well as the love interest of a mortal 17 year old girl named Elena Gilbert (played by Nina Dobrev). His wife, Torrey Devitto, currently works alongside him in "The Vampire Diaries" as Meredith Fell, a doctor in Mystic Falls. In May 2011, he joined the cast of "The Baytown Outlaws".
Personal life.
Wesley met and began dating actress Torrey DeVitto in 2007 when they acted together in "Killer Movie". They married in a private ceremony in New York City in April 2011. 
He enjoys playing ice hockey and snowboarding. Wesley has also expressed an interest in directing and writing.
