Jason Sudeikis ( ; born September 18, 1975) is an American actor and comedian best known as a cast member on "Saturday Night Live". He has starred in such films as "Hall Pass", "Horrible Bosses", and "A Good Old Fashioned Orgy".
Early life.
Sudeikis was born Daniel Jason Sudeikis in Fairfax, Virginia. His mother, Kathryn (née Wendt), was formerly a travel agent at Brennco and was president of the American Society of Travel Agents. His father, Daniel Joseph Sudeikis, is a vice president of business development. His uncle is actor George Wendt, who is best known for his role as Norm Peterson from "Cheers". His maternal grandmother's father was photographer Tom Howard. He is of Lithuanian and Irish descent on his father's side, and German and Irish ancestry on his mother's.
As a child, Sudeikis moved with his family to Overland Park, Kansas, which he considers his hometown. He attended Brookridge Elementary School before transferring to Holy Cross Catholic School; both are located in Overland Park. He began high school at the Jesuit Rockhurst High School in 1990, later transferring due to academic reasons to Shawnee Mission West High School.
Sudeikis occasionally references Kansas in "Saturday Night Live" sketches. He is also a longtime Kansas Jayhawks fan and has worked University of Kansas themes and well-known Lawrence, Kansas, locations into several sketches on "SNL".
Career.
Early career.
Sudeikis began performing at ComedySportz (now Comedy City) in Kansas City. After moving to Chicago, Sudeikis studied at the Annoyance Theatre and ImprovOlympic, where he was one of the founding members of the long-form team J.T.S. Brown.
He was later cast in The Second City's National Touring Company, and also performed with Boom Chicago in Amsterdam. In the early 2000s, he became a founding member of Second City Las Vegas. He continues to frequently perform at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre's weekly improv show "ASSSCAT 3000" in New York City.
"Saturday Night Live".
In 2003, while a regular performer at Second City Las Vegas, Sudeikis was hired as a sketch writer for "Saturday Night Live", and would occasionally make bit appearances as audience members or extras. In May 2005, he became a featured player on the show, and was upgraded to repertory status at the beginning of the show's 32nd season on September 30, 2006.
He became known for his impersonation of "American Idol" winner Taylor Hicks, as well as one-half of the Two A-Holes with Kristen Wiig.
Other work.
Sudeikis had a recurring guest role on the NBC series "30 Rock" with friend Tina Fey in early 2007, appearing in a total of seven episodes. He played Floyd DeBarber, a love interest of Tina Fey's character Liz Lemon. He made another appearance as Floyd in a 2008 episode, and appeared again in the Valentine's Day episode airing February 11, 2010, along with Jon Hamm and Dean Winters. Sudeikis last appeared in three episodes towards the end of the show's 4th season in 2010.
Sudeikis did voice work for the videogame "Grand Theft Auto IV", playing the role of right-wing radio host Richard Bastion. He also appeared in the 2008 comedy "What Happens in Vegas", playing the role of Cameron Diaz's ex-fiancé. In July 2008, Sudeikis co-starred with Bill Hader and Joe Lo Truglio in the Lorne Michaels-produced web-series "The Line" on Crackle.
Sudeikis appeared in the film "The Bounty Hunter", released in March 2010. He co-starred alongside Jennifer Aniston and Gerard Butler, playing a colleague of Aniston's character, who falls in love with her.
Sudeikis is currently a voice actor on the FOX animated comedy series "The Cleveland Show". Sudeikis provides the voice for Holt Richter, Cleveland's wannabe hipster neighbor, as well as the voice of Terry Kimple, Cleveland's hard-partying high school buddy, who now works with Cleveland at the cable company. After previously being credited as a recurring guest in season one, Sudeikis was bumped up to a series regular beginning in season two.
In May 2010, Sudeikis joined the cast of the 2011 Seth Gordon comedy "Horrible Bosses", which also starred Jamie Foxx, Kevin Spacey, Jennifer Aniston, Colin Farrell, Charlie Day, and Jason Bateman. Sudeikis co-hosted "WWE Raw" with "Going the Distance" co-stars Charlie Day and Justin Long on August 16, 2010, at the Staples Center in Los Angeles. Sudeikis also played his first lead film role, alongside Owen Wilson, in the 2011 Farrelly brothers comedy "Hall Pass". He had worked with Day when he played the role of Schmitty on It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia, and reprised the role on that show's 7th season finale.
He hosted the 2011 MTV Movie Awards on June 5, 2011, at the Gibson Amphitheatre.
In 2012, Sudeikis had a recurring role on the third season of the HBO series "Eastbound & Down" playing both Shane, Kenny Powers battery mate on the Myrtle Beach Mermen, and Shane's twin brother Cole.
Sudeikis is currently voicing a line of advertisements for the Applebee's casual dining chain that began running in 2012.
Personal life.
Sudeikis married actress and "30 Rock" writer Kay Cannon in 2004, after having dated five years prior to that. They separated in 2008 and their divorce was finalized in 2010. He had a six-month relationship with January Jones in that same year. Sudeikis started dating actress Olivia Wilde in November 2011. On January 12, 2013, Sudeikis and Wilde announced their engagement.
Sudeikis has two sisters, Lindsay and Kristin. Lindsay is a teacher at Dominican Academy, an all-girls high school in New York. Kristin is an established choreographer and dancer in New York and has appeared on "30 Rock".
On May 11, 2012, his father's family history was traced on the NBC program "Who Do You Think You Are?", on the third season of the NBC series.
