Elizabeth Banks (born Elizabeth Irene Mitchell; February 10, 1974) is an American actress, producer and director. Banks made her film debut in the low-budget independent film "Surrender Dorothy". She is best known for her roles in the films "Seabiscuit", "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", "Invincible", "Definitely, Maybe", "Zack and Miri Make a Porno", "W.", "Role Models", "Wet Hot American Summer", "The Uninvited", "The Hunger Games", "People Like Us", "Man on a Ledge", and "Pitch Perfect".
On television, Banks had a recurring role as Avery Jessup on the sitcom "30 Rock", which gained her two Emmy Award nominations. Previously, Banks had starred in a recurring role as Dr. Kim Briggs on "Scrubs" from 2006 to 2009.
Early life and education.
Banks was born in Pittsfield, Massachusetts, the eldest of four children of Ann (née Wallace) and Mark P. Mitchell. Her father was a factory worker for General Electric and her mother worked in a bank.
Growing up, she played baseball and rode horses. She was in little league when she broke her leg sliding into third. She then tried out for the school play which was her start in acting. She graduated from Pittsfield High School in 1992, and is a member of the Massachusetts Junior Classical League. She attended the University of Pennsylvania, where she was a member of the Delta Delta Delta Sorority. Banks graduated "magna cum laude" in 1996. In 1998, she completed schooling at the American Conservatory Theater and earned an MFA.
Career.
Banks changed her name to avoid confusion with actress Elizabeth Mitchell. She debuted in the 1998 independent film "Surrender Dorothy", as Elizabeth Casey, appeared in various films over the next seven years before gaining more prominent widespread exposure through the 2005 comedy film "The 40-Year-Old Virgin".
In August 2005, at the Williamstown Theatre Festival, Banks starred in William Inge's "Bus Stop" as Cherie, the sexy, blonde, aspiring nightclub singer. Jeffrey Borak wrote that Banks' portrayal was acted "with poise, clarity and a shrewd feel for Cherie's complexities. Her performance is all of a piece and in harmony, stylistically, with the performances around her..." In 2005, she appeared on the series "Stella", and in May 2006, she had a role in the season five finale of the NBC sitcom "Scrubs" as Dr. Kim Briggs, the love interest of J.D. (Zach Braff). The character appeared throughout seasons six, seven and eight as a recurring guest star.
In 2006, Banks appeared in the American football drama film "Invincible", in which she played Mark Wahlberg's love interest. Later, she and co-star Wahlberg were nominated for the "Best Kiss" award at the MTV Movie Award. Also that year, she landed the starring role in the comedy-horror film "Slither".
In 2007, she played the female lead in the comedy film "Meet Bill", alongside Aaron Eckhart and Jessica Alba. Also that year, Banks had a small role in the Christmas comedy film "Fred Claus", co-starring Vince Vaughn and Paul Giamatti. In 2008, she played a love interest in the comedy film "Definitely, Maybe", alongside Isla Fisher and Ryan Reynolds, starred with Seth Rogen as the eponymous female lead in the Kevin Smith comedy "Zack and Miri Make a Porno", and played United States First Lady Laura Bush in "W.", Oliver Stone's biopic of George W. Bush.
In 2009, Banks appeared in the thriller "The Uninvited", a remake of the Korean horror film "A Tale of Two Sisters". The film was about an intrusive stepmother who makes life miserable for the teen daughters of her new husband. Banks based her character, Rachel, on Rebecca De Mornay's character in "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle"". "It was very important to me that every line reading I gave could be interpreted two ways," says Banks of her role, "So that when you go back through the movie you can see that".
Banks is a frequent co-star of actor Paul Rudd, the two having appeared in five films together to date ("Wet Hot American Summer", "The Baxter", "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", "Role Models" and "Our Idiot Brother").
Banks was cast as a love interest for Jack Donaghy (Alec Baldwin) in the fourth season of the Emmy Award-winning sitcom "30 Rock". Intended to appear in four episodes in 2010, Banks went on to become a recurring character with thirteen appearances by the end of the fifth season, including her marriage in the episode "Mrs. Donaghy". Her performance in season five earned her a nomination for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards.
Banks appeared in the movie "The Hunger Games", playing Effie Trinket, a woman from "The Capitol" who escorts the District 12 tributes to the Hunger Games.
In December 2012, it was reported Banks would reprise her role as Sal on "Modern Family".
Personal life.
Banks met her husband, sportswriter and producer Max Handelman, on her first day at college on September 6, 1992. They were married in 2003. She and her husband welcomed their first child, Felix, who was born via a surrogate in March 2011. In November 2012, Banks announced that her family had welcomed another son, Magnus Mitchell, also born via surrogate.
Banks was raised in a family of both Irish Catholic and Anglo-Saxon Protestant background. She went through parts of the process of conversion to Judaism, her husband's faith, and studied with rabbis. In 2013, speaking of her religion, she stated that she practices Judaism, though "I did not have my mikveh, so technically I’m not converted", and added, "Frankly, because I’m already doing everything religious rituals, I feel like I’m as Jewish as I’m ever going to be".
