The tenth season of "Two and a Half Men" premiered on CBS Broadcasting Inc. (CBS) on September 27, 2012. Starting this season, the series now airs on Thursdays at 8:30 p.m., following "The Big Bang Theory".
Production.
On May 12, 2012, CBS renewed "Two and a Half Men" for a tenth season, following the announcement that CBS had closed a one-year deal with stars Ashton Kutcher, Jon Cryer, and Angus T. Jones. Series co-creator Lee Aronsohn will not return to his position as showrunner, and will be replaced by executive producers Don Reo and Jim Patterson. On September 6, 2012, other series co-creator Chuck Lorre signed a deal with Warner Bros. Television to remain executive producer of "Two and a Half Men".
Angus T. Jones comments.
In a November 2012 interview with a Christian website, Angus T. Jones revealed that he had recently converted to the Seventh-day Adventist Church. He attacked the show as "filth" that contradicts his moral values and said that he was sick of being a part of it. He also asked fans to stop watching the show. Producers explained that Jones is not expected back on the set until 2013, as his character was not scheduled to appear in the final two episodes before the winter hiatus. In response to the controversy, Charlie Sheen issued a public statement claiming that "Jones' outburst isn’t an isolated incident but rather a symptom of the toxic environment surrounding the show" and blamed Chuck Lorre for the outburst. The following day, Jones issued a public apology for his remarks, and explained that he "cannot address everything that has been said or right every misstatement or misunderstanding."
List of episodes.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
Critical reception.
The reception to this season has been generally positive. Cartermatt.com said "we are finding the show to be pretty funny this year, the truth is that the summer off with Ashton Kutcher already cast gave the writers some time to come up with some interesting ideas, and it actually feels like a pretty funny show." TVFanatic gave the first episode four stars and the second episode four and a half stars.
