"Mrs. Brown's Boys" is an award winning sitcom created by and starring Irish writer and performer Brendan O'Carroll. The show is based on O'Carroll's stage plays about the character Agnes Browne, which were developed from books and straight-to-DVD films. The sitcom continues the stories of Agnes, now with the shortened surname "Brown", and her family who are played by real life close friends and family of O'Carroll's. After being slated by critics, the show has become a ratings success in both Ireland, where it is set, and the United Kingdom, where it is recorded. On 29 December 2012 the show began its third series. 
"Mrs Brown's Boys" is a BBC Vision production, co-produced between BBC Scotland, BocPix and RTÉ.
Background.
"Mrs. Brown's Boys" appeared first on RTÉ 2fm, an Irish radio station, in 1992 and then in a series of books written by Brendan O'Carroll from the mid-1990s onwards. The books, entitled "The Mammy", "The Chisellers", "The Granny", and "The Young Wan", were first published in Ireland, before being made available in the United Kingdom. In 2000, "The Mammy" was adapted into a film titled "Agnes Browne" with Anjelica Huston playing the title character. Following the success of the film, O'Carroll wrote a series of stories, adapted from the books, in which he played Mrs. Browne (now spelled 'Brown') and cast the rest of the family — including many of his own relatives as characters. A series of seven, film-like adaptations were made, which went straight to DVD release. During this time, O'Carroll took the show on the road, appearing in a series of Mrs. Brown plays in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
In 2010, O'Carroll was approached to create a television series based on the stage show. He recruited a new cast mainly from family members and wrote a series of six thirty-minute episodes, together with an unbroadcast pilot, in order to encourage a network to pick up the series. RTÉ One subsequently bought the broadcast rights and the first, six-part series began airing on the channel from 1 January to 5 February 2011. In the United Kingdom, the BBC bought the rights and the first episode was transmitted on 21 February 2011.
Following the success of the first series, RTÉ and the BBC commissioned a second, which began with a Christmas special broadcast on 25 December 2011 on RTÉ One, and the next day on BBC One. The latter was the most watched television programme in Ireland over the Christmas season. The second series began on New Year's Eve 2011 in Ireland, and two days later in the United Kingdom.
After good rating figures for the second series, the BBC commissioned a third series. O'Carroll described the commission as "An extraordinary gift and we genuinely don't take it lightly. We're overwhelmed with the support of the audience and hopefully when they see what we've done with the second series they'll see that maybe the BBC is not totally mad." Whilst Cheryl Taylor, Controller, Comedy Commissioning for the BBC has also commented on the commission of a third series, "The new Mrs Brown's episodes are rip-roaring fun and will delight her ever growing army of fans. I am pleased as punch that we are commissioning series three - go Agnes!" Following two Christmas specials, the third series began on 29 December 2012 on RTÉ One and on 1 January 2013 on BBC One.
According to Gary Hollywood, who plays Dino, on a radio interview, a "Mrs. Brown's Boys" Christmas Special for the year 2013 will be filmed in May 2013, due to a busy schedule of UK touring and the potential of filming the "Mrs. Brown" film (due for cinematic release in June 2014) from September to November 2013. On 30 January 2013, the BBC announced that two Christmas specials had been commissioned for 2013.
Production.
"Mrs. Brown's Boys" is recorded in Scotland at the BBC Pacific Quay studios in Glasgow and is recorded in front of a live audience, which is seen at the beginning and the end of each show. While a fictional storyline is the basis of each episode, the programme uses a "laissez-faire" style in which areas beyond the set, including equipment and crew, are sometimes seen and aspects of the show's production are lampooned within the fictional dialogue. The show takes a more irregular concept as bloopers such as characters getting lines wrong, corpsing and set, camera and prop faults are not edited out of the episodes. At the beginning of each episode Agnes Brown breaks the fourth wall, with an introductory monologue. Each episode ends with Agnes again breaking the fourth wall to say goodbye. As the credits roll, the camera pulls out to see the audience and the cast of the entire episode lining up to take a bow. The finale of every series so far has ended with a music performance by the cast.
International broadcast.
The series is also broadcast in Canada, Australia, Iceland and New Zealand. Broadcast on the Seven Network in Australia, the series has secured nearly 1 million viewers.
TVNZ has obtained the New Zealand broadcast rights for the series.
Reception.
Critical reception.
Although the show has had high viewership, it has received poor reviews from critics. From the start critics hated it; "The whole thing is entirely predicated on viewers finding a man dressed as a foul-mouthed elderly woman intrinsically funny", noted Bernice Harrison, TV reviewer with "The Irish Times". "If you do, you're away in a hack, and the viewing figures are astronomical, but if you don't, and you think that died out with Les Dawson and Dick Emery, then it's a long half-hour." The "Irish Independent" said that "Mrs Brown's Boys" was the type of TV programme "that makes you vaguely embarrassed to be Irish".
Television ratings.
Ireland.
"Mrs. Brown's Boys" was a ratings success upon its initial broadcast in Ireland. Every episode aired won its timeslot for RTÉ, with an average viewership of 753,500 in January 2011. One episode's rating beat that of RTÉ's own ratings giant "The Late Late Show", with 856,000 viewers tuning in to watch. The 2011 Christmas episode was the most-watched TV show in Ireland over the holiday season, with a 48.6% audience share. A year later the show again topped the Christmas ratings with "The Virgin Mammy" gaining an average of 972,000 viewers and a 47% share, and "Mammy Christmas" gaining an average of 851,000 viewers and a 51% share.
United Kingdom.
Its opening in the UK won 16.4% of the ratings in its Monday night slot and was received well by viewers. Despite the critical reviews, 2.9 million viewers had tuned in by the third episode. The 2011 Christmas Special achieved 6.61 million viewers, winning in its 10 pm time-slot. Consolidated figures revealed the 2012 Christmas specials were the most watched programmes on Christmas Eve and Boxing Day respectively. "Mammy Christmas" gained 11.68m (41.3%) and "The Virgin Mammy" gained 10.72m (38.7%).
The first airing of the show usually averages around 10 million viewers with an additional 5 million viewing on the following Saturday repeat, adding up to almost 15 million views per episode.
Awards.
In 2011 "Mrs. Brown's Boys" was nominated for a BAFTA award at the British Academy Television Awards. In February 2012, it won an IFTA for Best Entertainment Programme. At the 2012 BAFTA Television Awards, "Mrs. Brown's Boys" won the award for Best Situation Comedy, and Brendan O'Carroll was nominated for the BAFTA for Best Male Performance in a Comedy Programme but lost to Darren Boyd for his role in the Sky1 comedy series, "Spy". In September 2012, the show won best comedy at the TV Choice Awards. In January 2013, "Mrs. Brown's Boys" won the National Television Award for Best Situation Comedy.
Distribution.
DVD and Blu-ray releases.
More than one million copies of the first series of "Mrs. Brown's Boys" were sold on DVD in Ireland and the UK between October 2011 and February 2012. A complete series 1 and 2 box set was also released on 8 October 2012, containing the 2011 Christmas special as a content exclusive, therefore meaning if one wishes to own the special, they would have to buy the box set.
Some of the episodes on the Series 1 DVD differ from their original broadcasts. Due to copyright issues, scenes where casts perform songs were edited out. These edits included a scene where Mrs Brown sings Happy Birthday, the entire cast singing The Proclaimers song, "I'm Gonna Be (500 Miles)" in episode 3, and a scene in episode 6 where Buster sings the theme tune to "Mission Impossible". No changes have been made to the Series 2 episodes on their DVD release. A joke about being sued for singing a copyrighted song featured in the stage show "Mrs Brown's Boys Live: Good Mourning Mrs Brown".
On 11 October 2012, series 2 was released in Region 4 in both standard form and a limited edition. The limited edition version contained the Christmas special. The Complete Collection was also released at the same time, containing all 13 episodes as well.
iTunes releases.
The first series of "Mrs. Brown's Boys" has been available on iTunes since 31 October 2011.
Spin-offs.
Film.
There have been reports that an estimated £3.6m deal is in place with Universal Studios to start production on the film version of the series. A spokesman for O'Carroll has also confirmed that the film will have a distinctly Dublin flavour, "It's Dublin humour so you're going to need Dublin actors and technicians to get it right for the big screen." Despite funding being secured, O'Carroll confirmed that the script has not been written. "I haven't written it yet. That's what success does, they give you money and say 'Whatever you think'. So I've taken the money!". At the 2013 National Television Awards O'Carroll confirmed the film had been written and will begin shooting the following autumn.
Filming is due to start in Dublin in September 2013 under the working title, "Mrs Brown D'Movie".
Game show.
O'Carroll has also confirmed that a game show starring Mrs Brown is in development with production company 12 Yard. A non-broadcast pilot is expected to be recorded in late 2012. A full series is also due to be broadcast in 2013.
Animated series.
O'Carroll has also confirmed that an animated version of the show is in development.
