Call the Midwife is a BBC period drama series starring Jessica Raine, Miranda Hart, Cliff Parisi, Jenny Agutter, Pam Ferris, Judy Parfitt and Vanessa Redgrave. It was created by Heidi Thomas based on the memoirs of Jennifer Worth and set in east London in the 1950s. The first series of six episodes premiered in the UK on 15 January 2012. The series is produced by Neal Street Productions, a production company founded and owned by the film director and producer Sam Mendes, "Call the Midwife" Executive Producer Pippa Harris and Caro Newling. 
"Call the Midwife" achieved very high ratings in its first series, making it the most successful new drama series on BBC One since 2001. A second series of eight episodes of the show has been commissioned and will air in early 2013 with a 2012 Christmas Special.
The autumn 2012 PBS broadcast of the first series of "Call the Midwife" in the United States received wide critical acclaim, earning a Metacritic score of 8.0. "The Wall Street Journal" declared that "this immensely absorbing drama is worth any trouble it takes to catch up with its singular pleasures", while The Washington Post stated that "the cast is marvellous, the gritty, post-war set pieces are meticulously recreated". "TV Guide" called the series "a delight to watch", while the "San Francisco Chronicle" described it as "sentimental, poignant and often heartbreaking".
On 11 February 2013, BBC Controller for Drama, Ben Stephenson, announced that he had commissioned a 2013 Christmas special, and a third series of eight episodes to air in 2014.
International distribution.
In May 2012, BBC Worldwide and the American Public Broadcasting Service PBS announced that the first series of "Call the Midwife" would premiere in the United States on 30 September 2012. BBC Worldwide has also sold the series to SVT (Sweden); NRK (Norway); RÚV (Iceland); Yle (Finland); AXN White (Spain); ERT (Greece); ABC in Australia and TVNZ in New Zealand, where its debut recorded a 35% share of the audience – 20% above average. In July 2012 BBC Worldwide announced it has sold the worldwide Video On Demand rights of the series to Netflix. According to BBC Worldwide America executive vice-president of sales and co-productions Matt Forde, BBC expects to sign another 13 to 15 deals for "Call the Midwife" with other international download-to-own and VoD services by the end of 2012.
The second series of "Call the Midwife" has been sold to PBS for transmission from 31 March 2013.
In February 2013, BBC Worldwide reported that "Call the Midwife" had been sold in over one hundred global territories.
Plot.
The plot follows newly qualified midwife Jenny Lee and the work of midwives and the nuns of Nonnatus House, a nursing convent, coping with the medical problems in a deprived area of East London in the 1950s.
Episodes.
For a full list of episodes, see List of Call the Midwife episodes.
Reception.
A second series of "Call the Midwife" was immediately commissioned after the drama's opening episode attracted an audience of nearly 10 million viewers.
The second episode increased its audience to 10.47 million, while the third continued the climb to 10.66. Episode 4's rating of 10.89 million overtook 2010 ITV hit "Downton Abbey" as the largest first series audience for original drama on British television in recent years. Miranda Hart and costume designer Amy Roberts were both nominated for BAFTA Awards in 2012.
In the United States, the first series transmission on PBS drew an average household audience rating of 2.1, translating into 3.0 million viewers — 50 percent above PBS' primetime average for the 2011-12 season.
In Australia, it aired on Sunday nights starting 2 September 2012 on ABC1. It was very well received, gaining solid ratings and rave reviews.
Production notes.
The ship in the opening titles is the Shaw Saville liner QSMV "Dominion Monarch" in dry dock at the King George V Dock and the road is Saville Road, Silvertown, East London.
Many of the exterior scenes are shot at the Chatham Historic Dockyard.
DVD.
The first series was released in a Region 2, two disc set on 12 March 2012.
In Australia (region 4), ABC released the DVD on 10 October 2012, shortly after it finished airing on ABC1.
In the United States, the first series was released on DVD and Blu-ray on 6 November 2012.
