Emma Thompson (born 15 April 1959) is a British actress, comedian, screenwriter and author. She first came to prominence in 1987 in two BBC TV series, "Tutti Frutti" and "Fortunes of War", she won the BAFTA TV Award for Best Actress for her work in both. Her first major film role was in the 1989 romantic comedy "The Tall Guy". In 1992, Thompson won multiple acting awards, including an Academy Award and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress, for her performance in the British drama "Howards End". The following year Thompson garnered dual Academy Award nominations, as Best Actress for "The Remains of the Day" and as Best Supporting Actress for "In the Name of the Father".
In 1995, Thompson scripted and starred in "Sense and Sensibility", a film adaptation of the Jane Austen novel of the same name, which earned her an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay and a BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role among other awards. Other notable film and television credits have included the "Harry Potter" film series, "Much Ado About Nothing" (1993), "Wit" (2001), "Love Actually" (2003), "Angels in America" (2003), "Nanny McPhee" (2005), "Stranger than Fiction" (2006), "Last Chance Harvey" (2008), "An Education" (2009), "Nanny McPhee and the Big Bang" (2010), "Men in Black 3" (2012) and "Brave" (2012). In 2012, Thompson authored "The Further Tale of Peter Rabbit" to commemorate the 110th anniversary of the publication of Beatrix Potter's "The Tale of Peter Rabbit".
Thompson is a patron of the Refugee Council and president of the Teaching Awards.
Early life.
Thompson was born in Paddington, London, England. Her father was English director and actor Eric Thompson, best known for having written and narrated "The Magic Roundabout", shown on BBC children's television in the 1960s and 1970s. Her mother is the Scottish actress Phyllida Law, and her younger sister is actress Sophie Thompson. Thompson has spent part of her life in Scotland and has stated that she "feel Scottish".
Education.
Thompson went to Beckford Primary School, in West Hampstead, Camden, London, England, followed by Camden School for Girls and then read English at Newnham College, Cambridge where she was a member (along with fellow actors Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie and Tony Slattery) and vice-president of the university's comedy troupe, the Footlights. Her acting talent was so impressive that agent Richard Armitage signed her to a contract while she was still two years away from graduation. Thompson graduated from Cambridge in 1980. Shortly afterward, she came to fame with a leading role opposite Robert Lindsay in the Leicester Haymarket Theatre's production of the musical "Me and My Girl", which had just been rescripted by Stephen Fry.
Career.
Thompson's earliest television appearances included the comedy sketch show "Alfresco", broadcast in 1983 and 1984 (as well as its three-part pilot "There's Nothing to Worry About", shown in 1982), which also featured Ben Elton, Stephen Fry and Hugh Laurie. Also in 1984 she guested alongside Elton, Fry and Laurie in the episode "Bambi" of the sitcom "The Young Ones", playing Miss Money-Sterling. Her breakthrough began in 1987 with her role as red-haired rock guitarist Suzi Kettles in the cult TV series "Tutti Frutti". This was followed by acclaim for the BBC series "Fortunes of War" in which she starred with her then future husband, Kenneth Branagh. For these two 1987 roles she won a BAFTA for Best Actress. In 1988, she starred in and wrote the eponymous "Thompson" comedy sketch series for BBC1; the series was not successful with audiences or critics. Described in "Time Out" magazine as "very clever-little-me-ish", it has never been repeated in Britain despite her Oscar successes, and Thompson has not returned to the sketch comedy field.
Thompson's first major film role was in Richard Curtis's romantic comedy "The Tall Guy" (1989) co-starring Jeff Goldblum. Her career took a more serious turn with a series of critically acclaimed performances and films, beginning with "Howards End" (1992), for which she received an Oscar for best actress; the part of Gareth Peirce, the lawyer for the Guildford Four, "In the Name of the Father"; "The Remains of the Day" opposite Anthony Hopkins; and as the British painter Dora Carrington in the film "Carrington".
Thompson won her next Oscar in 1996, for best adapted screenplay for her adaptation of Jane Austen's "Sense and Sensibility", a film directed by Ang Lee, in which she also played the Oscar-nominated lead role opposite Hugh Grant. She has said that she keeps both of her award statues in her downstairs bathroom, citing embarrassment at placing them in a more prominent place.
Thompson's recent television work has included a starring role in the 2001 HBO drama "Wit", in which she played a dying cancer patient, and 2003's "Angels in America", playing multiple roles, including one of the titular angels. Her Emmy Award was as a guest star in a 1997 episode of the show "Ellen"; in this episode she played a fictionalised parody of herself: a closeted lesbian more concerned with the media finding out she is actually American. She also appeared in an episode of "Cheers" in 1992 titled "One Hugs, the Other Doesn't".
More recently, Thompson appeared in supporting roles such as Sybill Trelawney in "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" and "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix". In 2002, she voiced Captain Amelia in Disney's "Treasure Planet", an adaptation of "Treasure Island". She also appeared in the 2003 comedy "Love Actually". The film "Nanny McPhee", adapted by Thompson from Christianna Brand's "Nurse Matilda" books, was first released in October 2005. Thompson worked on the project for nine years, having written the screenplay and starred alongside her mother (who has a cameo appearance). In the film "Stranger than Fiction" she plays an author planning on killing her main character, Harold Crick, who turns out to be a real person. Most recently, Thompson made a short uncredited cameo as a doctor introducing the cure for cancer in the form of measles in the latest film adaptation of "I Am Legend", and starred in "Last Chance Harvey" opposite Dustin Hoffman, Eileen Atkins and Kathy Baker. In 2009, she appeared in "An Education" and "The Boat That Rocked", the new Richard Curtis film, which also starred Gemma Arterton, Philip Seymour Hoffman, January Jones, Kenneth Branagh, Bill Nighy, Nick Frost, Jack Davenport and Rhys Ifans.
Thompson reprised her role as Sybill Trelawney in "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2". She voiced Queen Elinor in the 2012 Pixar film "Brave".
Personal life.
While at Cambridge, Thompson was romantically involved with actor Hugh Laurie, a fellow Footlights member and an undergraduate at Selwyn College, just across the road from Newnham. Thompson continues her friendship with Laurie.
She married actor Kenneth Branagh on 20 August 1989. They acted together several times, in the TV series "Fortunes of War", and in hit films such as "Dead Again", "Henry V", "Peter's Friends", and "Much Ado About Nothing". They divorced in October 1995.
Thompson married actor Greg Wise in 2003 in Dunoon, Scotland (she has a second home in nearby Ardentinny). The couple have a daughter, Gaia Romilly, born in 1999. In 2003, the couple informally adopted a 16-year-old Rwandan refugee named Tindyebwa Agaba and support ActionAid since 2000. They successfully resisted his deportation back to Rwanda, his family having been killed in the genocide.
Activism.
Environmental work.
Thompson is a supporter of Greenpeace. It was announced on 13 January 2009 that, with three other members of the organisation, she had bought land near the village of Sipson, under threat from a proposed third runway for Heathrow Airport. It was hoped that possession of the land, half the size of a football pitch, would make it possible to prevent the government from carrying through its plan to expand the airport.
Bought for an undisclosed sum from a local land owner, the plot was to be split into small squares and sold across the globe. Thompson said, "I don't understand how any government remotely serious about committing to reversing climate change can even consider these ridiculous plans. It's laughably hypocritical. That's why we've bought a plot on the runway. We'll stop this from happening even if we have to move in and plant vegetables."
Development work.
Thompson is an ambassador for the charity ActionAid and has travelled to Uganda, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Liberia and Burma to raise awareness of its work.
Political and religious views.
Thompson has said of her religious and political views: "I'm an atheist; I suppose you can call me a sort of libertarian anarchist. I regard religion with fear and suspicion. It's not enough to say that I don't believe in God. I actually regard the system as distressing: I am offended by some of the things said in the Bible and the Qur'an and I refute them." Despite this, she has said that "The guiding moral principles, the ethical principles, much of the philosophy the Christian tradition, if properly applied, is very good", and that she observes the Christmas tradition. 
She is supporter of the Labour Party and she told the BBC "Andrew Marr Show" in March 2010 that she had been a member of the party "all my life." Thompson is also a human rights activist for Palestinians, having been a member of the British-based ENOUGH! coalition that seeks to end the "Israeli occupation of the Gaza Strip and West Bank." She opposes Scottish independence, although she believes that England had been "so awful" to Scotland.
She is also a patron of the Elton John AIDS Foundation.
Controversies.
Political comments.
At a visit to Exeter University in November 2010 for a lecture titled 'All Africans Now', Thompson stated that Nick Griffin, leader of the British National Party would "love Exeter. He would feel very comfortable here", in reference to Exeter University's low number of ethnic minority students. Her remarks were responded to by from Exeter Conservative councillor, Jeff Coates, who said "It's a very strange accusation to make. For heaven's sake, this is a country on the north-west fringes of Europe".
Thompson came in for criticism for a comment on "The Late Late Show" on US television in August 2010, regarding residents of the Isle of Wight's attitude to homosexuals, remarking that they 'stone homosexuals'. Thompson later apologised, stating that her comments were meant to refer to the Isle of Man instead.
Infringement accusation.
In 2011, playwright Gregory Murphy accused Emma Thompson of misappropriating his Off-Broadway and West End theatre 2009 play and subsequent screenplay "The Countess", about the bizarre "love triangle" between John Ruskin, Effie Gray and John Everett Millais. Murphy asserts that copies of his play and screenplay were sent to her and her husband, Greg Wise, through a mutual friend. After obtaining a copy of a screenplay, titled "Effie", credited to Thompson and Wise, Murphy contacted the film's producers, noting that "Effie" was distinctly related to Murphy's own screenplay in its "time-frame, character development, structure and tone."
Thompson asserts that she has never seen "The Countess", read its screenplay, or ever received a copy from the mutual friend, who is willing to testify that he never gave her a copy. She maintains that all similarities between "Effie" and "The Countess" are simply the result of them being based on the same historical events.
Thompson met with Murphy at her home in an attempt to reach an agreement, and there followed over a number of months discussion of a possible writer's credit on the film and payment to Murphy. However no settlement could be reached to the satisfaction of both parties.
Thompson was expected to go into production on "Effie" in August 2011. However, she must "be able to demonstrate that there is no validity to Mr. Murphy's claim of infringement" to close the financing for the film.
Books.
In 2012, Thompson wrote "The Further Tale of Peter Rabbit", as an addition to the Peter Rabbit series by Beatrix Potter to commemorate the 110th anniversary of the publication of "The Tale of Peter Rabbit". The book falls in the middle of the earlier series, rather than at the end, and takes Peter Rabbit outside of Mr. McGregor's garden and into Scotland.
She has also written books based on movies for which she wrote the screenplays.
