"Scream & Shout" is a song recorded by American recording artist will.i.am featuring Britney Spears for will.i.am's upcoming fourth studio album "#willpower". The song was written by will.i.am, Jef Martens and Jean Baptiste and produced by Martens under the alias Lazy Jay, with additional production by will.i.am. "Scream & Shout" was released as the third single from the album, premiering on US and UK radio on November 19, 2012. The song was sent to mainstream radio in the United States through Interscope Records on November 27, 2012. "Scream & Shout" is an upbeat dance and electropop track with lyrics about having a great time on a night out. It interpolates a sample of the lyric "Britney, bitch", which was used on Spears' 2007 single "Gimme More". 
"Scream & Shout" received generally positive reviews from music critics, with a few describing it as a dark, club track, although others criticized the use of Auto-Tune on the vocals. The song was a commercial success worldwide, topping the charts in over eighteen countries, while reaching the top ten in territories such as Australia, Spain, Sweden, and South Korea. In the United States, the song peaked at number three on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and also became the first number one song of the newly established Dance/Electronic Songs chart. In the United Kingdom, "Scream & Shout" became will.i.am's second consecutive number one single, and Spears' sixth number one and her first chart-topper since "Everytime" (2004). 
An accompanying music video directed by Ben Mor was shot in October 2012, and premiered during a live episode of "The X Factor" on November 28, 2012. The theme of the music video is multiplicity, and its futuristic setting was complimented by critics. "Scream & Shout" also served as the theme song for the TV commercial to promote the "Beats by Dr. Dre Color" headphones. A remixed version of the song featuring rappers Diddy, Hit-Boy, Lil Wayne, and Waka Flocka Flame was uploaded to will.i.am's official YouTube account on January 25, 2013, following a leak that happened earlier the same day.
Background and release.
Following a year of promotion regarding her seventh studio album "Femme Fatale" (2011), RCA Records executive vice president of promotions Joe Riccitelli revealed that Spears would take a year off doing music to "be a mom and get married." However, on April 2012, it was reported that Simon Cowell was in talks with Spears for her to join the second season of American music competition show "The X Factor", reportedly offering her $15 million. On May 9, 2012, reports surfaced that Spears officially signed on to judge the show. On May 14, 2012, it was officially confirmed that Spears and pop singer Demi Lovato would join "The X Factor" as the two newest judges. On August 28, 2012, Spears confirmed that she was recording new material with will.i.am, tweeting, "Can't wait for y'all to hear @iamwill's next single featuring me. Coming very soon. Stay tuned people..." They worked together the previous year on two tracks for "Femme Fatale", with one called "Big Fat Bass" making the final cut. The song, rumored to be named "Sexy Sexy" at the time, was going to be released on "#willpower" on October 15, 2012; however, will.i.am changed the release date after several tracks from the album leaked online, saying, "I’m trying to finish #willpower…& now because of all the leaks I have push the album back to make new songs…I will give you updates soon." 
On October 12, 2012, Spears confirmed that the track would be called "Scream & Shout" and spoke about working with will.i.am: "You just have to hear it. He’s just, like, a little radical genius scientist in the studio when he’s in there, and he just knows what he’s doing, so just to be able to do a song with him is really fun." On November 17, 2012, the song leaked in full online. When asked about how he felt with it being released earlier than expected, will.i.am commented, "Well, that's done. You can't undo it. It's out. It made it real. But once things go to the editing and coloring, it's not in your control. You don't know what that intern's getting paid. Or not getting paid. You don't know what's going on in their heads." Spears also took her official Facebook account to express how she was sad about the early release of the song, but added, "I AM super excited that my fans seem to love it as much as will.i.am and I do. It hits radio tmw and iTunes later in the week." On an official note, "Billboard" confirmed the release of "Scream & Shout" on U.S. radio 102.7 KIIS-FM on November 19 at 12 PM PST / 3 PM EST. The same day, the song had a radio premiere through Capital FM in the United Kingdom at 8 PM GMT, and had a digital promotional release in Europe. It was released for digital download worldwide on the following day, and was officially sent to mainstream radio through Interscope Records on November 27, 2012. will.i.am revealed the cover art for "Scream & Shout" on the same day of the radio premiere through his Facebook account. "Scream & Shout" was originally written by British singer Tulisa Contostavlos for her debut album "The Female Boss" (2012) under the title "I Don't Give A Fuck" with will.i.am's protege, Jean Baptiste. However, the producer of the track, Lazy Jay, didn't want Contostavlos to have the song and gave it to will.i.am who re-wrote the song with Spears in mind.
Composition.
"Scream & Shout" is an upbeat dance and electropop track written in the key of D minor and with a moderate tempo of 130 beats per minute. It contains lyrics about having a great time on a night out. The track begins with Spears rapping "When you hear this in the club / You're gonna turn this shit up / When we up in the club / All eyes on us / See the boys in the club / They watchin' us / Everybody in the club / All eyes on us" with Nicki Minaj-esque vocals and a British accent. As it follows to the chorus, will.i.am joins Spears as they sing, "I wanna scream and shout and let it all out/ And scream and shout and let it out/ We sayin', 'Ohh, wee ohh, wee oh wee oh'/ We sayin', 'Ohh, wee ohh, wee oh wee oh'/ I wanna scream and shout and let it all out/ And scream and shout and let it out/ We sayin', 'Ohh, wee ohh, wee oh wee oh'." "Scream & Shout" also interpolates a sample of the lyric "It's Britney, bitch", which was used on Spears' 2007 single "Gimme More", which is used before every breakdown on the track.
"Spin" writer Marc Hogan noted similarities to Azealia Banks' "212" (2011) on the track, and compared the background vocals of it to the ones of "Are We All We Are" (2012) by P!nk. Keith Caulfield of "Billboard" said that the "dark" song "features a very different look for Spears, whose voice is roboticized to a nearly unrecognizable degree." Following the song leak, a reviewer for Idolator said, "we're pleased to report that it's pretty good — and slightly kooky," deeming the "When you hear us in the club / You're gonna turn this shit up" lyrics as "probably accurate" while praising the use of the "It's Britney, bitch" line. Rebecca Macatee of E! Online considered the track as "clubby, catchy, cool", while comparing Spears' vocals to the ones of Madonna, but noting, however, the use of pitch-correcting software Auto-Tune. Bill Lamb of About.com, however, thought that "the digital effects are seamless and the use of modulations of Britney Spears' voice to build the chorus sounds perfectly natural in this context." Lamb continued saying, "the spacey, free form bridge is beautiful despite will.i.am's singing talent limitations." A "Rap-Up" reviewer notice the use of Auto-Tune on will.i.am's vocals only.
Critical response.
"Scream & Shout" received generally positive reviews from music critics. Michael Murray of RyanSeacrest.com said the song "is like nothing we’ve ever heard", commenting that will.i.am utilizes his "his signature electric beats" while Spears embraces an alter-ego. MTV contributor Jocelyn Vena stated, "if anyone thought that Britney Spears and will.i.am wouldn't cook up a club banger for their latest collaboration, ... you were very much wrong. The track, off will's solo album #willpower, is an amped up dance-floor anthem, full of tempo changes, sassy one-liners and dubstep aplenty." Robert Copsey of Digital Spy admitted that, at a first listen, the song was confusing, but added that repeated listens reveal it to be a "surprisingly catchy robo-pop stomper." Bill Lamb of About.com thought the track has an "irresistibly catchy hook and melody," while adding that this might be will.i.am's big solo breakthrough in the American market, "with the star power of Britney Spears on the new record and a video introduction on X Factor." After detailing the release of "Scream & Shout", a reviewer for Take 40 Australia wrote, "get excited – we have a feeling this new track is going to be a big one!", while an AOL On reviewer deemed it as a "dance floor anthem" and stated that "perhaps the best part of the song is the best one-liner from Britney's 'Gimme More' – "It's Britney B"."
Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy thought that the "futuristic electro jam" needed more collaboration from Spears, but continued that "there were also parts that had us weeping and repenting, like that moment where Brit does a heavy Madonna-fied British accent and that other time will.i.am goes all 'Gimme More' on us with 'It's Britney, bitch'." Chris Eggertsen of HitFix graded the track a B-, saying that "the dubstep-y beat on offer is certainly a booty-shaker," but adding that it could more emphatic. Eggertsen continued saying that it is the type of music that is "serviceable enough in the moment, but it's not likely to stick in your head on the cab ride home at 2 a.m.". PopDust contributor Emily Exton considered Spears' featuring an improvement from "will's monotonous requests to 'lose control', 'let it go' and 'hit the floor'," but felt that the song needed "something more from Britney to balance this out." "Billboard" news writer Jason Lipshutz thought that will.i.am could have utilized Spears' feature "in a more efficient manner, but song's goal of inspiring awkward dance moves via its impossibly straightforward chorus ­... is soundly accomplished." 
Mixed reviews came from Yahoo!'s Kathleen Perricone, who said "Scream & Shout" was not worth the hype it got over the months prior to its official release, and from Alicia Lutes of Hollywood.com, who criticized its lyrical meaning and repetitive production. Malene Arpe of "Toronto Star" was negative towards the song, stating that it "is really terrible and rather than making you want to scream and shout, it sorta lulls you into a nice nap-like state of ceasing to care around the three-minute mark." "The Huffington Post" journalist Kia Makarechi was also critical, saying that despite being a "competent piece of airy dance pop", the only notable moment on "Scream & Shout" is the "Gimme More" sample. A reviewer from Popjustice was negative towards "Scream & Shout" and Pitbull's song "Feel This Moment" (2012), stating that what the "two songs represent is pop music writhing around in its own shit." Kurt Schlosser of NBCNews.com also criticized the song's lyrical content, saying that Spears never had "said anything earth-shattering" with her previous singles, but concluded that it is will.i.am's song, not hers.
Chart performance.
"Scream & Shout" made its first chart appearance after debuting at number 27 on the Spanish Singles Chart on November 28, 2012, before falling out of the top thirty the next week. On its tenth week on the chart, the song reached the top three. On the French Singles Chart, for the week of November 19, 2012, "Scream & Shout" debuted at number 6. The next chart issue, it reached number 2, staying there for two weeks. On the week ending January 26, 2013, the song peaked at number 1. In the United Kingdom, "Scream & Shout" became will.i.am's fourth consecutive top five single, after it debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 2, and Spears' first top five hit in the country since "Womanizer", which peaked at number 3 in 2008. On January 13, 2013, the song reached number 1 in the chart, making it will.i.am's second consecutive number one single and Spears' first number one since "Everytime" (2004). So far, it sold over 605,000 units in the country according to the Official Charts Company. "Scream & Shout" also debuted and stayed for seven weeks at number 1 on the UK R&B Chart. Elsewhere in Europe, the song managed to top the charts in Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway and Switzerland, while reaching the top ten in Czech Republic, Hungary and Sweden. In South Korea, it entered the Gaon Chart at number 3, with over 30,000 digital digital units sold.
Due to low airplay and streaming, "Scream & Shout" first entered the "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles in the United States at number 3, before debuting at number 12 on the Hot 100. It is Spears' 29th Hot 100 entry and her fourth-highest debut. The song also rose from number 66 to number 1 on the Hot Digital Songs, with 196,000 digital units sold, becoming Spears' seventh topper on the component chart and will.i.am's second as a solo artist. The jump to the latter summit is the greatest in the chart's archives, besting the 57–1 flight of Zac Efron, Andrew Seeley and Vanessa Hudgens' "Breaking Free" (from Disney's "High School Musical") the week of February 11, 2006. "Scream & Shout" also debuted at number 33 on the Pop Songs component chart, becoming her 30th hit on the tally, breaking a tie with Mariah Carey for the second-most entries in the chart's 20-year history. It reached new peak of 3. The song also entered the Latin Pop Airplay component chart at number 33, and has so far peaked at number 28. On the week ending January 19, 2013, "Scream & Shout" entered the top 10 on the Hot 100, reaching number eight. By doing so, will.i.am scores his third solo top 10 and first as a lead artist. It also passed 1 million in digital sales in the country that week. So far, it peaked at number three on the chart. The song debuted at number 39 in Canada, and reached number 3 the following week. Four weeks later, it peaked at number one, becoming will.i.am's first number one single in the country and Spears's ninth. "Scream & Shout" would be the first number-one single on "Billboard"s newly anointed Dance/Electronic Songs chart in its first issue, published on January 26, 2013. As of February 21st, 2013, the song has sold over 2,000,000 digital copies in the united states.
The song entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 26 on December 3, 2012, climbing into the top five the following week at number 2. It stayed for another week at number 2, before reaching the top position on the chart on December 24, 2012, becoming the Christmas number one for the year in the country, while earning a 2 times Platinum certification from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand for selling over 30,000 units there. "Scream & Shout" debuted on the Australian Singles Chart at number 32 on December 9, 2012. The following week, it entered the top five at number 5, reaching a peak of number 2 on the week ending December 23, 2012, making it Spears's highest charting single since "Piece of Me" (2008). It has also topped the Australian Dance Chart and has been certified 4 times Platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association denoting sales of 280,000 copies.
Music video.
Development.
</ref>
On November 24, 2012, a small preview of the music video was aired during a promotional commercial for "X Factor". Jessica Sager of Pop Crush described the looks of the preview saying that will.i.am "sports a black suit, while Spears rocks a futuristic, black, seemingly ‘Barbarella’-inspired look." On November 26, 2012, will.i.am tweeted that the video edit had been finished, and added, "I'm so happy and excited for everyone to see it...this week is going to be a good week." The music video for "Scream & Shout" premiered during a live episode of "The X Factor" on November 28, 2012, and was made available for viewing on VEVO immediately following the west coast broadcast.
Concept.
The theme of the music video is multiplicity, with the director commenting that the idea behind it "was essentially trying to reduce what the song is about to symbols. And that's what it was ... just really keeping it clean and iconic." It begins with intercalated beauty shots of will.i.am and Spears, until the scene cuts to will.i.am using his own iPhone camera add-on and social network iam+. As he says "Bring the action", we see Spears wearing "a skin tight skirt and long-sleeved midriff and cleavage baring top" and doing fast movements to the song's beat and singing along to the lyrics. Amy Sciaretto of Pop Crush compared Spears' look on the video to a "sexy, futuristic librarian". The singer is then seen on the top of a white box making different poses to the camera. When the track's chorus begins, will.i.am appears in front of an empty black background as he is joined by Spears, who now sports a corseted leotard accented with feathers, on a moving walkway and they sing together. Just after the first "Britney, bitch" line use, we see different shots of dancers performing to "Scream & Shout". The following moments of the video feature intercalated scenes of flaming disco balls, Spears image multiplied, and will.i.am wearing several gold accessories, including cap with a gold plate that reads 'King' on his head. Mor commented that the video has no exact narrative, saying, "there's no deep meaning to any of it. ... To me it was just about, you know, every scene is like a photo. I just liked it, I liked seeing the human heads, and I liked seeing the gold chains off of the plaques and then making it scroll. And then it was an awesome way to introduce characters, some friends of will ... so that it wasn't just about them."
Reception.
Following the premiere on "The X Factor", will.i.am thanked his fans for their overwhelmingly positive feedback, tweeting, "Wow!!! I feel so excited and full of energy right now!!! I want to #screamANDshout. Thank you all." Softpedia blogger Elena Gorgan also noted that the video received a positive response from fans, saying, "as Britney’s fans are also pointing out on various online forums, the Princess of Pop has never looked better than she does now, though some do wish she danced in the vid as well." Bruna Nessif of E! Online said that the video "wasn't too crazy, but it definitely provided the futuristic vibe that will.i.am is famous from," while HitFix collaborator Melinda Newman praised Spears' hairstyle and make-up, but commented that "the futuristic, minimalistic clip is a cheap-looking affair that displays no chemistry between the two" artists. Katie Atkinson of MTV compared Spears' persona on the video to Brigitte Bardot and wrote, "if anyone doubted her enduring sex appeal, Spears proved she's still got it, in a midriff-baring bodycon dress (still showing off her tummy, 13 years after her breakthrough "...Baby One More Time" video!) and a corseted leotard accented with feathers in later scenes." 4music critic Jenny Mensah thought that the singer "sounds less Southern belle and more Swedish dominatrix in the video, as she takes on a deep, authoritative voice." Hollywood.com blogger Leanne Aguilera questioned why Spears didn't dance on the video, but added that, despite that, the singer "does look phenomenal. With her teased blonde locks, sexy (yet age-appropriate) pencil skirt and the highest of high heels, Ms. Spears looks sultry yet sophisticated."
</ref>
Andrew Villagomez of "Out" noted that "the array of product placement display" throughout the video is "obviously not something new," but complimented Spears "confidence and sex appeal in the video" and continued to praise the song, concluding that the pop singer "gives Lana Del Rey a run for her money with a spy-like updo." "The Huffington Post" journalist Jessica Misener wrote that despite Spears' fashion problems over the year, "she suits up in two different sizzling hot outfits: a black crop top with matching pencil skirt and gloves, and a spangled nude and black lace bodysuit. Her blonde hair looks great and her body is amazing, and you know we love her oodles of gold bling," and added that it's the "hottest Britney music video look" since "Toxic" (2004). Yahaira Toribio of Terra deemed the video will.i.am's "high-end technological wonderland"; however, Toribio thought that "for all the choreography going on in this clip, we're missing Ms. Spears' bust out some moves like the good old days but all we get is her standing and sitting pretty." Idolator's Sam Lansky expressed that he was unsatisfied with the final product, saying that the music video "is more boundary-testing than the audio, it's all the things you'd expect: Futuristic, with some unsubtle product placement and a lot of ostensibly cool effects. Cool cars! Speakers! Will.i.am wearing a hat that says “KING”! We’d hoped for more."
Usage in media.
"Scream & Shout" served as the theme song for the TV commercial to promote the "Beats by Dr. Dre Color" headphones. The commercial featured many celebrities such as Azealia Banks, Zedd, Ellie Goulding, Lil Wayne, 2 Chainz Zendaya, Cam Newton, LeBron James and will.i.am himself. The song was also played on an episode of "Celebrity Big Brother 11" in the United Kingdom on January 2013. On January 26, 2013, a parody of the song was featured in a sketch of "Saturday Night Live", in which the lyrics were changed to "When I walk down the street, all eyes on me".
Remixes.
After the online leak of the track, Spears revealed she was "gonna do some sick remixes too" and asked "who would you like to remix Scream & Shout?" On December 3, 2012, she tweeted will.i.am saying that a "Lil birdy told me you have some amazing DJ's remixing it as we speak", while he replied, "I got some super fresh, mega dope, hot hot remixes from some super dj's and producers coming soon..." On January 1, 2013, will.i.am revealed that he was going to release a club remix of "Scream & Shout" featuring American rapper Waka Flocka Flame and producer Hit-Boy the same day. However, the release did not happen, with an early version of the remix leaking on January 25, 2013. Apart from Waka Flocka Flame and Hit-Boy, the remix also features rappers Diddy and Lil Wayne. Following the leak, will.i.am uploaded the finished version on his YouTube account. It was released for digital download on January 29, 2013. For being significantly different from the original version, the remix is being tracked separately on the "Billboard" charts. On the week ending February 16, 2013, it debuted at number 49 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs. An accompanying music video was filmed in Los Angeles, California on January 23, 2013, with will.i.am saying that the remix is "so freaking fresh that we had to do a video for it. Usually a remix just comes and it's a part of the initial but, this one needed a freaking video." The video was initially going to premiere on February 15, 2013 at BET's "106 & Park". However, it leaked online on February 14, 2013 through Youku, and was uploaded to VEVO later the same day.
Credits and personnel.
Credits adapted from the liner notes of "Scream & Shout".
