Lauren Cohan (born January 7, 1982) is an American-born English actress. Her most recognized roles to date are Bela Talbot on "Supernatural" and Maggie Greene in "The Walking Dead".
Early life.
Lauren was born in Philadelphia and lived in Cherry Hill, New Jersey during her childhood before moving to her mother's native United Kingdom in her teens. Cohan's Scottish mother converted to Judaism when she married Cohan's stepfather, and Cohan was raised in the Jewish religion from the age of five (she had a Bat Mitzvah). She has a younger stepsister. Lauren graduated from the University of Winchester / King Alfred's College where she studied Drama and English Literature, before touring with a theatre company she co-founded at the University. Lauren then split her time and work between London and Los Angeles, working on several films as well as some non-commercial projects.
Career.
Film.
Cohan's major movie debut was the 2005 film "Casanova" as Sister Beatrice. In 2006, she starred in the sequel to "National Lampoon's Van Wilder", "" playing the role of Charlotte Higginson. Her next role was in the 2007 film "Float". In February 2010 was cast in "Death Race 2", which co-stars Sean Bean and Danny Trejo.
Television.
Cohan was cast in Season Three of Supernatural as Bela Talbot; a thief, appearing in six episodes, who procures valuable supernatural objects and sells them to very rich and possibly very powerful people in the supernatural world. It was the head of the CW who requested a second female lead be added to the show. To accommodate this Kripke made the originally planned recurring character Bela, to be a prominent character. Kripke placed her along with Katie Cassidy who was cast as Ruby. Bela was not received well by fans due to her conniving behavior, antagonistic self-centeredness, and consistent nature to try to get the lead characters (the Winchester brothers) killed. The character was written out/killed off in the penultimate episode of Season 3.
She is also known for playing the recurring character Rose, a 500 year old vampire in "The Vampire Diaries". In February, she joined the television series "Chuck" in a recurring role playing Vivian Volkoff, a "charming, sophisticated socialite" from Somerset, England, and the daughter of primary villain, Alexei Volkoff. 
She has also guest starred on shows such as "Modern Family", "", "Cold Case", "Life" and "The Bold and the Beautiful". 
Cohan starred in a pilot for The CW called "Heavenly" in which she played the lead character, an attorney who teams up with an angel; it was not picked up as a series. 
She was cast in the second season of the AMC television series "The Walking Dead" based on the comic book series of the same name, in the recurring role of Maggie Greene. She returns for the third season, being promoted to the main cast.
