Kelly Rowland (born Kelendria Trene Rowland on February 11, 1981) is an American recording artist, songwriter, dancer, actress and television personality. Born in Atlanta, Georgia and raised in Houston, Texas, Rowland rose to fame as one of the founding members of Destiny's Child, one of the world's best-selling girl groups of all time, who have sold 50 million records worldwide. As of November 2012, Rowland, as a solo artist, has sold over 24 million records worldwide. Her work has earned her several achievements, including a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame with Destiny's Child, four Grammy Awards, two Billboard Music Awards, and a Soul Train Music Award. Rowland has been honored by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP) and "Essence" magazine for her contributions to music.
During the hiatus of Destiny's Child, Rowland released her debut solo album "Simply Deep" in 2002, which produced her joint worldwide number-one single "Dilemma" with rapper Nelly, and the international top-ten hit "Stole". The album topped the UK Albums Chart and sold more than 2.5 million copies worldwide. Following the group's disbandment in 2005, Rowland released her second solo effort "Ms. Kelly" in 2007 and despite being less successful than its predecessor, it included the international top-ten singles "Like This" and "Work". Rowland scored her second worldwide number-one hit in 2009, as a featured artist on French DJ David Guetta's single "When Love Takes Over", and two years later she collaborated with Italian DJ Alex Gaudino on the international top-ten single "What a Feeling". Both songs are included in the international edition of her third album "Here I Am" (2011), which topped the US R&B/Hip Hop Albums chart. It also included the international top-ten single "Commander" and the US R&B number-one "Motivation".
Apart from her work in music, Rowland has also launched a career in film and television. In 2002, she made her acting debut with guest appearances on sitcom series "The Hughleys" and "Taina", prior to appearing in various films, including "Freddy vs. Jason" (2003), "The Seat Filler" (2004) and "Think Like a Man" (2012). In 2007, Rowland appeared as a choirmaster on the reality show "Clash of the Choirs", and in 2009 she served as the host on Bravo's reality competition series "The Fashion Show" alongside Isaac Mizrahi. In 2011, Rowland joined the judging panel on the eighth series of "The X Factor" (UK), but left after one season. She then became a dance master on the first series of the Australian dance talent show "Everybody Dance Now" in 2012.
Biography.
1981–1996: Early life and career beginnings.
Kelendria Trene Rowland was born in Atlanta, Georgia. She is the daughter of Doris Rowland Garrison and Christopher Lovett. When she was seven, her mother took her and left her father, who was an abusive alcoholic. At the age of eight, she relocated to Houston. Rowland was placed into a rapping and dancing group, along with cousin Beyoncé Knowles and friend LaTavia Roberson. Originally named Girl's Tyme, they were eventually cut down to six members. West coast R&B producer, Arne Frager, flew into Houston to see them and eventually brought them to his studio, The Plant Recording Studio, in Northern California. As part of efforts to sign Girl's Tyme to a major label record deal, Frager's strategy was to debut them in "Star Search", the biggest talent show on national TV at that time. They participated, but lost the competition.
To manage the group, Mathew Knowles, Beyoncé's father, resigned in 1995 from his job as a medical-equipment salesman. He dedicated his time and established a "boot camp" for their training. At this time Rowland moved in with the Knowles. Not long after the inclusion of Rowland, Mathew cut the original lineup to four with LeToya Luckett joining in 1993. Rehearsing in Tina Knowles' hair styling salon and their backyards, the group continued performing as an opening act for other established R&B girl groups of the time. They auditioned before record labels and were finally signed to Elektra Records, only to be dropped months later, before they could release an album.
1997–02: Breakthrough with Destiny's Child.
Taken from a passage in the Biblical Book of Isaiah, the group changed their name to Destiny's Child in 1993. Together, they performed in local events and, after four years on the road, the group was signed to Columbia Records in late 1997. That same year, Destiny's Child recorded their major label debut song "Killing Time", for the soundtrack to the 1997 film, "Men in Black". The following year, the group released their self-titled debut album, spawning hits such as "No, No, No". The album established the group as a viable act in the music industry, amassing moderate sales and winning the group three Soul Train Lady of Soul Awards. The group rose to stardom after releasing their multi-platinum second album "The Writing's on the Wall" in 1999. The record featured some of the group's most widely known songs such as "Bills, Bills, Bills", "Jumpin' Jumpin'" and "Say My Name", which became their most-successful song at the time, and would remain as one of their signature songs. "Say My Name" won Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals and Best R&B Song at the 43rd Grammy Awards. "The Writing's on the Wall" sold more than 15 million copies worldwide, essentially becoming their breakthrough album.
Along with their commercial successes, the group became entangled in much-publicized turmoil involving the filing of a lawsuit by Luckett and Roberson for breach of contract. The issue was heightened after Michelle Williams and Farrah Franklin appeared in the video of "Say My Name", implying that Luckett and Roberson had already been replaced. Eventually, Luckett and Roberson left the group. Franklin would eventually fade from the group after five months, as evidenced by her absences during promotional appearances and concerts. She attributed her departure to negative vibes in the group resulting from the strife. After settling on their final lineup, the trio recorded "Independent Women Part I", which appeared on the soundtrack to the 2000 film, "Charlie's Angels". It became their best-charting single, topping the "Billboard" Hot 100 for eleven consecutive weeks. The success cemented the new lineup and skyrocketed them to fame. Later that year, Luckett and Roberson withdrew their case against their now-former band mates, while maintaining the suit against Mathew, which ended in both sides agreeing to stop public disparaging.
Later that year, while Destiny's Child was completing their third album "Survivor", Rowland appeared on the remix of Avant's single "Separated", which reached the top spot of the "Billboard" Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks chart. "Survivor", which channeled the turmoil the band underwent, spawned its lead single of the same name, which was a response to the experience. The song went on to win a Grammy Award for Best R&B Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocals. The themes of "Survivor", however, caused Luckett and Roberson to refile their lawsuit; the proceedings were eventually settled in June 2002. Meanwhile, the album was released in May 2001, debuting at number one on the US "Billboard" 200 with first-week sales of 663,000 copies sold. To date, "Survivor" has sold over twelve million copies worldwide, over forty percent of which were sold in the US alone. The album also spawned the number-one hit "Bootylicious". After releasing their remix album "This Is the Remix" in 2002, the group announced their temporary break-up to pursue solo projects.
2002–06: "Simply Deep", "Destiny Fulfilled" and group disbandment.
In 2002, Rowland teamed up with rapper Nelly to record the chorus and bridge vocals on the track "Dilemma" for his album "Nellyville". Released as the album's second single, the song became one of the most successful singles of the year, topping the charts in Australia, Belgium, Ireland, Netherlands, United Kingdom and the United States. The single saw Rowland establishing herself as a solo artist, and won in the Best Rap/Sung Collaboration category of the 45th Grammy Awards.
Originally due in early 2003, the success of the collaboration caused the label to advance the release date of Rowland's debut solo album "Simply Deep", which Rowland rushed within three weeks to get done. The album has a mixture of alternative-R&B and rock music. Featuring production contributions by Mark J. Feist, Big Bert, Rich Harrison, and singers Brandy and Solange Knowles providing background vocals, the album took Rowland's solo work further into an alternative music mixture, which Rowland described as a "weird fusion a little bit of Sade and a little bit of rock." Released in the United States in October 2002 and internationally in 2003, "Simply Deep" debuted at number 12 on the "Billboard" 200, with first-week sales of 77,000 copies sold. It was eventually certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), and has since sold 602,000 copies in the US. Released to an even bigger success in international territories, the album topped the UK Albums Chart and became a gold-seller in Australia, Canada and New Zealand, resulting into worldwide sales total of 2.5 million copies. In her review for "Simply Deep", Caroline Sullivan of "The Guardian" wrote, "Thanks to the ubiquitous 'Dilemma', a song that practically peeled off its clothes on the spot, Destiny's Child's Kelly Rowland is no longer a mere backing vocalist for Beyoncé Knowles."
The album yielded three singles. "Stole", a rock pop-influenced mid-tempo track about loss, was released as the album's lead single and became an international top-ten, peaking at number two in Australia and the United Kingdom. In the US, the song failed to capitalize on the success of "Dilemma", reaching the top-thirty only. The album's second single, an up-tempo track entitled "Can't Nobody", charted significantly lower in the US, but enjoyed top-twenty success in Australia and parts of Europe, where it became another top-five hit on the UK Singles Chart. The album's third and final single "Train on a Track" was featured on the soundtrack of the 2003 romantic comedy film "Maid in Manhattan", but failed to chart or sell noticeably, except in the UK, where it became Rowland's fourth consecutive top-twenty entry.
After a three-year journey that involved concentration on individual solo projects, Rowland rejoined Beyoncé Knowles and Michelle Williams for Destiny's Child's fourth studio album "Destiny Fulfilled", released in November 2004. The album hit number two on the "Billboard" 200, and spawned "Lose My Breath", "Soldier", "Girl", and "Cater 2 U" as notable mainstream records. In support of the album, Destiny's Child embarked on their 2005 Destiny Fulfilled ... And Lovin' It world tour, which started in April and ran through September. During the Barcelona, Spain visit of the tour, the group announced their disbandment after the end of their final North American leg. In October 2005, the group released a compilation album, entitled "#1's", including all of Destiny's Child's number-one hits and most of their well-known songs. The greatest hits collection also included three new tracks, including their final single "Stand Up for Love". In September 2005, Rowland was featured on American rapper Trina's single "Here We Go", the second single from her album "Glamorest Life". The song peaked at number 17 on the U.S. "Billboard" Hot 100, and became another top-twenty entry in Finland, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. On March 28, 2006, Destiny's Child reunited to accept a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. According to "Time" magazine, they were recognized as the world's best-selling female group of all time.
2007–08: "Ms. Kelly", dvd and eps.
Rowland's second solo album "Ms. Kelly" was released in June 2007. Not as successful as its predecessor, the album produced the hit singles "Like This" and "Work". Originally entitled "My Story", the album's first version was actually scheduled for a June 2006 release, but the singer, her management and Columbia Records decided to shelve the album at the last minute to re-work a version with a different vibe as the singer considered the final tracklisting "too full of midtempos and ballads." Rowland eventually consulted additional producers to collaborate on the album, renamed "Ms. Kelly", including Billy Mann, Scott Storch, and Atlanta-based Polow da Don who contributed to "Like This", a collaboration with rapper Eve. A moderate success around the globe, the song reached the top-ten in Ireland and the UK, and the top-twenty in Australia and New Zealand. Upon its release, "Ms. Kelly" debuted at number six on the "Billboard" 200, and number two on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, with moderately successful first week sales of 86,000 copies. Outside the US, the album widely failed to reprise the success of "Simply Deep", barely reaching the top-forty on the majority of all charts it appeared on, except for the UK, where it opened at number 37.
Rowland had been working on the conception of the album on and off since 2004, with some of her early recordings — such as the Bryan Michael Cox-produced "Bad Habit" — even being used on the Destiny's Child's albums "Destiny Fulfilled" (2004) and "" (2006). The album's first draft, entitled "My Story", saw her actually writing and recording with a wider range of well-known contemporary R&B producers and artists as she wanted to go "in the urban, more R&B route general" with the album, involving Big Tank, Patrick "J. Que" Smith, Rich Harrison, Rodney Jerkins, and Robin Thicke. Female rappers Remy Ma and Shawnna also lent their voices to guest parts. Anxious to avoid hasty productions as on previous album "Simply Deep", Rowland took a wider role in the production of the album: she co-wrote the majority of the songs and shared ideas in which one to produce. "I wrote a lot on this record [...] and it's especially from me my fans," she said of the album. "It's more R&B [...] and it definitely has a feel-good vibe to it as well."
A few months before the scheduled release of "My Story" however, Rowland felt the album was not going into the direction she had previously envisioned, and thus, she asked to revamp the album. "It was basically a list of songs that I put together about the past three years of my life, with love and relationships," she said of the original track listing. "And I remember listening to the record, and I was just like, 'I don't want this to be too deep to where, you know, lose people.' And the record was too full of midtempos and ballads, so I wanted to bring it up a little bit." Rowland eventually consulted new producers to collaborate on the album, including Mysto & Pizzi, Sean Garrett, Scott Storch, Polow da Don, and Eve. In addition, the singer decided to rename the album. "I really put my heart and soul into this record," she said, "and not only am I excited that everyone's going to hear the music, I'm looking forward to people getting to hear the real me. That's the reason I called the album "Ms. Kelly". Because the title is all about respect, being an adult and that's how I feel about my life, and my music." Rowland cited former bandmate Beyoncé Knowles, and singers Brandy and Whitney Houston as major inspirations while recording her album.
The same year, she released her first DVD entitled "BET Presents Kelly Rowland".
The DVD consists of a candid interview with Rowland as she talks about the production of "Ms. Kelly", her time as a member of Destiny's Child, and her perspective on her celebrity status and solo career. The DVD also features BET highlights, performance highlights, and music videos from throughout Rowland's career.
In continued support of the album, Rowland released the album cuts "Comeback", "Ghetto" and "Work" as singles, respectively. While "Comeback" didn't charted in any countries and the Snoop Dogg-featured "Ghetto" underperformed in the US, the latter became a top-ten hit in Australia and New Zealand, as well as in most European markets, including France, Italy, Switzerland and the UK. In 2008, she published two eps "Ms. Kelly: Diva Deluxe" and "Ms.Kelly: Digital Ep". While the second contains remixed songs of album, the first ep includes unpublished tracks among which the lead single is the previously unreleased Bobby Womack cover "Daylight", a collaboration with rapper Travie McCoy (of alternative rap group Gym Class Heroes) that reached the top-twenty of the UK Singles Chart.. Subsequently, a reissued version of album, branded "Ms. Kelly Deluxe", received a release, with addition of "Diva Deluxe"'s song. By April 2008, "Ms. Kelly" had managed to sell over 1.2 million copies worldwide. In October 2008, Rowland was featured on French singer Nâdiya's single "No Future in the Past".
2009–11: New management and label, compilations and "Here I Am".
In 2009, Rowland was featured on Italian singer Tiziano Ferro's single "Breathe Gentle", which was released on February 20, 2009. It reached the top ten of The Netherlands' Single Top 100 chart. On January 28, 2009, it was announced that Rowland and her manager Mathew Knowles had parted ways. She released a statement to the media, saying "Mathew Knowles has been a positive influence in my career. I have had great success under his guidance – both as a member of Destiny's Child and with my solo projects. Although we have decided to part ways professionally, the Knowles family and the entire Music World Entertainment team will always be my family." Then two months later, on March 31, 2009, Rowland issued a statement that she had also left her record label of 13 years, Columbia Records, to explore other ventures. She added that she "felt the need to explore new directions, new challenges, and new freedoms outside my comfort zone." Later in a 2010 interview with "Entertainment Weekly", Rowland stated that the decision to leave was not hers: the label ended her contract because her previous album "Ms. Kelly" was not commercially successful.
In April 2009, Rowland was featured on the dance song "When Love Takes Over", the first single from French DJ David Guetta's album "One Love" (2009), in which Rowland contributed vocals on two other tracks. The song was a commercial success, reaching number one in ten countries, including in the UK, Ireland, Italy and Switzerland. "When Love Takes Over" earned the pair a Grammy Award nomination in the Best Dance Recording category of the 52nd Grammy Awards. In October 2009, it was suggested that the success of the single had made Rowland consider signing a new record deal with EMI Music. Then in May 2010, speculation of Rowland's new record deal ended when an official press release revealed that she had signed to Universal Motown Records. It was whilst recording within the studios with Guetta that Rowland caught the attention of the head of Universal Motown, Sylvia Rhone, which led to the new deal. On the decision to go with Rhone's label, Rowland said "they have really embraced me and have set me up to succeed. I decided, after careful thought, to sign with Universal Motown not only because of their track record of success, but also because they truly put their artists first".
In 2010, Rowland released the single "Everywhere You Go", which featured several African and South African artists known as the Rhythm of Africa, as the theme song for the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Rowland continued her live appearances throughout 2010 in Australia, performing at the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras party with George Michael on March 7, and was part of the Supafest tour in April. A song titled "Commander", featuring David Guetta, was released on May 17, 2010 as the first international single from Rowland's third studio album "Here I Am". Upon release, the single was met with positive reception from music critics who praised the dance sound of the song. In the United Kingdom, "Commander" topped the UK Dance Chart and became a top-ten hit on the UK Singles Chart. Despite not being serviced as a single in the US, it managed to top the Hot Dance Club Songs chart. In the US, "Rose Colored Glasses" and "Grown Woman" were released as the album's lead pop and R&B singles, respectively. Both songs failed to match the chart success that their predecessor achieved, and resulted in "Grown Woman" being excluded from the album. Eventually, Rowland announced that "Here I Am" would be rebooted with a brand new lead single for the US market. The same year, Rowland released a box-set of her first two albums and her first compilation album "Work: The Best of Kelly Rowland", which includes singles and songs of "Simply Deep" and "Miss. Kelly Deluxe" that don't contain any collaboration.
In April 2011, she released a song titled "Motivation" featuring rapper Lil Wayne, replacing the previous lead singles. "Motivation" peaked at number 17 on the "Billboard" Hot 100, and number one on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. It was eventually certified platinum by the RIAA, and became Rowland's highest charting single on the Hot 100 as a lead artist thus far. The song won Song of the Year at the 2011 Soul Train Music Awards, and Top R&B Song at the 2012 Billboard Music Awards. It was also nominated for Best Rap/Sung Collaboration at the 54th Grammy Awards.
Rowland continued her musical collaborations by lending her vocals to British rapper Tinie Tempah's single "Invincible", from his album "Disc-Overy" (2010). The single peaked at number 11 on the UK Singles Chart. In addition, she reunited with rapper Nelly on the single "Gone", and appeared on Italian DJ Alex Gaudino's single "What a Feeling". After several delays, "Here I Am" was finally released in the US on July 26, 2011. The album debuted on the "Billboard" 200 at number three, and number one on the Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, with first-week sales of 77,000 copies sold. To date, it is Rowland's highest debuting and charting album in the United States. As of December 2011, "Here I Am" has sold 178,000 copies in the US. Two more singles were released from the album; "Lay It on Me" and "Down for Whatever", the latter became a top-ten hit in the UK. In August 2011, Rowland was announced as the ambassador and spokesperson for rapper Sean Combs' second fragrance, Empress. In October 2011, she released her second compilation album "", which includes her most famous songs included "Dilemma" with Nelly and "When Love Takes Over" with David Guetta. In December 2011, Rowland was announced as a worldwide ambassador for the watchmakers company, TW Steel. and was released her fitness DVD "Sex Abs with Kelly Rowland".
2012–present: Music collaborations and "Talk a Good Game".
On February 8, 2012, Rowland was honored for her contributions to the music industry at "Essence" magazine's 2012 Black Women in Music Event. In April 2012, Rowland was named one of '"Best Dressed Women of Year" by "Glamour" and travelled to Australia as one of the supporting acts at Supafest. A song titled "Need a Reason", featuring American rappers Future and Bei Major, was featured on the soundtrack album for the 2012 film "Think like a Man", in which Rowland stars as Brenda. In May 2012, Rowland made a cameo appearance in the music video for Trey Songz's single "Heart Attack", playing the role of his love interest. The following month, she teamed up with liquor company Bacardi for a remake of Kate Yanai's single "Bacardi Feeling (Summer Dreamin')", in honor of the company's 150th anniversary. Rowland shot an accompanying music video for the song in Barcelona, which was released on June 17, 2012.
Also in 2012, Rowland was featured on Ludacris' single "Representin'", Sean Paul's "How Deep Is Your Love", Big Boi's "Mama Told Me" and Future's "Neva End (Remix)". "Ice", featuring Lil Wayne, was released on August 24, 2012, as the lead single from her upcoming fourth studio album, "Year of the Woman". The single reached number 88 on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 chart, number 24 on the US Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, and number 25 on the South Korea Gaon International Chart. "Year of the Woman" will be Rowland's first release with Republic Records following Universal Music Group's decision to close Universal Motown and Universal Republic, and reviving Motown Records and Republic Records. "Kisses Down Low", the album's second single, was released on February 1, 2013. Soon after, Rowland announced the album would now be called "Talk a Good Game". Destiny's Child released a compilation album titled "Love Songs" on January 29. The album is a collection of romantically-themed songs from the group's previous albums and also includes the newly recorded song "Nuclear", co-written by Michelle Williams. Rowland's song "Heaven", from her debut solo album "Simply Deep" (2002), is also included on "Love Songs". On February 3, 2013, during the Beyoncé's performance at the Super Bowl XLVII halftime show, held at the Mercedes-Benz Superdome in New Orleans, Rowland and Williams joined Knowles on the stage, where the trio performed excerpts from "Bootylicious", "Independent Women", and "Single Ladies (Put a Ring on It)". Rowland and Williams then exited the stage and Knowles ended her performance.
Artistry.
Musical style.
Rowland can be classfied as a mezzo-soprano, and her music includes various styles of musical genres, including contemporary R&B, pop, hip hop, soul, rock and dance. Her debut solo album "Simply Deep" (2002) followed an adult-alternative rock sound, while her second album "Ms. Kelly" (2007) featured an urban sound. In an interview with "The Independent", Rowland admitted that with her first two albums she struggled to find her sound. "I was in a stage with the first two records where I was searching and I was like, let me try a rock-dance approach, the label management wanted me to try it and I did it ... And then after that came a more urban approach with "Ms. Kelly" in 2007." Her third album "Here I Am" (2011) consisted of a pop and R&B sound, with subtle influences of dance. Rowland stated that meeting French DJ David Guetta has influenced her to record dance music. During production of the album, Rowland stated that part of the reason for the new sound on "Here I Am" was wanting to do something different, saying "I knew I couldn't be afraid of this direction, and I wasn't going to let the thoughts and opinions of others make me afraid to go in this direction".
Most of the lyrical themes in "Simply Deep" (2002) speak of love and life experiences, particularly in the songs "Dilemma", in which Rowland expresses her endless love to her love interest, and "Stole", in which she sings about an emotional "tale of school shootings and suicides". In "Ms. Kelly" (2007), Rowland covers topics such as her "deeply personal relationship issues" in her songs, "Still in Love with My Ex", "Flashback", "Love", "Better Without You" and "Gotsta Go (Part I)". Alex Macpherson of "The Guardian" noted that the songs could be about Rowland's former relationship with American football player Roy Williams. "Here I Am" (2011) included common themes of womanhood, sexual intimacy and love. Some of Rowland's other songs such as "Work", "I'm Dat Chick" and "Work It Man" have been musically compared to the work of former bandmate Beyoncé Knowles.
Influences.
 Rowland has cited Whitney Houston and Janet Jackson as her biggest musical influences. Following the news of Houston's death, Rowland commented, "I am beyond heartbroken. Whitney Houston was undoubtedly one of the greatest singers & performers of all time & such a huge influence on me. She embraced me when I first started out with Destiny's Child, with love, with encouragement and with that powerhouse voice". Rowland has also drawn inspiration from Beyoncé, Destiny's Child, Sade, Martin Luther King Jr., Donna Summer, Diana Ross, Oprah Winfrey and Brandy. When speaking of Winfrey, she stated, "Nobody's perfect, but she comes so close! She's like the female version of God. She inspires me to work hard and give back". Rowland also stated that living in Miami has influenced her style, growth, and music. From a fashion perspective, Rowland has viewed her grandmother, Halle Berry, Jennifer Lopez, Beyoncé, and Oprah as her style icons.
Public image.
Destiny's Child were compared to The Supremes, a 1960s American female singing group. Whilst Knowles was compared to Ross, Kelly Rowland perhaps considered to be Destiny's Child deputy leader has been equated to Mary Wilson, the Supremes's second lead singer. Wilson declared about their second lead singer-position in the groups as "Same as our situation..." and about the possibility to emerge as solo artist, she says "It's very difficult, but it can be done. You've got to really want to I give that and that way it will work.".
Rowland performed live with Wilson and Cindy Birdsong of The Supremes at the Motown 45th anniversary, in 2004. After the international success of her worldwide hit singles "Dilemma" and "Stole" and of her debut album "Simply Deep", music critics wrote of Rowland as an emancipated and different artist from Beyoncé, that has established herself as a solo singer and songwriter.
In the first three albums of the group, Rowland sang her solo verses and briges in a lot of songs (like in the hit singles "Bills, Bills, Bills", "Independent Woman", "Survivor" and "Bootylicious"), leaded choruses ("Say My Name") and harmonized Knowles ("No, No, No" and "Jumpin' Jumpin'"), but in " Destiny Fulfilled " she conquered more space in all songs of album.. With her following solo albums, Rowland reaches a more mature and provocative image, treating themes of female strength, love and sexuality and showing a notable versatility of musical styles, moving herself from R&B to dance music.
Other ventures.
Film and television career.
Rowland branched out into acting with a guest stint on the sitcom "The Hughleys" in 2002, before appearing in other UPN shows such as "Eve" and "Girlfriends" in the years of 2003 and 2006 respectively. Having played the role of Tammy Hamilton, an ambitious 21-year-old apprentice to realtor Toni (Jill Marie Jones) in latter sitcom, Rowland initially hoped her three-episode stint would expand to a larger recurring role, but as the show was moved to The CW network the following year plans for a return eventually went nowhere. Also in 2003, she appeared in "American Dreams" as Martha Reeves of Martha & The Vandellas, singing a version of the group's single "Nowhere to Run".
In 2003, Rowland made her big screen debut in the slasher film "Freddy vs. Jason", a crossover film directed by Ronny Yu. Cast as one of the female leads, she portrayed Kia Waterson, the frank best friend of lead character Lori Campbell, played by Monica Keena. Released to generally mixed reviews from critics, the movie topped the U.S. box office, gaining $36.4 million on its first weekend. Budgeted at $25 million, the film became a financial success, resulting in a worldwide box office total of $114.3 million. 
The following year, Rowland returned to the big screen, this time for a lead role in the romantic comedy "The Seat Filler", starring opposite Duane Martin and Shemar Moore. Executive produced by Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith, the film hit theaters in the summer of 2005 and debuted at number eighteen at the box office top twenty. It eventually earned a total domestic gross ticket sales of $10.2 million, and about $18 million worldwide. In the film, for which she recorded two songs, Rowland played a pop star who falls for an awards-show seat filler whom she mistakes for a high-profile entertainment attorney. Released to a limited number of festivals only, the film went straight to DVD in 2006.
In October 2007, Rowland auditioned for the role of Louise, Carrie Bradshaw's assistant, in the 2008 of HBO's comedy series "Sex and the City". The part eventually went to Jennifer Hudson. In fall 2007, Rowland appeared as a choirmaster on the NBC reality show "Clash of the Choirs". Rowland was among superstars like Michael Bolton, Patti LaBelle, Nick Lachey, and Blake Shelton. Rowland's choir finished fifth in the competition. In 2009, she was cast to host Bravo's reality competition series "The Fashion Show" alongside Isaac Mizrahi. The series premiered on May 7, 2009. On May 30, 2011, Rowland was confirmed as a judge for the eighth series of British television show "The X Factor". In addition to her judging stint, Rowland also had a supporting role in the motion picture "Think Like a Man" (2012), which also starred Keri Hilson, Chris Brown and Gabrielle Union. On April 30, 2012, it was officially announced that Rowland had stepped down as a judge on "The X Factor", due to a conflicting schedule. Rowland was awarded Ultimate TV Personality at the 2011 Cosmopolitan Ultimate Women of the Year Awards, and TV Personality of the Year at the 2012 Glamour Women of the Years Awards, for her role on the show. In August 2012, Rowland became a dance master alongside Jason Derülo, for the first season of the Australian dance talent show "Everybody Dance Now". However, on August 21, 2012, the show was cancelled due to poor ratings. Rowland has reportedly signed on to the BET network's new series "What Would Dylan Do?". A pilot for the sitcom, from producer Warren Hutcherson, is set to begin production in the coming monts.
Philanthropy.
Rowland and the Knowles family founded the Survivor Foundation, a charitable entity set up to provide transitional housing for 2005 Hurricane Katrina victims and storm evacuees in the Houston, Texas area. The Survivor Foundation extended the philanthropic mission of the Knowles-Rowland Center for Youth, a multi-purpose community outreach facility in downtown Houston. Also in 2005, Rowland and Knowles lent their voices to a collaboration with Kitten K. Sera, entitled "All That I'm Lookin for". The song appeared on "The Katrina CD" album, whose proceeds went to the "Recording Artists for Hope" organization.
In 2006, Rowland joined other artists such as Pink and Avril Lavigne in ads for so-called empowerment tags for the ALDO Fights AIDS campaign, which went on sale exclusively at ALDO stores and benefited the YouthAIDS initiative. In 2007, Rowland, along with stars such as Jessica Simpson and the cast of "Grey's Anatomy" autographed pink Goody Ouchless brushes that were made available for auction on eBay, with all proceeds going to Breast Cancer Awareness. In addition, the singer teamed up with Kanye West, Nelly Furtado and Snoop Dogg to design a Nike sneaker for another eBay auction. All proceeds went to AIDS Awareness.
In 2008, Rowland officially became ambassador for MTV's Staying Alive Foundation, which aims to reduce discrimination against HIV and AIDS victims. She has since visited projects in Tanzania and Kenya to promote the charity, and underwent a HIV and AIDS test in Africa to raise awareness of the deadly diseases. In March 2009, she spearheaded a bone marrow drive. In 2009, Rowland connected with Serve.MTV.com, MTV's platform to connect young people with local volunteerism opportunities, for a series of on-air PSAs. From battling homelessness to beautifying impoverished neighborhoods to saving whales, Rowland was joined by the likes of Cameron Diaz, will.i.am, and Sean Kingston as they discuss causes they volunteer to support, and urge young people to join with their friends in making civil service a part of their lifestyle. Also in 2009, Rowland along with fellow singers Alesha Dixon and Pixie Lott created T-shirts for River Island in aid of the Prince's Trust, profits from which help change young lives. In March 2010, Rowland launched her brand new charity, I Heart My Girlfriends. According to Rowland's official website, the charity focuses on self-esteem, date violence prevention, community service, abstinence, sports, drug and alcohol and smoking avoidance, obesity, disabilities, education and more. On April 26, 2010, she was at Grand Ballroom's "City of Hope — Spirit of Life Awards" for a charity event.
Tours.
Headlining
Supporting
Filmography.
Films
TV series (as an actress)
TV series (as a television personality)
