Paranormal Activity 4 is a 2012 American supernatural horror film, directed by Ariel Schulman and Henry Joost, directors of "Paranormal Activity 3", and written by Christopher Landon from a story by Chad Feehan. The film features Katie Featherston, who starred in the first film, and had cameos in the other two. The film was released in theaters and IMAX on October 17, 2012 in the United Kingdom and was released on October 18, 2012 in the United States, by Paramount Pictures. It is the fourth film in the "Paranormal Activity" film series, and a sequel to "Paranormal Activity 2", set several years later.
On October 9th, 2006, Kristi Rey and her husband are killed by Kristi's possessed sister Katie (Katie Featherston). She then kidnaps Kristi's baby son, Hunter. Katie and Hunter's whereabouts remained unknown.
Plot.
In November 2011, a teenager named Alex (Kathryn Newton) and her family live in suburban Henderson, Nevada with her mother Holly (Alexondra Lee), her father Doug (Stephen Dunham), and her little brother Wyatt (Aiden Lovekamp). Alex and her boyfriend, Ben (Matt Shively) discover their neighbor's child, Robbie (Brady Allen), hiding in their family treehouse. The next day, Robbie's mother falls ill and is taken to the hospital, leaving Robbie in the care of Alex's family. Robbie begins mentioning an invisible friend, whose presence is captured by a series of laptop cameras set up by Alex and Ben. On an Xbox Kinect, pixel dots show an invisible figure stand up and walk. One night, Alex notices several cars outside Robbie's house, but flees after being confronted by a woman. During the day, Robbie draws a green symbol on Wyatt's back, which Alex later determines to be associated with witchcraft and demonic possession.
The following day, Robbie takes Wyatt to his house. Alex follows them and finds Robbie's mother, who is actually Katie. Later, Wyatt confides in Alex that Katie told him he was adopted, like Robbie, and that his birth family needs him. That night, Wyatt talks to an invisible being, seemingly pleading that his name is not Hunter. Wyatt is taking a bath when he is violently pulled underwater by an unseen force, remaining underwater for a long time, before emerging, now referring to himself as Hunter. That night, Alex has her sheets ripped away and is levitated above her bed while she sleeps. Meanwhile, Doug experiences some paranormal activity himself when one of Holly's missing knives tries to fall on him.
Alone in the house with Wyatt, Alex video-chats with Ben, and hears the garage door open by itself. She goes down to close it but gets locked in. A woman is seen going upstairs to Wyatt's room, where he is hiding in his closet. The woman calls for Hunter, saying, "It's your aunt Katie... you're almost ready Hunter... I'll be here till you're ready." Alex is trapped in the garage, where the family car turns on by itself and begins spewing carbon monoxide exhaust. She escapes by breaking into the car and crashing out through the garage door. When her family gets home, they don't believe her account of what happened. Later, Holly is alone in the house, and begins to hear strange noises. Katie enters the house undetected, and goes to Wyatt's room. Holly is picked up and violently thrown against the ceiling by a hissing invisible entity. She crashes to the floor with a loud snap. Katie drags her body away. Ben later arrives to discover no one is home. He leaves Alex a phone message, telling her that he has discovered everything behind these strange occurrences. Ben goes to view the footage on the laptop but Katie appears behind him and snaps his neck.
Alex and her father arrive, and he thinks he sees Alex's mother with Wyatt (or Robbie) and Katie outside. As he goes to explore, Alex goes to her room and discovers Ben's body. She runs to Katie's house and finds her dad being dragged violently by the unseen entity. She looks around to find her dad's body but there is nothing, not even Robbie. Katie appears and storms forwards, demonically screaming. Alex quickly climbs out of the window at the rear of the house, where she discovers Wyatt standing still. She pleads with him to run away with her, but he stands there, face blank. As Alex looks up, she sees dozens of women marching towards her. She turns the other way, only to be attacked by a demonized Katie, her fate is unknown but it is implied she is devoured or possessed.
In a post-credits scene, two Spanish-speaking men in Mexico with a camera go into a mysterious store. They think that the store sells ""witchcraft"". They decide to run to the exit but one bumps into an old and scared-looking Mexican woman who states, translated from Spanish, that ""This is only the beginning"". Frightened by her, the men leave the store and the camera cuts to black.
Production.
Paramount Pictures announced on January 2, 2012 that "Paranormal Activity 4" was in the works. Information on the characters had been scarce, stating that Brady Allen was set to play a character named Robbie. Katie Featherston reprised her role as Katie, who was still possessed from the ending of the first two films. Other cast and characters that appeared in the film had been kept extremely tightly under wraps in order for fans to not know the plot. Henry Joost and Ariel Schulman returned to direct the film.
On June 23, 2012, it was confirmed that the fourth film had begun filming. A trailer debuted on August 3 in front of "Total Recall". The first theatrical trailer was released for the film on August 1, 2012. The trailer showed that the film is a sequel to "Paranormal Activity 2", following the story of possessed Katie and kidnapped Hunter after their disappearance at the end of the second film. The movie also featured a new scare technique, of footage being shown from a laptop in a video chat, that the directors felt would rival the 'fan cam' from the previous movie and that because of it being familiar technology it was "built for a horror movie". The movie also featured the Kinect, a Macbook, smart phones and a Canon XA10.
Release.
Box office.
As of December 23, 2012, the film has grossed $53,851,000 in North America and $86,855,358 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $140,706,358.
"Paranormal Activity 4" did not perform as well as "Paranormal Activity 2" or "Paranormal Activity 3" as it debuted with $4.8 million in midnight showings. That made it the third highest in midnight grosses for a horror film behind only its predecessors, "Paranormal Activity 3" ($8 million) and "Paranormal Activity 2" ($6.3 million). It then grossed $15 million in its opening day, also lower than the third film ($26.2 million) and second film ($20.1 million), bringing its total to $29 million in its opening weekend.
A movie theatre chain in the United Kingdom, Cineworld, showed screenings of the film, "Paranormal Activity 4" rather than the DreamWorks cartoon film, "", leaving children traumatized. A similar event happened in the US in 2007, with screenings of "The Hills Have Eyes 2" instead of "The Last Mimzy", and in 2010 with screenings of "Saw 3D" instead of "Megamind".
Critical reception.
The film has received mostly negative reviews from film critics and is generally regarded as the most divisive entry in the series. At Rotten Tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 26% based upon 94 reviews with an average rating of 4.3/10, indicating negative reviews. The website's consensus stated that "While it does manage to wring a few more screams out of the franchise's surprisingly durable premise, "Paranormal Activity 4" provides fans of the series with dismayingly diminishing returns." At Metacritic the film has a score of 40 out of 100 based on 22 reviews, indicating "mixed or average" reviews.
Drew McWeeny gave the film a C+, saying that while he felt that the film "played it safe", he still found the film to be shameful. Shaun Munro also reacted negatively, saying that he felt that the film would only be enjoyed by the "die-hard" fans of the previous films in the franchise. Ryan Lambie reacted negatively, giving the film a rating of 2/5, and saying that the film did not introduce any new ideas. Scott Weinberg gave a positive review, saying that there was "some fun" to be had in the film, however also felt that the film would likely only be enjoyed by fans of the previous films. Fred Topel also gave a positive review, saying that the film included iconography from some classic horror films.
Sequel.
On October 21, 2012, Paramount announced that "Paranormal Activity 5" would be released in October 2013.
Home media.
The film was released on Blu-ray Disc and DVD on January 29, 2013.
The post-credits scene teases "Paranormal Activity: The Oxnard Tapes", which is an upcoming Latino spin-off of the "Paranormal Activity" series. The post-credits scene was taken out of the film when the DVD was released.
