The Hangover Part III is an upcoming American comedy film produced by Legendary Pictures and distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures. It is the sequel to 2011's "The Hangover Part II", and the third and final film in "The Hangover" franchise. The film stars Bradley Cooper, Ed Helms, Zach Galifianakis and Justin Bartha with Todd Phillips directing a screenplay written by himself and Craig Mazin. "The Hangover Part III" is scheduled for release on May 24, 2013.
Production.
Development and pre-production.
In May 2011, days before the release of "The Hangover Part II", director Todd Phillips said that "there already are plans for a third film but no script or start date". About the possibility of "The Hangover Part III", Phillips stated, "If we were to do a third one, if the audience, if the desire was there, I think we have a very clear idea where that would head. It's certainly not in the same template that you've seen these movies. The third would be very much a finale and an ending. The most I could say about it, what's in my head, and I haven't discussed it with these actors, is that it is not following that template but very much a new idea. As far as where it takes place, I said I'm very open." Also during May, Craig Mazin, who co-wrote "The Hangover Part II", entered early talks to write the script for the third installment.
In December 2011, Bradley Cooper appeared on "The Graham Norton Show" to promote "The Hangover Part II" DVD and Blu-ray release, where he stated he "hopes" that "The Hangover Part III" will start shooting in September 2012, and also stated that Todd Phillips is working on the script. In January 2012, it was reported that stars Bradley Cooper, Zach Galifianakis and Ed Helms were nearing deals to reprise their roles in third installment with each receiving $15 million (against the backend) for their participation. In February 2012, Mike Tyson confirmed that he will return in the third film, although he later told TMZ that "I have no idea what's going on. I'm not in this one."
In March 2012, Warner Bros. announced that it was moving forward with the sequel and scheduled a release date of May 24, 2013, again aiming for a Memorial Day opening weekend. In June 2012, it was reported that the third installment would return to Las Vegas and would shoot on the Las Vegas Strip and at Caesars Palace. The report stated that much of the film would also be shot in Los Angeles and Tijuana and include a storyline that involves the boys rescuing Alan from a mental hospital.
In July 2012, Ken Jeong signed on to return in a significantly expanded role. The following week, Mike Epps entered negotiations to reprise his role of Black Doug. In August 2012, it was reported that Heather Graham would be back to play Jade the stripper. A few days later, Sasha Barrese was set to reprise her role as Doug's wife, Tracy. Also in August, John Goodman began talks to join the cast in a small role, described as an antagonist in the same vein as Paul Giamatti's character in "The Hangover: Part II". In September, Justin Bartha stated on "The Stephanie Miller Show" that he has signed on to return in the sequel.
Filming.
Principal photography began on Monday, September 10, 2012 in Los Angeles, California. The following week, it was reported that Melissa McCarthy entered negotiations to join the cast in a small role and Lela Loren was cast as a police officer. On October 8, 2012, production moved to Nogales, Arizona, which doubled as Tijuana in the film. On October 20 and 21, a stretch of the 73 Toll Road in Orange County, California was closed for filming. At the end of the month, production moved to Las Vegas for several weeks of filming. Principal photography concluded in Las Vegas on Friday, November 16, 2012.
