Continuum is a Canadian science fiction series produced by Reunion Pictures Inc., Boy Meets Girl Film Company and GK-TV. The series centres on the conflict between a police officer and a group of rebels from the year 2077 who time-travel to Vancouver, BC in the year 2012. It premiered on Showcase on May 27, 2012. The first season consists of 10 episodes. On August 25, Showcase officially renewed "Continuum" for a second season of 13 episodes to premiere in April 2013. The series is currently airing in America on Syfy.
Plot.
When a group of rebels convicted as terrorists escape execution by fleeing from the year 2077 to 2012, Kiera Cameron (Rachel Nichols), a future Vancouver law enforcement officer (called Protector), is involuntarily transported with them. In order to track down the terrorists (who call themselves "Liber8") and keep them from changing the past (and presumably future), Kiera joins the 2012 Vancouver Police Department and uses the skills of a young tech expert, Alec Sadler (Erik Knudsen), to both track the Liber8 agents' pasts and provide her with the necessary information and contacts to operate in the present despite her lack of official credentials.
The future of 2077 is a dystopian one in which world governments have collapsed and corporations now dominate the planet, instituting a high-surveillance, technically advanced police state and removing certain social freedoms, specifically criticism against the "Corporate Congress". The society seems relatively free, with a working class that enjoys a high standard of living in contrast with scenes of severe persecution upon a downtrodden people who cannot afford food. The moral dilemma this presents is that the group of eight from 2077, while self-admittedly having killed tens of thousands of people as collateral damage, consider themselves to be freedom fighters against the Orwellian corporate regime that dominates their time. Kiera's actions are primarily focused on preserving her timeline so that she can return to her family rather than considering the broader implications of her society. She has already released a woman who committed a murder in the present because she would go on to use stolen technology to develop an efficient new power supply for the world of the future, but is otherwise willing to treat the crimes she investigates on their merits in the present rather than constantly worrying how they will affect her future.
After Kiera goes back in time, she finds that she can communicate with a young Alec Sadler using his prototype 2012 wireless technology, which will become pervasive in 2077 and incorporated in her cybernetic police gear. She learns that in sixty years' time, an elderly Alec Sadler is actually the head of the mega-corporation Sadtech, whose technology may (inadvertently or otherwise) have been used to send Kiera and the others back in time.
Time travel.
The first is that this is a time loop, and elderly Alec in 2077 had already met Kiera, remembered everything they did together, and was possibly even inspired to create cybernetic technology from encountering "his" future work in her implants. In this case, nothing can be changed, and the mega-corporations will still dominate the planet in 2077.
The second possibility is that the time travel of the terrorists and Kiera has altered the pre-existing timeline, and due to their intervention it is no longer certain what 2077 will be like.
The first possibility is indicated in Season 1 Episode 1, when during the escape of the Liber8, the 2077 Alec Sadler was the only witness who seemed totally unsurprised as events unfolded.
The theory is potentially contradicted in Season 1 Episode 5 when a woman believed to be the grandmother of Liber8 member Matthew Kellog is killed before she can have children and Kellog remains in existence, but the present Alec notes that there is no way to be sure if the woman in question actually "was" Kellog's grandmother, as he merely identified her based on the house she lived in and he could have found the house before his family moved in.
In season 1's tenth and final episode, "Endtime", we discover more evidence that the time loop possibility is indeed correct: Sadler knew precisely what would happen in 2077 and purposefully sent both Kiera and Liber8 back in time, for reasons yet unknown.
