Ajay Devgn born Vishal Devgan on 2 April 1969, is an Indian film actor, director, and producer. He made his film debut with "Phool Aur Kaante" in 1991 and received a Filmfare Award for Best Male Debut for his performance. He then starred in films such as "Jigar" (1992), "Dilwale" (1994), "Suhaag" (1994), "Naajayaz" (1995), "Diljale" (1996) and "Ishq" (1997). In 1999, he received his first National Film Award for Best Actor for his performance in Mahesh Bhatt's drama "Zakhm".
In the early 2000s he starred in "Lajja" (2001) and "Company" (2002). In 2003, he won his second National Film Award for Best Actor for his portrayal of Bhagat Singh in Rajkumar Santoshi's biopic "The Legend of Bhagat Singh". Throughout his career he has performed in many critically and commercially successful films including "Raincoat" (2004), "Yuva" (2004), "Omkara" (2006), ' (2006), "Golmaal Returns" (2008), ' (2009), "Once Upon a Time in Mumbaai" (2010), "Golmaal 3" (2010), "Raajneeti" (2010), "Singham" (2011), "Bol Bachchan" (2012) and "Son of Sardaar" (2012). Having done so, he has established himself as one of the leading actors of Bollywood. In 2008, he debuted as a film director with "U Me Aur Hum" and then established the production house Ajay Devgan Films.
Biography.
Ajay was born in Punjab to Veena and Veeru Devgan. Originally from Mumbai, India, members of the The Mukherjee-Samarth Devagn family are all related to the Hindi film industry in Mumbai. His father, Veeru Devgan, is a well-known stunt choreographer and his mother Veena Devgan, a film producer. Ajay's brother, Anil Devgan, is a Hindi film director. Ajay Devgan is an alumnus of the Silver Beach High School in Juhu and Mithibai College.
Kajol began dating fellow actor, Ajay Devgn, in 1994, while filming for "Gundaraj". Members of the media, however, labelled them as an "unlikely pair" due to their contrasting personalities. Devgn explained their relationship by saying, "We never resorted to the usual 'I Love you' routine. A proposal never happened. We grew with each other. Marriage was never discussed, but it was always imminent". 
On 24 February 1999, they were married in a traditional Maharashtrian style ceremony at the Devgn house. The couple has two children. Their daughter Nysa was born on 20 April 2003 and their son Yug was born on 13 September 2010. Ajay Devgn and Kajol chose to store their newborn son's umbilical cord blood and tissues, which act as a stemcell source and help protect the child from several serious ailments. In August 2009, Devgn's surname was changed to its current spelling from its more well-known "Devgan", at the request of his family. He became the first Bollywood personality to acquire a private jet for transport to shooting locations, promotions and personal trips. He is the first Indian to own a Maserati Quattroporte
Career.
1991–1997: Breakthrough and success.
In 1991, Ajay Devgn made his debut as an actor in "Phool Aur Kaante". The film grossed 11,000,000 Indian rupees () and it was fourth highest grossing movie of the year and earned him a Filmfare Award for Best Male Newcomer. ajay devgn introducion scene on two bikes was one of the best and most exciting introduction of any actor in hindi cinema,Phool Aur Kaante clashed with Yash Chopra directed "Lamhe" at the box office. However Phool Aur Kante proved to be a super hit, on the other hand Lamhe which starred Anil Kapoor bombed at the box office. 
In 1992, he starred in Bollywood martial arts action romantic film "Jigar" alongside Karisma Kapoor, which grossed 7,00,00,000 and it was seventh highest grossing movie of the year at boxoffice., it was released in Diwali weekend and proved to be successful. It was Ajay Devgn second success after Phool Aur Kaante. 
In 1993,he starred in "Dil Hai Betaab" which was first unsuccessful movie of ajay devgn,after he appeared in "Divya Shakti" which was average at boxoffice, He then starred in "Sangram", then he worked with director Deepak Bahry in the action film "Ek Hi Raasta", and with Deepak Pawar in "Platform". his other movies which released this year and did not perform well at box office was "Shaktiman", "Dhanwan" and "Bedardi" ,so overall this year was disappointing for ajay devgn
In 1994, he starred in Harry Baweja's action romantic movie"Dilwale" the movie was major superhit and 8th highest grossing movie of the year at boxoffice, His next release was "Kanoon" ,He then starred in director Kuku Kohli's "Suhaag" with Akshay Kumar,the film was superhit and 7th highest grossing movie of the year, He then choosed to work in "Vijaypath" after refusing Karan arjun because shooting date was clashing with "Vijaypath" ,film was hit at boxoffice and 11th highest grossing of the year,so over all this year was very good for devgn ,all 3 movies were hit at boxoffice
In 1995, he appeared in critical acclaimed Mahesh Bhatt's movie"Naajayaz", for which he was nominated as a Best Actor by Filmfare. his next venture as "Hulchul" with new director Milan Luthria alongside Kajol,during this movie Ajay and Kajol came close and started dating and married after 4 years, he then appeared in "Gundaraj" with Kajol and movie didn't perform at boxoffice
His next release was "Haqeeqat"" alongside Tabbu and the film was 11th highest grossing movie of the year 
In 1996, he starred in action movie "Jung" with Mithun Chakraborty, Rambha and Aditya Pancholi, but the movie did not perform well at the box office. His next release was an action movie called "Jaan" with Twinkle Khanna, which was successful. He then starred in director's "Harry Baweja's" film "Diljale" where he played a terrorist character Shaka, the film was a major hit at box office and 8th higest grossing movie of the year. 
In 1997 he starred in "Itihaas" with Twinkle Khanna which was flop . His next release was "Ishq" alongside aamir Khan, kajol and Juhi chawla. The film grossed 30 crore Indian rupees and was the fourth highest grossing film of the year a.
1998–2005: Success as well as critical acclaim.
In 1998, he starred in "Major Saab" with amitabh bachchan and sonali bendre where he played character of army officer movie was successful and tenth highest grossing of the year at box office, He then starred in director Anees Bazmee's second film "Pyaar To Hona Hi Tha" It grossed 30,25,00,000 Indian rupees and became third highest grossing film of the year.His next release was Mahesh Bhatt's "Zakhm" and "Zakhm" won Ajay Devgn several awards for his performance, including the National Film Award for Best Actor and the Star Screen Award for Best Actor, overall 1998 was very good for Ajay Devgn he won national award for Zakhm and two highest grossing movie of the year. 
In 1999 He worked with Sanjay Leela Bhansali's "Hum Dil De Chuke Sanam" and cast with Salman Khan and Aishwarya rai Movie was both critically and commercially successful and ajay devgn was nominated for filmfare best actor award after then he appeared in "Hindustan Ki Kasam" with amitabh Bachchan and Sonali bendre which took best opening at that time in the same year he worked with director Milan Luthria in "Kachche Dhaage" with Saif ali khan and Manisha koirala and the movie was hit at boxoffice next movie of ajay devgn in this year was "Hogi Pyaar Ki Jeet which was romantic comedy " and it was succesfull at boxoffice He then starred his home production movie with director Prakash jha's film "Dil Kya Kare" with wife Kajol and himself in lead roles. The film was acclaimed critically. his other movies include this year was "Gair" and "Thakshak" this movie's was praised for Ajay Devgan's portrayal of a strong, silent man was one of the highlights of the movie
In 2000, he worked in Harry Baweja's "Deewane". In this film, he essayed a double role, one as a thief and the other as a police officer. The film flopped at the box office. The same year, Devgn starred in his first home production "Raju Chacha" opposite wife Kajol. The film also bombed at the box office.
In 2001, he starred in "Yeh Raaste Hain Pyaar Ke" with Madhuri Dixit and Preity Zinta. This film was an average grosser at the box office. His next release "Lajja", alongside Manisha Koirala, Madhuri Dixit, Jackie Shroff and Anil Kapoor, earned him a nomination for the "Filmfare Best Supporting Actor Award". The film did not perform as expected at the box office. He then worked in Mahesh Manjrekar's "Tera Mera Saath Rahen".
In 2002, he featured in Ram Gopal Varma's fictional expose of Mumbai underworld "Company". He was nominated for the Filmfare Best Actor Award and won the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Actor. The film fared well at the box office. His next release was "Hum Kisise Kum Nahin" alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Sanjay Dutt and Aishwarya Rai.
The same year, he also starred in Rajkumar Santoshi's biopic "The Legend of Bhagat Singh". in the title role.Film was released on 7 June 2002 and went on to win two National Film Awards, including the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi, and three Filmfare Awards, including the Filmfare Critics Award for Best Movie.The film didn't fare well at the box office. However, he won his second National Film Award for Best Actor for his performance. He then starred in Anees Bazmee's "Deewangee". The film was partially inspired by William Diehl's English language novel "Primal Fear" and earned Devgn several awards for his negative role including, "Filmfare Best Villain Award", "Star Screen Award for Best Villain" and "Zee Cine Award for Best Actor in a Negative Role". This film was a success at the box office.
In 2003, he starred in Ram Gopal Verma's "Bhoot" opposite Urmila Matondkar. The film was appreciated critically & performed very well at the box office. He then starred in action thriller "" opposite debutante Neha Dhupia which was huge commercial success. He then worked in Milan Luthria's romantic film "Chori Chori" opposite Rani Mukherji and Sonali Bendre. This film did not succeed at the box office.
In that same year he featured in Prakash Jha's "Gangaajal",The movie as a sidetrack also mentions the blinding incident at Bhagalpur. Gangaajal was declared above average at Indian box-office.his erformance was well received by critics, rediff noted "Ajay Devgan pulls up an ace with a part tailormade to reinforce his seething-under-the-surface angry hero image. To his credit (and the director's), he brings style and grace to a largely stereotypical, righteous protagonist. To a great extent, his presence covers up the film's patchiness in the second half". he was also nominated for the "Filmfare Best Actor Award". He then worked in Rohit Shetty's directional debut "Zameen" and J. P. Dutta's war film "LOC Kargil".
In 2004 he was cast alongside Amitabh Bachchan, Aishwarya Rai and Akshay Kumar in Rajkumar Santoshi's "Khakee". The film was released on January 23, 2004 to positive reviews and went on to became one of the highest-grossing film of 2004. His performance was well received by critics, Taran Adarsh concluded "Ajay Devgan adds yet another feather in his cap with a performance that could've been essayed only by a master performer. His confrontations with Amitabh Bachchan are exemplary.". Later that year he appeared in director Indra Kumar's ""and also starred in the critically acclaimed movie "Yuva" 
Ajay Devgn next collaborated with director Rituparno Ghosh's, in the relationship drama "Raincoat", an adaptation of O. Henry's "The Gift of the Magi". Also featuring Aishwaraya Rai, "Raincoat" met with wide critical acclaim and among other wins, won the National Film Award for Best Feature Film in Hindi. his performance in "Raincoat" was highly praise by critics,rediff noted "Hesitation, desperation, humiliation – Ajay Devgan conveys them eloquently. His Manoj is no cool dude, but just another lower middle-class guy in misery, with whom none would like to switch place. He particularly stands out in the scenes where he cries in the bathroom, or begs Neeru not to marry someone else" He was also seen in a cameo appearance in "".
2005 was less successful for him as he starred in a series of flop movies like "Insan", "Blackmail", "Main Aisa Hi Hoon", "Tango Charlie" and "Shikhar" whilst "Kaal" and "Apaharan" succeeded at the Box Office. For his performance in Apaharan Devgn was nominated for the National Film Award for Best Actor and Filmfare Best Actor Award. His villanous performance in "Kaal" also earned him a nomination for the Filmfare Best Villain Award
2006–2009: "Golmaal" and other projects.
In 2006's he portrayed the character of "Othello" in "Omkara", the Hindi adaptation of William Shakespeare's "Othello". Directed by Vishal Bhardwaj, the film is a tragedy of sexual jealousy set against the backdrop of the political system in Uttar Pradesh. It premiered at the 2006 Cannes Film Festival and was screened at the Cairo International Film Festival. "Omkara" was received highly positive by critics,Rediff concluded about his performance"Othello is a tricky role, a leading man eclipsed by the villain. Yet the Moor is a brooding and compelling character, and Ajay Devgan [ Images ] does valiantly with his material. Omkara strips Othello of the racism, exchanging his black skin for surprisingly inconsequential half-Brahminism. Ajay's best bits are when restrained, and while there is a bit of a seen-that feel to his character, by the time the film is over, you realise just how unflinchingly solid he's been.". Taran Adarsh Describe about his performance"Ajay makes a stirring and powerful interpretation of a man haunted by uncertainty about his lover's faithfulness. The serious look that Ajay carries suits him to the T. Of course, Ajay is exceptional in the film and looks every inch the character he portrays".
same year, he starred "Golmaal" ."Golmaal" proved to be a sleeper hit. The latter film was soon to be followed by two super hit sequels "Golmaal Returns" and "Golmaal 3". In the same year he also featured in a short documentary about the Mumbai floods of 2005 named "The Awakening".
2007 was disappointing for him as he starred only in 2 movies, directorAnubhav Sinha's action thriller "Cash" and "Ram Gopal Varma Ki Aag" which was a remake of the 1975 classic "Sholay". Both films received extremely poor reception both at the box office and from critics, and the latter is currently placed at number 14 on the bottom 100 movies on Imdb.
In 2008's he worked in social film "Halla Bol" with Rajkumar Santoshi and was cast with Pankaj Kapoor and Vidya Balan. The film was based on the life of activist Safdar Hashmi, who was killed by political rivals while performing on a street play (by the name of "Halla Bol") in 1989. The film was a critical failure.
He then starred in director Rohit Shetty's third film "Sunday",
He next starred in his directorial debut film, "U Me Aur Hum" (2008) with wife Kajol. Devgn described Kajol's participation in the project by saying, "She is always thorough with the nitty-gritties of her character before she begins shooting. Since the screenplay work happened at home, Kajol was present for all the sittings and even gave her inputs." Upon release, the film performed moderately well at the box-office and earned positive critical reviews for his performance as well as for direction.Rediff concluded about his performance "his character grows, discovers both shirt-buttons and subtlety, delivering an intense acting job. Speaking almost entirely in platitudes – pithy at first, profound as he goes on – this grows into an extraordinarily well-written character, replete with flaws and relatability. The way he treats his remorse, drunkenly pointing every finger at himself around a dinner table, is superbly handled, as is his guilty struggle to delineate his life experience from his professional opinion".
He also had a cameo appearance in his brother Anil Devgan's film "Haal–e–dil". He starred with long-time friend Sanjay Dutt and actress Manisha Koirala in Afzal Khan's "Mehbooba". 
He then appeared in Rohit Shetty's comedy "Golmaal Returns", the sequel to the 2006 film "". Part of an ensemble cast which included Kareena kaoor, Arshad Warsi and Tusshar Kapoor, Movie was about a mistrustful wife who believed her husband was unfaithful. The film had an ambivalent reception from critics, "The Indian Express" believed the screenplay was derivative, concluding: "There is nothing particularly new about a suspicious wife keeping tabs on her husband, and there is nothing particularly new in the way Ajay-Kareena play it." "Golmaal Returns" was a financial success with global revenues of .
In 2009 he produced his third film "" also directed by Rohit Shetty. The film did good business and was a semi-hit. Later in the year he starred in Vipul Shah's "London Dreams" with Salman Khan and Tamil film star Asin. The film was declared a flop.
2010–present: Entry in 100 Crore Club.
In 2010 he featured in the comedy "Atithi Tum Kab Jaoge?" alongside Paresh Rawal and Konkona Sen Sharma which was a success. same year, he featured in Prakash Jha's multi-starrer political thriller "Rajneeti", "Raajneeti" was released in theaters worldwide on 4 June 2010, after some controversies regarding similarities between real-life people and the characters in the film, as well as issues about the national anthem.film was Made on budget of was released on June 2010, The film opened to positive reviews and was declared a "blockbuster". His performance was well received with critic Nikhat Kazmi
Same year,Devgn starred in Milan Luthria's "Once Upon a Time in Mumbai".His performance was hugely received by critics, komal Nahta concluding "Ajay Devgan is simply fantastic in the role of Sultan Mirza. So real is his performance that it looks like he was born to play this role. Right from his look to his acting including dialogue-delivery, everything is fabulous. Indeed, an award-winning performance!". movie was among the top grossers of 2010. He was then seen alongside Akshaye Khanna in Priyadarshan's, "Aakrosh".At the end of the year, he reunited with director Rohit Shetty for his sequel to the 2008 release "Golmaal Returns". Although (like its predecessor) the film received mixed reviews it was the most successful entry in the "Golmaal" series, earning more than domestically. The movie was a Blockbuster and it was first 100 crore movie for Ajay devgn and it was also the fourth highest grossing movie in Bollywood history at that time. Devgn later lent his voice to the animated film "Toonpur Ka Super Hero".
In 2011 he teamed up with Emraan Hashmi for Madhur Bhandarkar's comedy "Dil Toh Baccha Hai Ji" which also starred Omi Vaidya. The film was a moderate success. He was a narrator in "Yamla Pagla Deewana" and also did a cameo role in the 2011 Salman Khan-starrer "Ready".
The same year, he featured in Rohit shetty "Singham", which proved to be a milestone for him. His performance was well received by critics, Komal Nahta concluding " Ajay Devgan, it would seem, was born to play this role. He is absolutely extraordinary as Singham and breathes fire in the scenes of confrontation with Shikre, his seniors and the minister. He is suitably mellow in the romantic scenes. This is one of the best ever performances of Ajay Devgan in his entire career and he would be a strong contender this year for the best actor award for this film.". Another critics Taran Adarsh concluding about his performance "The title means 'Lion' and Ajay is in the centre of the battle between good and evil. The embodiment of screen masculinity, Ajay enacts the central character of a righteous, hardhearted cop with flourish. He brings alive on screen a larger-than-life hero character with determined conviction, which renders you thunderstruck. One of the few actors who underplays his part admirably, he returns to the over-the-top-action genre of films with this one. In a nutshell, his performance plays a pivotal role in carrying the film to the winning post.". The film grossed 100 crores net in India, making it the 7th film to do so, and was a blockbuster worldwide. 
In 2012,he featured in Rohit shetty's multi-starrer "Bol Bachchan", where he acted alongside Abhishek Bachchan and Asin Thottumkal, Bol bachchan also reached blockbuster status at the box office. "Bol Bachchan" has grossed 150 crore worldwide..
Same year,ajay devgn starred in Ashwni Dhir's "Son Of Sardar" which was superhit at box office by grossing around 150 crore worldwide as 105.66 Crore net in domestic and Overseas Collections is 15.35 crore and it was 4th movie of ajay devgn which did more than 100 crore at domestic boxoffice. 
In 2013, he he will be featured in the remake version of "Himmatwala".which is slated to release on 29th march. then same year ajay devgn will appear in Prakash Jha's multi-starrer political Drama "Satyagraha". 
Personal life.
Ajay Devgn began dating actress, Kajol, in 1994, while filming for "Gundaraj". Members of the media, however, labelled them as an "unlikely pair" due to their contrasting personalities. Devgn explained their relationship by saying, "We never resorted to the usual 'I Love you' routine. A proposal never happened. We grew with each other. Marriage was never discussed, but it was always imminent". They subsequently got married on 24 February 1999 in a traditional Maharashtrian style ceremony at the Devgn house. The wedding was subject to wide media scrutiny, as certain members of the media criticised Kajol's decision to settle down at the "peak of her career". after post marriage there was news in media that ajay didn't allow Kajol to do film,later Kajol clarified ,she would not quit films, but would cut down on the amount of work that she did.
Following his marriage, Kajol moved into his, and his parents, houseat the latter's ancestral house in Juhu. While media members speculated about a lack of compatibility between her in-laws and her, Kajol clarified that they were "like parents to me" and encouraged her to continue working in films. Rumours have often romantically linked Devgn with other Bollywood actresses, and have reported about an imminent divorce. Refuting the rumours, Kajol stated, "I don't believe in those rumours because I know the way this industry functions. [...] You cannot continue a marriage without the basic trust. Frankly, I don't care for such talk.
In 2001, his wife Kajol was pregnant with her first child. However, due to an ectopic pregnancy, she suffered from a miscarriage. On 20 April 2003, Kajol gave birth to a daughter, Nysa. Seven years later, on 13 September 2010, she gave birth to a son, Yug. She described motherhood as "fab" and added that her kids brought out "the best in her".
Television Shows.
Ajay Devgn will be hosting the fifth season of ", as Akshay Kumar will not be available for the show. Devgn was invited to anchor the Google+ Hangout session with Narendra Modi. In his session, Modi answered questions on ‘Strong and Glorious India Long Cherished by Swami Vivekananda.’ Devgn will make his first appearance on the small screen as the 'Sutradhar' of 'Ram Leela' on STAR TV in 2012.
In late 2012, Devgn hosted Life OK's miniseries "Ramleela - Ajay Devgn Ke Saath" from 21 October 2012 to 18 November 2012.
