Chelsea Joy Handler (born February 25, 1975) is an American comedian, actress, author, talk show host and producer. She has hosted her own late-night talk show, "Chelsea Lately", on E! Entertainment Television since 2007.
Early life.
Handler was born in Livingston, New Jersey. The youngest of six children, she was raised in Reform Judaism by her Jewish father, Seymour, and her Mormon mother, Rita. Her mother was German and came to the United States in 1958. Handler has said that while growing up, she felt like an outsider, and told a reporter, "We lived in this nice Jewish neighborhood...Everyone had Mercedes and Jaguars, and I was going to school in a Pinto." Despite this, her family had a summer house on Martha's Vineyard. In a June 2011 episode of her show, she and author James Van Praagh discussed the death of her brother, Chet, when she was ten years old. Handler had an abortion at age 16, which she discussed during an interview in 2011.
At age 19, she moved from New Jersey to Los Angeles, California to pursue an acting career, and two years later, decided to become a stand-up comic after telling her story about a DUI to a class of other offenders, who found it funny.
Career.
"Chelsea Lately".
In July 2007, Handler began starring on her own half-hour, late-night comedy series on E! Entertainment Television titled "Chelsea Lately". On the show's 100th episode, she revealed to viewers that the network had picked up "Chelsea Lately" for another 150 episodes. The show has proved to be a hit by averaging more than a half-million viewers since its premiere (much more than the average for a late night cable program) and having clips on YouTube with more than one million views. All this success is despite the fact that Handler's guests often are not A-list celebrities. In a 2008 interview, Handler said, "The worse the guests are, the more pathetic they are, the funnier the show is." Handler's most recent contract extension will keep "Chelsea Lately" on the air through 2014. "Chelsea Lately" is broadcast daily on the E! Network in the UK, Australia, Germany and New Zealand.
"After Lately".
"After Lately" is a mockumentary in which the various cast members, writers, crew and even "hangers-on" of "Chelsea Lately" are shown bickering over trivial matters and competing for air time on the show. They also seek personal approval from Handler, who usually appears in very few scenes of the program, and is always portrayed as having open and utter disdain for everyone beneath her. "After Lately" began airing on E! Entertainment Television on March 6, 2011. Guest stars include: Reese Witherspoon (in seasons one and two), Jennifer Aniston, Jay Leno, Tori Spelling, Jenny McCarthy, Sharon Osbourne, Dave Grohl and Jane Fonda.
Books.
Handler has authored four books on the "New York Times" Best Seller List, three of which have been number one. Her first book, "" (2005), describes the variety of sexual encounters she went through throughout her life. Handler also wrote "Are You There, Vodka? It's Me, Chelsea" (2008), a collection of humorous essays that hit the "New York Times" Nonfiction Best Seller List on May 11, 2008, with a print run of over 350,000. She went on a nationwide tour to promote her third book, titled "Chelsea Chelsea Bang Bang", which was released on March 9, 2010. 
On November 15, 2010, it was announced that Handler's publishers gave her her own publishing imprint (Borderline Amazing/A Chelsea Handler Book). She also signed a three-book deal with the imprint, the first of which is called "Lies That Chelsea Handler Told Me", where her coworkers and family members discuss what Handler has done, which was released in May 2011 and also hit number one.
In 2012, Chelsea Handler began to author a spoof on the popular book series 50 Shades of Grey called "50 Shades of Chartreuse: This Time It's Personal".
Performances.
 has performed nationwide as a comedian and appeared as a regular on the Oxygen Network series "Girls Behaving Badly", as well as on other shows like "Weekends at the D.L.", "The Bernie Mac Show", "My Wife and Kids", and "The Practice". She is a regular commentator on E! and "Scarborough Country", as well as a correspondent on "The Tonight Show". She hosted the first episode of the reality TV show "On the Lot", but quit before the second one was aired, saying later, "Because I smelled the disaster happening before it did." The show, produced by Steven Spielberg and Mark Burnett, is a competition for aspiring filmmakers who are vying for a chance at stardom. Handler was replaced by former Robin & Company entertainment anchor, Adrianna Costa. Handler also began hosting "The Chelsea Handler Show" in April 2006, which lasted two seasons. She was a guest on "Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld" and "The View", and she co-hosted "The View" on August 2, 2007, and again on September 5, 2008. On January 25, 2009, Handler was on the CBS gameshow "Million Dollar Password" as one of the celebrity players. 
On August 18, 2010, it was announced that Handler would be the host of the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards. The announcement was surprising to many, including MTV representatives, who claimed that the final decision was unexpected. This makes Handler only the second woman in the history of the VMAs to be the sole host of the ceremony, behind Roseanne Barr, who hosted in 1994. The event took place at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles on September 12, 2010.
In 2007, Handler performed with Comedy Central's Hour Stand-Up Comedy Tour across the United States. Her stand-up comedy has also been televised on VH1's "Love Lounge", Comedy Central's "Premium Blend", and HBO's broadcast of the "Aspen Comedy Festival".
"In the Motherhood".
In 2007, Handler appeared in the Internet-based program "In the Motherhood" with Leah Remini and Jenny McCarthy (since January 2008). On September 8, 2008, it was announced that ABC would be turning "In The Motherhood" into a series starring Jessica St. Clair, Megan Mullally and Cheryl Hines. Handler decided to drop out of the project due to scheduling commitments to her show "Chelsea Lately".
"Are You There, Chelsea?".
"Are You There, Chelsea?" is an NBC sitcom, based on Handler's 2008 best-selling book "Are You There, Vodka? It's Me, Chelsea", which aired from January 11 to March 28, 2012. On May 11, 2012, the network canceled it. Laura Prepon played the main character, "Chelsea Newman," a cocktail waitress while Handler portrayed "Chelsea's" born-again Christian sister, "Sloane," a married, conservative, new mom who had little in common with her carefree sister. Dottie Zicklin (of "Dharma & Greg") and Julie Larson (of "The Drew Carey Show") were creators and executive producers. Handler served as executive producer, along with Tom Werner (of "That 70's Show"), Mike Clements (of "The Life & Times of Tim"), and Tom Brunelle (of "Chelsea Lately").
In popular culture.
She was ranked number 91 in 2009, and number 87 in 2010 on the Maxim (magazine) Hot 100. In 2010, Chelsea Handler was ranked on the Forbes Celebrity 100 at number 98. In 2012, Time magazine placed her on the list of its 100 Most Influential People. On April 2009, she won the Bravo A-List Award for "A-List Funny." On July 2012, she received the Comedy Person of the Year award by Montreal’s Just For Laughs comedy festival. She appeared on one of the two covers for the December 2009 edition of Playboy magazine. Inside the magazine, Handler posed for a non-nude pictorial. She was also featured on the cover of Shape magazine on April 2010, the Hollywood Reporter on June 2011, on Redbook‘s March 2012 issue and on the cover of the September 2012 issue of Marie Claire.
She has her own columns in "Cosmopolitan" and "NOW", a UK celebrity magazine.
On March 2009, Handler received the prestigious Ally for Equality Award from the Human Rights Campaign, recognizing "the outstanding efforts of those who dedicate time, energy, spirit and whole-hearted commitment to better the lives of LGBT people". On May 2009, she was the host of the 20th Annual GLAAD Media Awards in San Francisco. On June 2009 she was named as Grand Marshal of the 2009 Los Angeles LGBT PRIDE Celebration "for her visible and vocal support of equality". On July 2010, during a tour stop in Salt Lake City, Chelsea took part in the 'I AM EQUAL' Photo Documentary project in memory of her mother, Rita, who died from complications of cancer. Along with her photo being added to the documentary and accompanying photo mosaic, she also shared a "Photo Story" with a message that inspires people to take chances in life. On March 2012, she has hosted the Human Rights Campaign Gala in Los Angeles, CA.
Personal life.
In 2006, Handler began dating Ted Harbert, who oversaw E! Entertainment Television as the former CEO of Comcast Entertainment Group. On January 25, 2010, Handler confirmed, via her late-night talk show, that she had broken up with Harbert. 
On the July 19, 2010 episode of her show, Handler confirmed she was dating animal trainer and television producer Dave Salmoni. However, on September 2, 2010, when asked by guest Melanie Brown if she was single, Handler stated that she was. Later that year, she began dating rapper and actor 50 Cent for a couple of months.
In 2010, a sex tape of Chelsea Handler was reportedly being offered for sale. This tape was a copy of Handler's audition tape from the 1990s. Handler has stated she added the sex scenes to her audition tape to appear as if she had accidentally taped over her homemade sex tape, and has been showing the tape at parties "for years". On the April 18, 2011 episode of "Chelsea Lately", Handler announced to the audience that she was dating again, and at the end of the show revealed a photo of herself and Andre Balazs at a table. However, when interviewed on "E! News" and "Piers Morgan Tonight" on May 10, 2011, she declined to confirm that she and Balazs were together and stated that she was respecting her current boyfriend's privacy because he had children. Then, on the November 9, 2011 episode of her show, Handler revealed that she had broken up with Balazs. In the May 2012 issue of More, Handler revealed that she and Balazs were back together but it was reported a few months later that the couple had called it off once again. By early November 2012 it was reported that Handler and Balazs had rekindled their romance for the third time. 
