Michael Kirk Douglas (born September 25, 1944) is an American actor and producer, primarily in movies and television. He has won four Golden Globes, including Cecil B. DeMille Award, and two Academy Awards; as producer of 1975's Best Picture, "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest", and as Best Actor in 1987 for his role in "Wall Street". Other performances include "The Game", "Wonder Boys", "Traffic" and "Solitary Man". Douglas received the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2009. He is the eldest of actor Kirk Douglas's four sons.
Early life and education.
Douglas was born in New Brunswick, New Jersey, the first child of actor Kirk Douglas and Bermudian-born actress Diana Love Dill. His paternal grandparents were Jewish immigrants from Gomel in Belarus (at that time a part of the Russian Empire). His mother was from Devonshire Parish, Bermuda, and has English, Scottish, and Dutch ancestry. Douglas's maternal grandfather, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Melville Dill, served as Attorney General of Bermuda, as a Member of the Parliament of Bermuda (MCP), and as commanding officer of the Bermuda Militia Artillery. Douglas has a younger brother, Joel Douglas (born 1947), and two paternal half-brothers, Peter Douglas (born 1955) and Eric Douglas (1958–2004), from stepmother Anne Buydens.
Douglas attended The Allen-Stevenson School in New York City, The Choate Preparatory School (now Choate Rosemary Hall) in Wallingford, Connecticut. He received his B.A. in drama from the University of California, Santa Barbara in 1968, where he was also the Honorary President of the UCSB Alumni Association. He studied acting with Wynn Handman at The American Place Theatre in New York City.
Career.
Early years.
Douglas started his film career in the late 1960s and early 1970s, appearing in little known films like "Hail, Hero!" and "Summertree". His first significant role came in the TV series "The Streets of San Francisco" from 1972 to 1976, where he starred alongside Karl Malden. Douglas later said that Malden became a "mentor" and someone he "admired and loved deeply". After Douglas left the show, he had a long association with his mentor until Malden's death on July 1, 2009. In 2004, Douglas presented Malden with the Monte Cristo Award of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Connecticut, for the Lifetime Achievement Award.
In 1975, Douglas received from his father, Kirk Douglas, the rights to the novel "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest". Michael went on to produce the film of the same name with Saul Zaentz. Kirk Douglas considered playing the starring role himself, having starred in an earlier stage version, but decided against it. The lead role went instead to Jack Nicholson, who would go on to win the Academy Award for Best Actor. Douglas won the Award for Best Picture for producing the film. 
After leaving "Streets of San Francisco" in 1976, Douglas played a hospital doctor in the medical thriller "Coma" (1978), and in 1979 he played the role of a troubled marathon runner in "Running". In 1979, he both produced and starred in "The China Syndrome", a dramatic film co-starring Jane Fonda and Jack Lemmon about a nuclear power plant accident (the Three Mile Island accident took place 12 days after the film's release). The film was considered "one of the most intelligent Hollywood films of the 1970s."
Success in Hollywood.
Douglas's acting career was propelled to fame when he produced and starred in the 1984 romantic adventure comedy "Romancing the Stone". It also helped launch Kathleen Turner to stardom, reintroduced Douglas as a capable leading man, and gave director Robert Zemeckis his first box-office success. The film also starred Danny DeVito, a personal friend of Douglas's since they had shared an apartment in the 1960s. It was followed a year later by a sequel, "The Jewel of the Nile", which he also produced.
The year 1987 saw Douglas star in the horror thriller "Fatal Attraction" with Glenn Close. That same year he played tycoon Gordon Gekko in Oliver Stone's "Wall Street" for which he received an Academy Award as Best Actor. He reprised his role as Gekko in the sequel "" in 2010, also directed by Stone.
Douglas again teamed with Kathleen Turner and Danny DeVito for the 1989 film "The War of the Roses". In 1989, he starred in Ridley Scott's international police crime drama "Black Rain" opposite Andy García and Kate Capshaw. The film was shot in Osaka, Japan.
In 1992, Douglas had another successful starring role when he appeared alongside Sharon Stone in the film "Basic Instinct". The movie was a box office hit, and sparked controversy over its depictions of bisexuality and lesbianism. In 1994, Douglas and Demi Moore starred in the hit movie "Disclosure" focusing on the topic of sexual harassment with Douglas playing a man harassed by his new female boss. Other popular films he starred during these decade were "Falling Down", "The American President", "The Ghost and the Darkness", "The Game" (directed by David Fincher), and a remake of Alfred Hitchcock's classic – "Dial M for Murder" – titled "A Perfect Murder". In 1998, Douglas received the Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival. 
In 2000, Douglas starred in Steven Soderbergh's critically acclaimed film "Traffic", opposite Benicio del Toro and future wife Catherine Zeta-Jones. That same year, he also received critical acclaim for his role in "Wonder Boys" as a professor and novelist suffering from writer's block. He was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Drama as well as several other awards from critics.
Types of roles.
According to film historian and critic David Thomson, Douglas was capable of playing characters who were "weak, culpable, morally indolent, compromised, and greedy for illicit sensation without losing that basic probity or potential for ethical character that we require of a hero." Critic and author Rob Edelman points out similarities in many of Douglas's roles, writing that in some of his leading films, he personified the "contemporary, Caucasian middle-to-upper-class American male who finds himself the brunt of female anger because of real or imagined sexual slights." 
These themes of male victimization are seen in films such as "Fatal Attraction" (1987), with Glenn Close, "War of the Roses" (1989), with Kathleen Turner, "Basic Instinct" (1992), with Sharon Stone, "Falling Down" (1993), and "Disclosure" (1994), with Demi Moore. For his characters in films such as these, "any kind of sexual contact with someone other than his mate and the mother of his children is destined to come at a costly price." Edelman describes his characters as the "Everyman who must contend with, and be victimized by, these women and their raging, psychotic sexuality."
Conversely, Douglas also played powerful characters with dominating personalities equally well: as Gordon Gekko, in the "Wall Street" franchise, he acted the role of a "greedy yuppie personification of the Me generation," convinced that "greed is good;" in "Romancing the Stone" and "The Jewel of the Nile," he played an idealistic soldier of fortune; in "The Star Chamber" (1983), he was a court judge fed up with an inadequate legal system, leading him to become involved with a vigilante group; and in Black Rain (1989), he proved he could also play a Stallone-like action hero as a New York City cop.
Actor and producer.
Having become recognized as both a successful producer and actor, he describes himself as "an actor first and a producer second." He has explained why he enjoys both functions: 
Hirschberg, Lynn. "Rolling Stone" magazine, Jan. 16, 1986 pp. 28–32, 41</ref>
He has also offered reasons why he has become successful in both acting and producing:"I think I'm a chameleon. I think it's something that I possibly inherited early on as a child going back and forth between two families. I know that whether it's right or wrong, I have an ability to sort of fit into a lot of different situations and make people feel relatively comfortable in a wide range without giving up all my moral values. I think that same chameleonlike quality can transfer into films. I think if you can remember the reason you got involved with it in the first place and try to keep that impulsive, instinctive feeling even when you're being beaten down or exhausted or waylaid, you'll be successful."
Recent years.
Douglas starred in the solid commercial action flick "Don't Say a Word". In 2003, he starred in "It Runs in the Family", which featured three generations of his family (his parents, Kirk and Diana, as well as his own son, Cameron). The film, although a labor of love, was not successful, critically or at the box office. He then starred in the poorly received action-thriller "The Sentinel" in 2006. During that time, he also guest-appeared on the episode, "Fatal Attraction", of the popular television sitcom "Will and Grace", as a gay cop attracted to Will Truman (Eric McCormack); the performance earned Douglas an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Show. 
Douglas was approached for "Basic Instinct 2", but he declined to participate in the project. He said:</ref>
Future engagements.
Douglas is rumored to appear in "Tragic Indifference", a courtroom thriller based on a landmark liability case against Ford Motor Company, according to "Variety". Douglas will play the attorney who took Ford to court on behalf of a single mother from Texas who was paralyzed and nearly died after an accident. The trial exposed the automaker's indifference to flaws in its Sport Utility Vehicles (SUV). The movie will be based on Adam Penenberg's 2003 book of the same name. Douglas will play Attorney Tab Turner, who represented Donna Bailey after the Ford Explorer SUV she was riding in rolled over following a Firestone tire failure. 
Douglas will next work with collaborator Steven Soderbergh on a project entitled "Behind the Candelabra", as Liberace, opposite Matt Damon, centered on the pianist's life.
On December 17, 2007 it was announced that Douglas would announce the introduction to "NBC Nightly News", some two years after Howard Reig, the previous announcer, retired.
Personal life.
Family.
After filming "Summertree" (1971), he began dating actress Brenda Vaccaro. The relationship lasted for about six years.
In March 1977, 32 year old Douglas married 19 year old Diandra Luker, the daughter of an Austrian diplomat. They had one son, Cameron, born in 1978. In 1995 Diandra filed for divorce and was awarded $45 million as her settlement.
Dating since March 1999, Douglas married Welsh actress Catherine Zeta-Jones on November 18, 2000. They were both born on September 25, though 25 years apart. Zeta-Jones says that when they met in Deauville, France, Douglas used the line "I want to father your children." They have two children, Dylan Michael (born August 8, 2000) and Carys Zeta (born April 20, 2003). 
They planned on renewing their wedding vows in 2010 as part of their 10th wedding anniversary. The idea was hers, and came after Douglas was found to have advanced stages of cancer. One report notes that "Michael was in tears when she suggested it to him," and he sees it as a “wonderful expression of love.”
Douglas, the son of a Jewish father and an Anglican mother, has declared no religious affiliation.
Citizenship.
Douglas is a U.S. citizen by birth in the United States and has Bermudian Status through his mother's birth in Bermuda.
Skiing accident and rehab.
In 1980, Douglas was involved in a serious skiing accident which sidelined his acting career for three years. On September 17, 1992, the same year "Basic Instinct" came out, he began a 30-day treatment for alcoholism and drug addiction at Sierra Tucson Center.
Legal problems.
In 1997, New York caddie James Parker sued Douglas for $25 million. Parker accused Douglas of hitting him in the groin with an errant golf ball, causing Parker to lose a testicle and his job. The case was later settled out of court.
Stalking.
In 2004, Douglas and Zeta-Jones took legal action against stalker Dawnette Knight, who was accused of sending violent letters to the couple that contained graphic threats on Zeta-Jones's life. Testifying, Zeta-Jones said the threats left her so shaken she feared a nervous breakdown. Knight claimed she had been in love with Douglas and admitted to the offenses, which took place between October 2003 and May 2004. She was sentenced to three years in prison.
Health problems.
It was announced on August 16, 2010 that Douglas was suffering from throat cancer and would undergo chemotherapy and radiation treatment. On August 31, 2010 Douglas appeared on "Late Show with David Letterman" and confirmed that the cancer was at stage IV, the most advanced stage. Douglas attributed the cancer to a combination of stress, his previous alcohol abuse, and years of heavy smoking.
Douglas credits the discovery of his cancer to the public Canadian health system since a doctor in Montreal, Quebec diagnosed the actor's medical condition after numerous American specialists failed to.
In November 2010, Douglas was put on a special weight gain diet by his doctors due to the excessive weight loss leaving him weak. On January 11, 2011, he said in an interview that the tumor was gone. He said that the illness and aggressive treatment had caused him to lose 32 lbs in weight. He will have to have monthly screenings because there is a very high chance that the cancer could return within two to three years. "Although Douglas has described the cancer as throat cancer, many doctors believe he was actually diagnosed with oropharyngeal cancer." He was photographed smoking in July 2011.
Activism.
Political activities.
Douglas and Zeta-Jones hosted the annual Nobel Peace Prize concert in Oslo, Norway, on December 11, 2003. They acted as co-masters of ceremony in the concert celebrating the award given to Iranian human rights activist Shirin Ebadi. In 2006, Douglas was awarded an honorary Doctor of Letters (D.Litt.) from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland. 
He is an advocate of nuclear disarmament, a supporter of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation, and sits on the Board of Directors of the anti-war grantmaking foundation Ploughshares Fund. In 1998, he was appointed UN Messenger of Peace by Secretary-General Kofi Annan. He is a notable Democrat and has donated money to Barack Obama, Christopher Dodd, and Al Franken. He has been a major supporter of gun control since John Lennon was murdered in 1980.
A few years earlier, in 2003, Douglas hosted a "powerful film" on child soldiers and the impact of combat on children in countries such as Sierra Leone. During the documentary film, Douglas interviewed children, and estimated that they were among 300,000 other children worldwide who have been conscripted or kidnapped and forced to fight. Of one such child he interviewed, Douglas stated, "After being kidnapped by a rebel group, he was tortured, drugged, and forced to commit atrocities." 
In February, 2012, following his return to the character of financial criminal Gordon Gekko, the Federal Bureau of Investigation released a public service announcement video of Michael Douglas calling on viewers to report financial crime.
Humanitarian initiatives.
In 2009 Douglas joined the project "Soldiers of Peace", a movie against all wars and for global peace.
Douglas lent his support for the campaign to release Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani, the Iranian woman, who after having been convicted of committing adultery, was given a sentence of death by stoning.
