James Andrew Arthur (born 2 March 1988) is an English singer and musician who won the ninth series of "The X Factor" in 2012. His debut single, "Impossible", was released after the final and debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart on 16 December 2012 in its first week of release. It has since gone on to sell over 1 million copies and become the best-selling "The X Factor" winner's single of all time. 
Prior to his participation in "The X Factor", he was a vocalist and guitarist in a number of bands between 2005 and 2012, and later as a solo artist, as well as forming The James Arthur Band and James Arthur Project.
Early life.
Arthur was born in Middlesbrough, England to English mother Shirley Ashworth and Scottish father Neil Arthur. James' father was a delivery driver, but also used to be a DJ and a drummer for many years. Arthur's parents split up when he was two years old and each settled with a new partner. Neil and Shirley were not on speaking terms with one another for more than twenty years. But they agreed to attend his audition together in a family reunion.
Arthur first went to Ings Farm Primary School in Redcar, North Yorkshire. When he was nine, he moved with his mother Shirley and his stepfather Ronald Rafferty to Bahrain where he studied at the local British School of Bahrain for four years. When they split, Arthur, then 14, had to move back with his mother and his two half-sisters Jasmin and Neve to the UK to live in a modest house in Saltburn-by-the-Sea. Upon his return, he continued his studies at Redcar's Rye Hills School.
Arthur has five siblings, an older brother called Neil Arthur, an older sister called Sian Arthur, and three younger sisters, Charlotte Arthur and Jasmin and Neve Rafferty.
Career.
Early years.
Arthur also uploaded many of his own songs to Soundcloud and YouTube including an album entitled "Sins by the Sea". In 2011, he auditioned for "The Voice UK" and made it into the final 200 contestants but no further. 
In early 2012, he recorded songs and released two EPs as The James Arthur Band. The band consisted of Arthur (vocals and guitar), Jez Taylor (guitar), Chris Smalls (keyboards), Jordan Swain (drums) and Rich Doney (bass). In 2012, the band released "The EP Collection" CD with nine tracks with R&B, soul and hip hop influences, a compilation of tracks on both EPs. Arthur also released an EP named "Hold On" under the name The James Arthur Project in August 2012 in collaboration with John McGough. The tracks were written and arranged by McGough, and mixed by Matt Wanstall with all vocals by Arthur.
2012: "The X Factor".
Arthur auditioned for "The X Factor" with an acoustic rendition of judge Tulisa Contostavlos's "Young", before explaining his past, including spells in care and time spent on the streets after break-ups within his family. He also revealed his father and mother had not spoken to each other for over 20 years, and this was a reunion of sorts for them to attend his audition. After his judges' houses performance of "I Can't Make You Love Me", he was picked by his mentor Nicole Scherzinger as one of the 12 contestants for the live shows, and one of three in the "Boys" category. 
After his second live performance, Arthur suffered from an anxiety attack backstage. Whilst being treated at the studio, paramedics determined he did not need to go to hospital, and he was ordered back to his hotel to rest. He later returned for the results show the following night. After his performance of LMFAO's "Sexy and I Know It" on the third live show on 20 October, Arthur was accused of plagiarism. His rendition was very similar to the rendition by YouTube star only1Noah, who uploaded it on 9 May 2012 and has earned over 14 million views from it. However, Arthur later tweeted: "Btw doesn't everyone know I was putting a spin on Noah's version? It had 13.something million hits! Was I supposed to state the obvious?" In week 7, after performing "Can't Take My Eyes Off You", Arthur was controversially in the bottom two. He sang "Fallin'" for survival against fellow favourite Ella Henderson, with the judges going to deadlock after their vote was evenly split 2-2 (mentor Scherzinger and Gary Barlow voting to keep him, while Contostavlos and Louis Walsh voted in favour of Henderson). Arthur was then saved by the public vote. On 8 December, he made it through to the second night of the live finals. 
Arthur won "The X Factor" on 9 December 2012, with 53.7% of the vote, against Jahméne Douglas who received 38.9% of the vote.
After "The X Factor".
Following his victory, Arthur's winner's song, a cover of Shontelle's 2010 song "Impossible", was released as a charity single for Together for Short Lives. It became the fastest-selling "The X Factor" winner's single so far, reaching 255,000 downloads within 48 hours and over 490,000 by the end of the week. The single topped the UK Singles Chart in its first week of release. After 11 days, it was the seventh biggest-selling debut single from any contestant from "The X Factor", with sales of 622,000. In its second week the single dropped to number two, but reclaimed the number one spot in its third week, and stayed at the top for a further week. After three weeks, it was the fifth best-selling single of 2012 with 897,000 copies sold. After four weeks it had sold 971,000 copies. As of 11 January 2013, the single has sold more than 1 million copies. The song also peaked at number one in Ireland, two in Australia, New Zealand and Switzerland, and eight in Slovakia. By February 2013, it had become the best-selling "X Factor" winner's single with 1.3 million copies sold.
Personal life.
Arthur supports Middlesbrough F.C. and Rangers F.C.
After winning "The X Factor", he was invited to return to Bahrain to formally open the British School of Bahrain's music and drama rehearsal studios and the school's 400-seat auditorium, both part of the expansion of the facilities in the school in which he studied for four years.
