The films listed here have achieved notably negative reputations as being called the worst films ever made. They have been cited by a combination of reputable sources as the worst movies of all time. Examples of such sources include Metacritic, Roger Ebert's list of most hated films, Leonard Maltin's Movie Guide, Rotten Tomatoes, being featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000", and the Golden Raspberry Awards ("Razzies").
1950s.
"Glen or Glenda" (1953).
A semi-autobiographical quasi-documentary about transvestism, starring and directed by Ed Wood. After a nightmarish dream sequence, Glen undergoes psychotherapy to help cure his affliction. Bela Lugosi appears in this film, as he did in several other Wood films toward the end of his career. Many of Wood's fans and critic Leonard Maltin insist that this was far worse than "Plan 9 from Outer Space"; Maltin considers it "possibly the worst movie ever made". In his book "Cult Movies 3", Danny Peary suggests that this is actually a radical, if ineptly made, film that presents a far more personal story than is contained in films by more well-respected auteurs.
"Robot Monster" (1953).
A science fiction film, originally shot and exhibited in 3D, featuring an actor dressed in a gorilla suit and what looks almost like a diving helmet. The film, produced and directed by Phil Tucker, is listed in Michael Sauter's book "The Worst Movies of All Time" among "The Baddest of the Bs." It is also featured in "The Book of Lists" 10 worst movie list, in "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". "The Golden Turkey Awards" confers its main character the title of "Most Ridiculous Monster in Screen History" and, listing director Tucker among the runners-up to "Worst Director of All Time" (the winner being Ed Wood), states that "What made "Robot Monster" ineffably worse than any other low-budget sci-fi epic was its bizarre artistic pretension". Noted film composer Elmer Bernstein wrote the score for this film. It was featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000", and was fondly remembered by author Stephen King who quotes, and agrees with, a review in "Castle of Frankenstein" magazine ("certainly among the finest terrible movies ever made", "one of the most laughable poverty row quickies").
"The Conqueror" (1956).
A Howard Hughes-funded epic film featuring white actor John Wayne as Mongolian chieftain Genghis Khan and the redheaded Susan Hayward as a Tatar princess. The movie was filmed near St. George, Utah, downwind from a nuclear testing range in Nevada, and is often blamed for the cancer deaths of many of the cast and crew, including Hayward, Wayne, Agnes Moorehead, Pedro Armendáriz and director Dick Powell. The film made the 10-worst list in "The Book of Lists", appears in Michael Sauter's book "The Worst Movies of All Time", and was one of the films listed in Michael Medved's book "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". Hughes bought every existing print for $12 million and refused to let the film be seen on television until 1974. Reportedly, he felt very guilty over the decision to shoot at such a hazardous site. This was the last film that Hughes produced.
"Plan 9 from Outer Space" (1959).
Ed Wood's "Plan 9" was labeled the "Worst Film Ever" by "The Golden Turkey Awards". This movie marked the final appearance of Bela Lugosi. Wood shot only a small amount of test footage featuring his idol Lugosi before the actor's death. This footage, repeated several times, was included in the final movie. Following Lugosi's death, the character was played by Tom Mason, the chiropractor of Wood's wife at the time, who played his scenes holding the character's cape in front of his face. Wood was apparently undeterred by the numerous physical differencessuch as height, build and the fact that Mason was nearly bald while Lugosi retained a full head of hair until his deaththat distinguished Mason from Lugosi. Years later video distributors such as Avenue One DVD began to make light of this, adding such blurbs as "Almost Starring Bela Lugosi" to the cover art. Shot in 1956, the film was not released until 1959 due to difficulty in finding a distributor. It has played at the New Orleans Worst Film Festival. In 1994, Tim Burton directed "Ed Wood", which includes some material about the trials and tribulations of making "Plan 9". On the popular film review site Rotten Tomatoes Phil Hall calls it "Far too entertaining to be considered as the very worst film ever made". Likewise John Wirt goes as far as to call it "The ultimate cult flick", and "Videohound's Complete Guide to Cult Flicks and Trash Pics" states that, "In fact, the film has become so famous for its own badness that it's now beyond criticism." Plan 9 was also voted 23rd worst movie ever by RiffTrax in 2012.
1960s.
"The Beast of Yucca Flats" (1961).
A film by Coleman Francis shot silently with added narration, it concerns a scientist (played by Tor Johnson) who is exposed to radiation from an atomic blast, which turns him into a monster. The film opens with a scene of implied necrophilia that has nothing to do with the remainder of the movie and does not fit anywhere into the film's chronology. "Leonard Maltin's TV and Movie Guide" calls it "one of the worst films ever made". Bill Warren said "It may very well be the worst non-porno science fiction movie ever made." It was featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000", where members of the cast state it is by far one of the worst films they have seen up to that point.
"Eegah" (1962).
A low-budget shocker, featuring Richard Kiel as a prehistoric caveman emerging in early 1960s California who finds love with another teenager. Arch Hall, Jr. performs musical numbers, with lyrics widely considered to be terrible. The film's notoriety was enhanced as a result of being featured on episodes of "Canned Film Festival" and "Mystery Science Theater 3000", where the cast of the show stated in "The Mystery Science Theater 3000 Amazing Colossal Episode Guide" (ISBN 0-553-37783-3), that they consider the shaving scene (where Eegah lolls his tongue around and laps up shaving cream) to be one of the most disgusting things they have seen. It was also one of the films listed in Michael Medved's book "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time".
"Santa Claus Conquers the Martians" (1964).
This holiday staple, a sci-fi adventure, was the creation of Nicholas Webster. When Martian children get to see Santa Claus only on TV signals beamed from Earth, their parents decide to abduct Santa to make them happy. The film was initially criticized for its oddity and poor special effects. Like many others in this category, it has been featured in "Mystery Science Theater 3000". The film is cited on a 10-worst list in "The Book of Lists", in "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". It is also known for starring a very young Pia Zadora. "Mystery Science Theater 3000" featured the film during its third season and "Cinematic Titanic" (a spin-off of "Mystery Science Theater 3000") revisited the film in 2008.
"Monster A Go-Go" (1965).
"Monster A Go-Go" began as "Terror at Halfday" by Bill Rebane. The production ran out of money and the film was abandoned. Herschell Gordon Lewis, who reportedly needed a second feature to compose a double bill, purchased and completed the film for a minimal amount of money. Several of the film's actors were unable to return, so Lewis simply replaced their parts with new characters who mysteriously appear and fill the roles of the missing characters. One of the actors Lewis managed to rehire had gained weight, gone bald and grown a goatee, so Lewis recast him as the brother of the original character. The picture consists mostly of lengthy dialogue sequences concerning the apparent mutation of an astronaut into a monster. Much of the film's dialogue is unintelligible due to poor audio quality, and due to overexposure of the film, several characters' faces appear to be bright white, glowing circles. At one point, when a phone supposedly rings, a person can easily be heard making the noise with his mouth. During the climax of the movie, as soldiers prepare to confront the mutated astronaut, he abruptly vanishes and the narrator informs the audience that "there was no monster," and that the astronaut has, in fact, been in the Atlantic Ocean the entire time. All Movie Guide calls the film a "surreal anti-masterpiece". It was also featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000", where writer Paul Chaplin called the dialogue "beyond recognition", and also added "I recall this episode as being the first time we decided explicitly to write sketches having nothing to do with the movie. Really, we had no choice. We ran through a long string of topics trying to find one that had something to do with the movie, but since the movie is about nothing, any topic that is about something (that is, any topic that exhibits "topicness") cannot, by definition, have anything to do with this movie. Understand? Interesting philosophical dilemma. I think we solved it nicely." The entire cast of the show later stated it was officially the worst movie they have ever seen.
"" (1966).
A low-budget horror film made by El Paso insurance salesman Hal P. Warren, the plot concerns a vacationing family that is kidnapped by a polygamous cult of pagans. Among its most notorious flaws, besides poor production qualities, is the opening sequence, a several-minute-long series of long tracking shots of the countryside with almost no dialogue; it was intended to be the opening credits sequence, but no credits were ever produced to be superimposed over the footage. The film also dedicates significant time to a young couple spotted at various locations making out in their car, who have no bearing on the plot other than to point the police in the direction of the cult compound during the film's climax. The film's main monster, Torgo (John Reynolds), was intended to be a satyr, but this is never stated onscreen and only conveyed with the use of bizarre prosthetic devices which the actor wore backwards under his trousers, making his knees bulge and forcing him to walk awkwardly. In another infamous scene that grew out of cast and crew availability constraints that caused Warren to shoot night-for-night scenes, two police officers hear gunshots and pull up near the cult's dwelling. Owing to insufficient lighting to do a pan shot, however, the officers walk only a few feet from their car before appearing to "give up" their investigation. The film gained notoriety and cult popularity by being featured on "Mystery Science Theater 3000". The film has a 0% rating at Rotten Tomatoes.
1970s.
"Myra Breckinridge" (1970).
This 1970 film based on the book of the same name by Gore Vidal, directed by Michael Sarne and starring Raquel Welch, Mae West, John Huston and Farrah Fawcett provoked controversy due to a scene in which Welch forcibly sodomizes a bound man while clips from various classic films play onscreen. The film was initially rated X before edits and an appeal to the MPAA brought it down to an R. The film also used the technique of inserting clips from Golden Age movies in such a way that the dialogue took on sexual undertones. Several stars whose films were featured objected to the gimmick, and some (such as Loretta Young) sued to remove the footage. The film was a critical failure, with "Time" magazine saying ""Myra Breckinridge" is about as funny as a child molester." The film is also cited in the book "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time". It also was included in 1978's "The Book Of Lists"' worst movies of all time, claiming that there was something in the movie to offend absolutely everyone. Gore Vidal disowned the film, calling it "an awful joke", and blamed the movie for a decade-long drought in the sale of the original book.
"At Long Last Love" (1975).
"At Long Last Love" was renowned director Peter Bogdanovich's musical homage to great 1930s Hollywood musicals. It features 16 songs by Cole Porter and stars Cybill Shepherd and Burt Reynolds; as listed in The Golden Turkey Awards: “Burt Reynolds and Cybill Shepherd under the direction of Peter Bogdanovich destroy sixteen beautiful Cole Porter melodies”. Upon release, it received a slew of very negative reviews. "Esquire" film critic John Simon said, "it may be the worst movie musical of this – or any – decade." "The Buffalo News" film critic Jeff Simon wrote, "About 45 minutes in, it became apparent to one and all that this was one of the worst and most embarrassing major-talent turkeys of all time." It was included in the books "The Fifty Worst Films of All Time" and Michael Sauter's book "The Worst Films of All Time". It is also included in "The Golden Turkey Awards: Nominees and Winners, the Worst Achievements in Hollywood History". Film critic Jay Cocks said it's "regarded as the great white elephant catastrophe of its time." Bogdanovich, who was also the screenwriter, sent press releases to newspapers across the country apologizing for this film.
1980s.
"Heaven's Gate" (1980).
This Western epic, based on the Johnson County War in 1890s Wyoming, was plagued by massive cost and time overruns, largely due to director Michael Cimino's extreme attention to detail. He demanded 50 takes of at least one scene, and refused to start shooting for another until a cloud he liked rolled across the sky. It cost over $44 million, but only brought in $3.5 million at the box office. The original version ran at nearly four hours, but was yanked from release after only one week due to scathing reviews. It later resurfaced in a 149-minute version, but by then the damage was done. Vincent Canby famously called it "an unqualified disaster," among other things. Roger Ebert called it "the most scandalous cinematic waste I've ever seen." After word of his grandiose spending and defiant nature toward studio United Artists got out, Cimino was awarded the 1980 Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Director, and the film was nominated for four more Razzies, including Worst Picture. In February 2010, the readers of "Empire" voted it the 6th worst film of all time. That same year, Joe Queenan of "The Guardian" also called it the worst film ever made, saying that much of it was "beyond belief." Cimino was initially thought to be a director on the rise after directing "The Deer Hunter" (which won five Oscars, including Best Picture and Best Director), but his reputation never recovered after "Heaven's Gate". The production is also notorious for the cruelty to animals that occurred both on screen and on site, including deliberately killing a horse with explosives. The film effectively ended not only the existence of United Artists as an independent Hollywood studio (its parent firm sold the company to MGM, where it still operates) but also, largely, Cimino's career—he never directed another major motion picture afterwards; "Year of the Dragon," which he did direct, is considered comparatively minor, as are all his subsequent films.
Despite the vicious reviews, the film's reputation has greatly improved over time. In fall, 2012, The New York Film Festival premiered the restored director's cut of the film, the same scene of its infamous opening. By stark contrast, The Times had called it "...a modern masterpiece" and whose 1980 cutting was characterized as "one of the greatest injustices of cinematic history". The film will also be released on Blu-ray by the Criterion Collection, a home video label which specializes in critically acclaimed and "important" films.
"Inchon" (1981).
This war movie, directed by Terence Young and starring Laurence Olivier as General Douglas MacArthur, was meant to be a depiction of the Battle of Inchon during the Korean War. Producer Mitsuharu Ishii was a senior member of the Japanese branch of the Unification Church, whose leader, Sun Myung Moon, claimed he had the film made to show MacArthur's spirituality and connection to God and the Japanese people. The film's eventual production cost of $46 million resulted in a $5 million box office gross, and the "New York Times" review written by Vincent Canby calls the movie "the most expensive B-movie ever." Every conceivable kind of problem plagued production, including labor issues, the U.S. military withdrawing support due to the film's Unification Church connection, weather and natural disasters, customs difficulties, expensive directorial blunders, and the original director (Andrew McLaglen) quitting before the start of production. Olivier's performance was roundly panned and he was awarded the 1982 Golden Raspberry award for Worst Actor. The film itself took the 1982 Razzies for Worst Picture and Worst Screenplay, and Young's direction earned him a tie for Worst Director of 1982. "Inchon" was later profiled in multiple books on worst in film, including "The Hollywood Hall of Shame" by Harry and Michael Medved, and "The Worst Movies of All Time" by Michael Sauter. To date, "Inchon" has never been released on home video in the United States.
"Mommie Dearest" (1981).
"Mommie Dearest" was based on the memoir of the same name by Christina Crawford about her upbringing by Joan Crawford. It was the first film to sweep the Golden Raspberry Awards, winning a total of five Razzies out of the 9 nominations, including "Worst Picture" and Worst Actress (Faye Dunaway, shared with Bo Derek). The same organization also named it "Worst Picture of the Decade" in 1989/90, and was nominated for "Worst Drama of Our First 25 Years" in 2004/05. The film is part of the "100 most awful" in the book "". Entertainment writer Michael Sauter included the film in his book "The Worst Movies of All Time". The film earned, as film critic and television host Richard Crouse put it, "some of the nastiest reviews ever". Writing for the "Chicago Sun-Times", film critic Roger Ebert wrote of this film, "I can't imagine who would want to subject themselves to this movie. "Mommie Dearest" is a painful experience that drones on endlessly, as Joan Crawford's relationship with her daughter, Christina, disintegrates from cruelty through jealousy into pathos." Of the performance of Faye Dunaway, "Variety" said "Dunaway does not chew scenery. Dunaway starts neatly at each corner of the set in every scene and swallows it whole, costars and all."
"Leonard Part 6" (1987).
"Leonard Part 6", starring (as well as written and produced by) Bill Cosby, was intended to be a parody of spy movies. Leonard Parker, a former CIA spy, is brought out of retirement to save the world from an evil vegetarian who brainwashes animals to kill people. The film ends with Leonard infiltrating a base, fighting vegetarians with "magic meat" he was given by a Gypsy, freeing animals and flooding the base using Alka-Seltzer. He escapes by climbing onto an ostrich on the roof of the building, after which the ostrich flies him down (despite the fact that ostriches are unable to fly). The movie was a box office flop, grossing only $4,615,255 a fraction of its $24 million budget. It has also been cited as one of the worst movies of all time, earning Golden Raspberrys for Worst Actor (Cosby), Worst Picture, and Worst Screenplay. It was also nominated for two more Razzie Awards, for Worst Supporting Actress and Worst Director. Cosby himself disowned the film, and when it was released to theatres he publicly advised people not to see it. Rita Kempley at the "Washington Post" noted the large number of Coca Cola product placements and said "The only good thing about Bill Cosby's "Leonard Part 6" is that we didn't have to see Parts 1 through 5." Scott Weinberg at DVD Talk noted the film as "truly one of the worst movies you'll ever see", and said "movies this bad should be handled with Teflon gloves and a pair of tongs". Kevin Thomas at the "Los Angeles Times" said "There's virtually nothing to laugh at in this film, and too much of everything else".
"" (1987).
The fourth and final entry in the "Jaws" film series, "Jaws: The Revenge" was universally panned by critics upon its release in 1987. Although it was able to cover its costs at the box office, it received the lowest amount of money in the series. The film grossed just $7,154,890 in its opening weekend when it opened on 1,606 screens. This was around $5 million less than its predecessor. It is often considered one of the worst movies ever made. It was rated by "Entertainment Weekly" as one of "The 25 Worst Sequels Ever Made". Roger Ebert gave the film a rare zero stars and said that "It is not simply a bad movie, but also a stupid and incompetent one." He lists several elements that he finds unbelievable, including that Ellen is "haunted by flashbacks to events where she was not present." Ebert also laments that Michael Caine could not attend the ceremony to collect his Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor earned for "Hannah and Her Sisters" because of his shooting commitments on this film. He guesses that he might not have wanted to return to the shoot if he had left it.
The film contains many scenes that are considered implausible, such as the shark swimming from a New York island to the Bahamas (approx. 2000 km) in less than three days, and following Michael through an underwater labyrinth, as well as the implication that it was seeking revenge. "The Independent" says that "the film was riddled with inconsistencies errors (sharks cannot float or roar like lions)". The special effects were criticized, especially some frames of the shark being speared by the boat's prow. Also, the mechanisms propelling the shark can be seen in some shots. Critics commented upon the sepia-toned flashbacks to the first film. A scene with Michael and Thea imitating each other is interspersed with shots from a similar scene in the 1975 film of Sean (Jay Mello) and Martin Brody. Similarly, the shark's destruction contains footage of Martin Brody aiming at the compressed air tank, saying "Smile, you son of a ...," "The New York Times" comments "nothing kills a sequel faster than reverence... Joseph Sargent, the director, has turned this into a color-by-numbers version of Steven Spielberg's original "Jaws."" Jaws: The Revenge has gained a bit of a cult following by fans, although most fans of the original Jaws film panned it.
"The Garbage Pail Kids Movie" (1987).
The film is a live-action adaptation of the then-popular, yet controversial trading card series of the same name, itself a gross-out parody of the Cabbage Patch Kids dolls. The title characters are depicted by dwarf actors in low budget costumes, with poorly functioning mouths and expressionless faces. The film is often criticized for its gross-out humor, nonsensical plot, poor explanations, bad acting, and the creepy appearance of the Garbage Pail Kids. It has a 0% rating on Rotten Tomatoes and Caryn James of the "New York Times" said the movie is "too repulsive for children or adults of any age" and is "enough to make you believe in strict and faraway boarding schools." Carlos Coto of the "Sun-Sentinel" called the film "one of the worst ever made". Much of its content is said to be inappropriate for children, its intended audience. Throughout the movie, the Garbage Pail Kids steal, get in fights, bite toes off people, fart in people's faces, threaten others with switch blades, urinate upon themselves, and run over cars. Some have pointed out that the movie contradicts its own message, that people should be judged by their behavior, not their appearance. In addition to scatological behavior, the movie has several scenes that feature sexual images, violence, and drinking. Offended parents launched a nation-wide protest of the movie that successfully resulted in the movie being withdrawn from circulation. The shortened release contributed to the movie's poor gross of only $1,576,615. It was nominated for three Golden Raspberry Awards at the 8th Golden Raspberry Awards: Worst Visual Effects, Worst New Star for the Garbage Pail Kids collectively, and Worst Song.
"Hobgoblins" (1988).
This film by Rick Sloane is widely considered to be a blatant rip-off capitalizing on the popularity of the 1984 film "Gremlins". "MST3K" writer Paul Chaplin later commented on "Hobgoblins", saying, “Oh, man. You have no idea the torture it was to watch this movie several times in the space of a week. It shoots right to the top of the list of the worst movies we’ve ever done." Greg Muskewitz at Efilmcritic.com called it "Jim Henson's worst nightmare." Hobgoblins is also one of the few films considered the worst of all time to have spawned a sequel—"Hobgoblins 2", made twenty years after the original.
"Mac and Me" (1988).
The film is about a young boy in a wheelchair who meets and befriends an alien who has crash landed on earth. The decision to make the film was based on the success of "E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial" (the title itself, "Mac and Me", comes from the working title for "E.T."—"E.T. and Me".), as well as to serve as a marketing vehicle for Coca-Cola and McDonald's. One scene in the film is a large, impromptu dance-off with the alien (dressed in a teddy bear costume), a football team, Ronald McDonald, and various other people inside and outside of a McDonald's restaurant. The film's cast list states "and Ronald McDonald as Himself." "Mac and Me" has a rating of 0% on Rotten Tomatoes, and Leonard Maltin referred to it as "more like a TV commercial than a movie". Scott Weinberg of eFilmcritic.com called it "Quite possibly one of the worst movies of the past 435 years" and Marjorie Baumgarten of the "Austin Chronicle" called it a "shameless E.T. knockoff". The film was nominated for four Razzie Awards including Worst Picture and Worst Screenplay and won two trophies, Worst Director for Stewart Raffill (tied with Blake Edwards for "Sunset") and Worst New Star for Ronald McDonald in a small cameo.
1990s.
"Troll 2" (1990).
Notable in part for not featuring any trolls (the antagonists are goblins from the town of Nilbog — which is goblin spelled backwards), the film also has no relation to the original "Troll", which was also critically panned. Not only one of the "least scary horror movies ever", according to Yahoo! Movies, but "by pretty much any measure... one of the worst films ever made". Director Claudio Fragasso (who used the pseudonym Drake Floyd for his work on the film) has maintained for twenty years that the film is a "masterpiece". Despite the script being written in awkward language (Fragasso and his wife Rosella Drudi, native Italians, spoke virtually no English when they wrote the script), Fragasso insisted the American actors deliver the lines as written. The goblins in the movie are dwarfs wearing burlap sacks and latex masks. Campy acting, confusing plot twists and unintentional homosexual innuendos have contributed to give the movie a cult status comparable to "The Rocky Horror Picture Show". Nearly twenty years after its release, the movie's child star, Michael Stephenson, made a documentary about the film titled "Best Worst Movie", released to critical success in 2009.
"" (1991).
A sequel to the cult film "Highlander," which transitions the fantasy franchise into science fiction and retcons the mystical warriors of the first film into aliens. It was met with harsh criticism by both critics and audiences. Based on 23 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes, the film currently holds a 0%, "Rotten" rating, all 23 reviews being negative. Common criticisms included the lack of motivation for the characters, the new and seemingly incongruent origin for the Immortals, the resurrection of Ramirez, and apparent contradictions in the film's internal logic. Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film a score of one-half star (out of four), saying: ""Highlander II: The Quickening" is the most hilariously incomprehensible movie I've seen in many a long day—a movie almost awesome in its badness. Wherever science fiction fans gather, in decades and generations to come, this film will be remembered in hushed tones as one of the immortal low points of the genre." He continued, saying "If there is a planet somewhere whose civilization is based on the worst movies of all time, "Highlander 2: The Quickening" deserves a sacred place among their most treasured artifacts." Giving the film a score of 2 out of 10, IGN's review of the film said: "How bad is this movie? Well, imagine if Ed Wood were alive today, and someone gave him a multi-million dollar budget. See his imagination running rampant, bringing in aliens from outer space with immensely powerful firearms, immortals who bring each other back to life by calling out their names, epic duels on flying skateboards, and a blatant disregard for anything logical or previously established—now you are starting to get closer to the vision of "Highlander II"." Awarding the film one star out of five, Christopher Null of FilmCritic.com said, ""Highlander" has become a bit of a joke, and here's where the joke started. ... Incomprehensible doesn't even begin to explain it. This movie is the equivalent of the 'Hey, look over there!' gag. You look, and the guy you wanted to beat up has run away and hid."
In 1995, the film's director Russell Mulcahy made a director's cut version known as "Highlander II: The Renegade Version" and then later released another version simply known as "Highlander II: The Special Edition" for its 2004 DVD release. The film was reconstructed on both occasions largely from existing material, with certain scenes removed and others added back in, and the entire sequence of events changed. These new edits of the film are comprehensible and provide a more fantasy-based story for the characters' origins. They are generally treated as the canonical versions of the movie by fans of the franchise.
"North" (1994).
This Rob Reiner film is an adaption of the novel "North: The Tale of a 9-Year-Old Boy Who Becomes a Free Agent and Travels the World in Search of the Perfect Parents" by Alan Zweibel, who also wrote the screenplay and has a minor role in the film. "North", which is also Scarlett Johansson's debut film, was a critical and commercial failure, earning only $7,138,449 worldwide. The film was widely criticized for its plot, its all-star cast of insensitive characters, lack of humor, and portrayal of numerous ethnic stereotypes. The film has an 11% approval rating at Rotten Tomatoes. Roger Ebert gave the film zero stars and, in his review, famously wrote "I hated this movie. Hated hated hated hated hated this movie. Hated it. Hated every simpering stupid vacant audience-insulting moment of it. Hated the sensibility that thought anyone would like it. Hated the implied insult to the audience by its belief that anyone would be entertained by it." He continued saying ""North" is a bad film – one of the worst movies ever made," and is also on his list of most hated films. Both Roger Ebert and Gene Siskel named "North" as the worst film of 1994. Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said in his review that ""North" is director Rob Reiner's first flat-out failure, a sincerely wrought, energetically made picture that all the same crashes on takeoff. It's strange and oddly distasteful, at its best managing to be bad in some original and unexpected ways." Richard Roeper named "North" as one of the 40 worst movies he has ever seen, saying that, "Of all the films on this list, "North" may be the most difficult to watch from start to finish." The film was nominated for the following awards at the 15th Golden Raspberry Awards: Worst Picture, Worst Actor (Bruce Willis, also for "Color of Night"), Worst Supporting Actress (Kathy Bates), Worst Supporting Actor (Dan Aykroyd, also for "Exit to Eden"), Worst Director, and Worst Screenplay (Andrew Scheinman and Alan Zweibel).
"Showgirls" (1995).
A large amount of hype was put behind promoting the sex and nudity in this NC-17 film with a $45 million budget, but the final result was critically derided. Most of the hype revolved around the film's star, Elizabeth Berkley, who only two years before had been one of the stars of the teenage sitcom "Saved by the Bell" (in which she played a young straw feminist). The film won seven of the thirteen Razzie Awards for which it was nominated. The film also appeared on Metacritic's list of the all-time lowest-scoring films. The film, however, has garnered a cult following over the years, as evidenced by it grossing over $100 million in the video market. The edited R-rated version, which director Paul Verhoeven developed for video outlets that would not carry NC-17 films, deletes about three minutes of the more graphic sex scenes. TBS has broadcast the film on television in its prime time schedule, but this version adds digitally animated solid black underwear to hide breasts and genitalia. This version has also been broadcast by VH1 as part of its "Movies That Rock" series.
"Bio-Dome" (1996).
A Jason Bloom stoner comedy starring Pauly Shore and Stephen Baldwin, the film revolves around two clumsy, dim-witted slackers who, whilst on a road trip, look for a toilet stop in what they believe is a shopping mall, which in fact turns out to be a "bio-dome", a form of a closed ecological system in which five scientists are to be hermetically sealed for a year. It was universally panned by critics for its poor acting, unfunny gags and overabundance of references to substance abuse, sexual innuendos, and toilet humor. It has a 5% approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes. It also has a score of 1 out of 100 on Metacritic, the worst reviewed film on their site (tied with "The Singing Forest" and "Chaos"). Kim Williamson of "Boxoffice Magazine" stated that Jason Bloom's "inexperience shows" as "Bio-Dome" was his directorial debut. David Sterritt of the "Christian Science Monitor" was especially harsh against Pauly Shore's performance and participation in the scriptwriting process calling him, "less a comedian than a class clown" and "vapid, vulgar, and more to the point, not funny." Ryan Crocknell of "Apollo Guide" said that "Bio-Dome" "could possibly be the worst Hollywood movie ever developed." At the 1996 Golden Raspberry Awards, Pauly Shore co-won a Razzie Award for Worst Actor for his work in the film, tied with Tom Arnold for that actor's performances in "Big Bully", "Carpool" and "The Stupids".
"" (1998).
A 1998 comedy about a film that was so poorly received that its own director wanted his name removed from it. Since the director (Eric Idle) is named Alan Smithee, replacing his name with what was then the only Directors Guild of America-approved pseudonym for directors who wanted their names removed from credits, Alan Smithee, is a logical impossibility, so he destroys all copies of the movie. Also featuring cameos by Jackie Chan, Oscar winner Whoopi Goldberg, and Oscar-nominated actors Ryan O'Neal and Sylvester Stallone, this film was widely panned by critics upon its release. It won five Razzies, including Worst Picture. With an estimated budget of $10 million, "Burn Hollywood Burn" only grossed approximately $52,850, since it was released in only 19 theaters, making it a tremendous box office flop. Roger Ebert gave the film a zero out of four stars, calling it a "spectacularly bad film—incompetent, unfunny, ill-conceived, badly executed, lamely written, and acted by people who look trapped in the headlights." It is also on his "most hated" list. In the documentary "Directed by Alan Smithee," director Arthur Hiller stated he had his credit replaced with the pseudonym Alan Smithee because he was so appalled with the botched final cut by the film's producers. It was written by Joe Eszterhas and at one point in the movie a character comments that the film-within-the-film was "worse than "Showgirls,"" which was also written by Eszterhas.
Even with its hostile critical reception and commercial failure, "An Alan Smithee Film: Burn Hollywood Burn" did have one positive effect: It was perhaps the most widely known of several films which confronted the "Alan Smithee" issue that finally forced the Directors Guild of America to broaden the list of approved false names for directors who wished their actual names removed from motion picture and/or television credits.
2000s.
"Battlefield Earth" (2000).
Based on the first half of L. Ron Hubbard’s novel of the same name, starring John Travolta, Barry Pepper and Forest Whitaker. Although a sequel covering the second half of the book was planned, the universal panning, poor box office intake and financial ruin of Franchise Pictures killed off such plans. It was criticized for a poor script, hammy acting, overuse of Dutch angles, repetitive dialogue and several inconsistencies. The movie's distributor, Franchise Pictures, was later forced out of business after it emerged that it had fraudulently overstated the film's budget by $31 million. The film has a 2% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, and was included in their Top 100 worst reviewed movies of the last 10 years. Roger Ebert predicted that the film "for decades to come will be the punch line of jokes about bad movies." It is also on his "most hated" list. It won seven Golden Raspberry Awards, including Worst Picture and Worst Screen Couple (John Travolta and "anyone on the screen with him"). In 2005, an eighth Razzie (for Worst "Drama" of Our First 25 Years) was awarded to the film, and in 2010 the film won a ninth Razzie at the 30th Golden Raspberry Awards for "Worst Picture of the Decade", the most of any film in the history of the awards at the time, before "Jack and Jill" surpassed the film's record with ten wins in 2012. The movie appeared on Metacritic's list of the all-time lowest-scoring films, is on the MRQE's 50 Worst Movies list.
"Freddy Got Fingered" (2001).
A comedy film starring Tom Green, who also wrote and directed it, featuring largely gross-out and shock humor (including multiple instances of bestiality) similar to that featured in "The Tom Green Show". In the film, Green stars as a twenty-eight-year-old slacker and cartoonist who falsely accuses his father of child molestation when he questions his son's life goals. "Freddy Got Fingered" received overwhelmingly negative reviews, with CNN critic Paul Clinton declaring it "quite simply the worst movie ever released by a major studio in Hollywood history". A review in "The Washington Post" said: "If ever a movie testified to the utter creative bankruptcy of the Hollywood film industry, it is the abomination known as "Freddy Got Fingered"." Film reviewer Roger Ebert included the film on his "most hated" list, gave it zero out of four stars, and wrote: "This movie doesn't scrape the bottom of the barrel. This movie isn't the bottom of the barrel. This movie isn't below the bottom of the barrel. This movie doesn't deserve to be mentioned in the same sentence with barrels." "Freddy Got Fingered" was nominated for eight awards at the 2001 Razzies, and won for Worst Picture, Worst Actor, Worst Director, Worst Screenplay, and Worst On-Screen Couple. Razzies founder John J. B. Wilson called the film "offensive, stupid and obnoxious" and said it had "no redeeming value". The movie has an 11% positive rating on Rotten Tomatoes. Tom Green accepted his awards in person, traveling to the ceremony in a white Cadillac, wearing a tuxedo and rolling out his own red carpet to the presentation. In 2010, the film was nominated at the 30th Golden Raspberry Awards for "Worst Picture of the Decade", although it lost to "Battlefield Earth". "Freddy Got Fingered" also appeared on Metacritic's list of the all-time lowest-scoring films.
"" (2002).
An action film starring Antonio Banderas and Lucy Liu as opposing secret agents was universally panned by critics, who generally regarded it as having no redeeming features, not even the comedic value normally associated with bad films. Critics variously described the film as "A picture for idiots", "Boring to an amazing degree", "A fine achievement in stupidity and dullness", "Dreadful", "new meaning to the word incoherent", and "bad on just about every level". One critic suggested an alternate title as ""Simplistic: Bullets Vs. Humans"." Stephen Hunter of "The Washington Post" wrote, "You could run this film backward, soundtrack included, and it would make no less sense." Roger Ebert, who included the film in his "most hated list", called the movie "a chaotic mess, overloaded with special effects and explosions, light on continuity, sanity and coherence", Among the most obvious plot holes noted by critics of the film is the fact that the FBI – an organization intended to work within the United States – is somehow working in Vancouver, Canada. In addition to being lambasted by critics, the film was a disaster financially, recouping just over $19.9 million of its $70 million budget.
In March 2007, the movie review site Rotten Tomatoes ranked the film #1 among "The Worst of the Worst" movie list, with 108 "rotten" reviews and no "fresh" ones.
"The Room" (2003).
This independently produced film about an amiable banker whose friends betray him one by one has been called "the "Citizen Kane" of bad movies" by some critics. Although the film's star, writer, producer and director Tommy Wiseau has claimed it to be a black comedy (and that, as a result, the film's numerous flaws are intentional), other actors involved in the production have denied this, stating that Wiseau intended it to be a melodramatic romance. "The Room" has been noted for its bizarre and out-of-place lines, protracted sex scenes, various subplots that are inadequately resolved or simply disappear altogether (most notably, a character announces that she has breast cancer, but it's never mentioned again during the film's duration), nonsensical exterior shots (one scene features three establishing shots during its duration), and infamous use of green-screen for "outdoor" rooftop scenes. It has gained a cult status, and regularly sells out midnight viewings at theaters in the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and Australia. It made its broadcast premiere as an April Fools' Day special in 2009 on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim block, edited down from its original R rating to a TV-14/DSLV rating. The day after its appearance, its DVD became the top-selling independent film on Amazon.com. It has garnered a cult following similar to "The Rocky Horror Picture Show", and in June 2010, "The Room" started playing at the American Film Institute. "Mystery Science Theater 3000" alumni Michael J. Nelson, Kevin Murphy, and Bill Corbett produced an audio commentary track to accompany the movie through their site RiffTrax.com.
"Gigli" (2003).
A Martin Brest movie featuring Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck, with appearances by Al Pacino and Christopher Walken. "Gigli" was originally a black comedy with no romantic subplot. The producers demanded script rewrites throughout filming, hoping to cash in on the Lopez-Affleck romance that was big news in celebrity-watching publications of the time such as "Us" and "People". This film cost $54 million to make but grossed only $6 million, making it one of the biggest box office bombs of all time. It was also the winner of seven Razzies (including 2005's Worst "Comedy" of Our First 25 Years), and in 2010 the film was nominated at the 30th Golden Raspberry Awards for "Worst Picture of the Decade". The film is in Rotten Tomatoes' Top 100 worst reviewed movies of the last 10 years, where it has a 6% rating.
"Catwoman" (2004).
Nominally based on the DC Comics character and starring Halle Berry, the titular "Catwoman" bears little resemblance to the Batman antagonist: the cinematic Catwoman has superpowers, unlike in the comics, and leaps from rooftop to rooftop in stiletto heels. The character's signature lycra catsuit was replaced with slashed leather trousers and matching bra, and a mask that also acts as a hat. Ry The Movie Guy has commented that the film was "...solely made as an excuse to let us men see one of the most desirable women in the world wear a seductive cat-suit, and no other apparent reason." As the movie character differs so widely from her comic book source, the character, as portrayed in this film, has been cited as "Catwoman in Name Only". The film was the result of various rewrites by a total of 28 different screenwriters, though only four were credited after arbitration with the WGA. It has a 10% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, and was declared "arguably the worst superhero film ever made" by the "Orlando Sentinel". Jean Lowerison of the "San Diego Metropolitan" said in her review that "Catwoman" "goes on my 'worst' list for the year, and quite possibly for all time." "The Village Voice" summed up reviews of the film under the title "Me-Ouch." The movie was the winner of four Razzies for Worst Picture, Worst Actress, Worst Director (Pitof) and Worst Screenplay. Berry arrived at the ceremony to accept her Razzie in person (with her Best Actress Oscar for "Monster's Ball" in hand), saying: "First of all, I want to thank Warner Brothers. Thank you for putting me in a piece of shit, god-awful movie... It was just what my career needed." It is on Roger Ebert's "most hated" list.
"" (2004).
A family-oriented comedy, this was the last film to be directed by Bob Clark before his death. It is a sequel to the 1999 film "Baby Geniuses" and like its predecessor, it received universally negative reviews from film critics, earning "0%" positive rating on review website Rotten Tomatoes. Following the plot of the first film, four babies can communicate with each other using 'baby talk', and have knowledge of many secrets. The "baby geniuses" become involved in a scheme by media mogul Bill Biscane (Jon Voight), a notorious kidnapper of children. Helping the geniuses is a legendary superbaby named Kahuna, who stops Biscane's plots and saves children from being kidnapped by Biscane and his minions. He joins up with several other babies in an attempt to stop Biscane, who intends to use a satellite system to control the world's population by brainwashing them and forcing people to be sedentary and watch TV the rest of their lives. The film was a box office bomb, only receiving $9 million from its $20 million budget. Tom Long of "The Deseret News" said "It is perhaps the most incompetent and least funny comic film ever made." MaryAnn Johanson of Flick Philosopher said in her review "To call this immeasurably terrible movie 'stupid and nonsensical' would be an insult to stupid and nonsensical movies." Eric D. Snider wrote that ""Superbabies" couldn't be worse if it had been written and produced by actual babies, and I mean babies who are retarded and who hate movies," and Nathan Rabin at The A.V. Club called it "The most perversely unnecessary sequel in recent memory." Rotten Tomatoes ranked the film 6th in the 100 worst reviewed films of the 2000s, with a rating of 0%. The film was nominated for four Golden Raspberry Awards including Worst Picture, Worst Director (Bob Clark), Worst Supporting Actor (Jon Voight) and Worst Screenplay (Steven Paul (story) & Gregory Poppen). Eric Henderson at Slant Magazine wrote that ""Superbabies: Baby Geniuses 2" had the rare distinction of briefly unseating the obstinate "Manos: The Hands of Fate"—the film that "MST3K" single-handedly popularized as the 'official worst movie of all time'—from its perch atop the IMDb's list of 100 worst movies" and David Cornelius at efilmcritic wondered "Why would anyone want to make a follow-up to what is universally viewed as one of the very worst movies ever produced is a mystery for the ages".
"Alone in the Dark" (2005).
Loosely based on a series of video games by Infogrames and directed by Uwe Boll, this film was panned by critics from "Entertainment Weekly", "Variety", "The Village Voice" and various Internet movie sites for a multitude of reasons, including poor script and production values, quick cuts to optimize the gory content, almost no connection to the game, and bad acting. One review said the movie was "so poorly built, so horribly acted and so sloppily stitched together that it's not even at the straight-to-DVD level." The movie has received a 1% rating at Rotten Tomatoes, and was included in their Top 100 worst reviewed movies of the last 10 years. Critic Rob Vaux states that this movie is so bad that "the other practitioners of cinematic drivel can rest a little easier now; they can walk in the daylight with their heads held high, a smile on their lips and a song in their hearts. It's okay, they'll tell themselves. I didn't make "Alone in the Dark"." Screenwriter Blair Erickson wrote about his experience dealing with Boll and his original script, which was closer to the actual game itself, and Boll's script change demands on the comedy website "Something Awful". It appeared on Metacritic's list of the all-time lowest-scoring films, and is on the MRQE's 50 Worst Movies list. It also received two 2005 Golden Raspberry Awards nominations for Worst Director (Uwe Boll) and Worst Actress (Tara Reid), and won three 2005 Stinkers Awards, for Worst Picture, Worst Director, and Worst Special Effects. In 2009, Peter Hartlaub, the San Francisco Chronicle's pop culture critic, named it the worst film of the decade.
"" (2008).
An independently produced film that is an apparent homage to Alfred Hitchcock's "The Birds", "Birdemic" tells the story of a romance between the two leading characters, played by Alan Bagh and Whitney Moore, as their small town is attacked by birds. Written, directed, and produced by James Nguyen, the film was intended to be a "romantic thriller" but gained a cult following due to its poor quality, with reviewers calling out its wooden acting, bad dialogue, amateurish sound and editing, nonsensical plot and, in particular, its special effects, consisting primarily of poorly rendered CGI eagles and vultures that perform physically awkward aerial maneuvers and explode upon impact with the ground. The film, which cost $10,000 to make, was called by the "Huffington Post" "truly, one of the worst films ever made" and by "The Village Voice" as "one more in the pantheon of beloved trash-terpieces". "Slate" deemed it among the worst movies ever made, while "Salon" referred to it as "a cult hit among bad-movie fans" and "Variety" stated that the film displayed "all the revered hallmarks of hilariously bad filmmaking." Following the home media release of "Birdemic", Michael J. Nelson, Kevin Murphy, and Bill Corbett of "Mystery Science Theater 3000" fame produced an audio commentary track to accompany the movie through Rifftrax. They later riffed upon the film again theatrically.
2010s.
"Movie 43" (2013).
Produced and co-directed by Peter Farrelly, "Movie 43" is a comedy film consisting of several vignettes each by a different director. The film has been called one of the worst films ever by critics like Peter Howell of the "Toronto Star", who said, "There’s just one use for "Movie 43", apart from it being ground into the landfill that it deserves to become sooner rather than later. It provides me with a handy new answer to a question I’m often asked: “What’s the worst film you've ever seen?”". Richard Roeper of the "Chicago Sun-Times" voiced similar hatred, calling it "aggressively tasteless" and "the "Citizen Kane" of awful". It currently holds a 4% approval rating on review website Rotten Tomatoes based on 67 reviews, averaging out at a 2.3/10 rating.
Outside the United States.
"Dünyayı Kurtaran Adam (The Man Who Saved the World)" (1982).
Directed by Çetin İnanç, and starring Cüneyt Arkın, this mockbuster is considered to be one of the worst Turkish films of all time. It is notorious for illegally using footage from well known science fiction films and shows, most notably "Star Wars", along with stealing the music score from films such as "Moonraker" and "Raiders of the Lost Ark". The film is also criticized for its nonsensical plot, badly written dialogue, and mediocre special effects.
"De Zeemeerman (The Mer-Man)" (1996).
According to 134,000 users of website moviemeter.nl, "De Zeemeerman" is the worst Dutch movie of all time, scoring #3 in the list of worst movies overall (with "National Lampoon's Pledge This!" in the number one spot). "De Zeemeerman" revolves around a young man who has a hard time getting girls because he permanently smells of fish. The cure, offered by a mad professor, turns him into a male mermaid, or mer-man ('zeemeerman' in Dutch).
"Le Jour et la Nuit (Day and Night)" (1997).
Directed by philosopher Bernard-Henri Lévy, "Le Jour et la Nuit" is an romance film that was considered "the worst French film in decades" by Cahiers du cinéma, and considered as a possible "worst film in history" by the French version of "Slate", although the "Slate" article also considered American films.
"Cinderela Baiana (Bahian Cinderella)" (1998).
A Brazilian film directed by Conrado Sanchez and starring former É o Tchan! (at the time called Gera Samba) dancer Carla Perez, it is a semi-fictional biographical account of Perez's early life and how she came into fame. Despite starring Alexandre Pires, Perez's boyfriend and very popular singer in Brazil at the time, the movie was criticized for its campy dialogue, badly-written script, innumerous plot holes and ludicrous acting, to the point of Perez herself disowning the film years later. It was a box office bomb, and it was some time later banned from circulation. It has a 2.6 out of 10 rating on the Internet Movie Database. It was also the debut of a then unknown Lázaro Ramos, who used his salary to pay for acting classes.
On March 15, 2010, Brazilian magazine "Veja" made a Top 10 list of the worst Brazilian movies of all time, and "Cinderela Baiana" was featured in first place. The reviewer, Pollyane Lima e Silva, called the film "a shame".
"Sproet 2 (Fleck 2)" (2003).
Viewers of Dutch pay-TV moviechannel Film 1 voted this movie as the worst movie ever made by a Dutchman - in this case director Ben Verbong. In the movie, the pixielike character Sproet can make wishes come true by pushing the flecks ('sproeten' in Dutch) on his body. In the same list "Adrenaline" was voted second worst. The budget of this movie was so low that scenes had to be filmed in public locations, which was later explained by director Roel Reiné as being artistically relevant 'guerrilla filming'.
"Devilman" (2004).
Based on the famous manga series "Devilman", this movie topped an annual poll by the magazine "Eiga Hihō" for the worst movie, attracting five times as many votes as the second-place film, and also got first place at the Bunshun Kiichigo Awards and Sports Hochi's Hebi-Ichigo Awards. It was voted the worst Japanese film of the 2000s in an online poll, which noted that the excitement of the manga series getting a film adaptation increased the universal disappointment with the film. (It was not, however, labelled the worst film ever.)
"Daniel – Der Zauberer (Daniel – The Wizard)" (2004).
The 2004 German semi-documentary film is currently ranked 1st on "IMDb's Bottom 100". It is a grotesque experimental film directed by Ulli Lommel about the pop singer Daniel Küblböck, starring as himself. The website "filmstarts.de" states that "Daniel - Der Zauberer" was unbearable for non-fans of Küblböck, the performances of the actors were some of the worst in the history of German cinema, and that Ulli Lommel and producer Peter Schamoni have damaged their reputation." 
"Troppo belli" (2005).
The 2005 Italian comedy film is widely considered in Italy to be one of the worst films of all time. Aside from doing extremely poorly at the box office, the film was critically panned. Star Costantino Vitagliano won the "Fiasco gold worst actor award", while it was nominated for several others. It is currently ranked #10 at IMDB's "Bottom 100" list.
"Finding Rin Tin Tin" (2007).
The lowest ranked film on the French site AlloCiné, compiling the ratings of several movie critics, is the Bulgarian-American film "Finding Rin Tin Tin" (2007), which was unanimously ranked 1 star.
"Celal ile Ceren (Celal and Ceren)" (2013).
Directed by Togan Gökbakar, and starring Şahan Gökbakar, this is considered to be one of the worst Turkish films of all time. It is considered to be a poor imitation of popular love movies and the Turkish Comedy movie "Recep İvedik". It has a 1.6 out of 10 rating on the Internet Movie Database and film is currently ranked 1st on "IMDb's Bottom 100". IMDB removed this movie from bottom 100 list.
