Arjun Kapoor (born 26 June 1985) is an Indian actor who appears in Hindi films. After taking on the role of assistant producer and assistant director in a few films, Kapoor made his acting debut in Habib Faisal's critically and commercially successful romance drama Ishaqzaade, for which he received critical acclaim for his performance.
Early life.
Kapoor was born in Chembur, Mumbai to Indian film producer, Boney Kapoor and Mona Shourie Kapoor. He is the grandson of filmmaker Surinder Kapoor, He is the nephew of actors Anil Kapoor, Sanjay Kapoor and producer Sandeep Marwah, and the first-cousin of actress Sonam Kapoor and producer Rhea Kapoor. He is also the step-son of actress Sridevi. He has a sister, Anshula Kapoor, and also two half sisters, Jhanvi and Khushi Kapoor. Prior to acting, Kapoor aspired to become a director, a decision that his family supported, as he weighed about 140 kg, however it was actor Salman Khan who insisted on him being an actor, and helped him to lose weight.
Career.
Career beginnings (2005–11).
Kapoor's first stint as assistant producer was for the blockbuster "No Entry" (2005), which was followed by another blockbuster "Wanted" (2009), starring Salman Khan and Ayesha Takia. He also co-produced "Milenge Milenge" (2010), which starred Shahid Kapoor and Kareena Kapoor. Furthermore, he was assistant director of various films, including the critically successful "" (2002), starring Karisma Kapoor and Nana Patekar; box office hit "Kal Ho Naa Ho" (2003), which starred Shahrukh Khan, Saif Ali Khan and Preity Zinta; and "Salaam-E-Ishq" (2007), which featured an ensemble star cast
Debut and breakthrough (2012–present).
Kapoor was originally supposed to debut with Y-Films’ Virus Diwan in 2011. However, he was launched by Yash Raj Films in Ishaqzaade instead, which saw him star opposite Parineeti Chopra. Written and directed by Habib Faisal of "Do Dooni Chaar" fame, the film became a commercial and critical success, after grossing approximately 42.52 crores in three weeks and eventually being declared a "super hit". Kapoor's performance in the film attracted critical appreciation, with Taran Adarsh from Bollywood Hungama noting that "Arjun Kapoor makes a fantastic debut. He has a peerless body language and a 'I-don't-give-a-damn' kind of an approach in the movie. The youngster, with his untidy look and impish smile, has already won female reverence prior to the release of the film and after having watched him emote, you can confidently say that he's blessed to depict this rebellious character in his launch vehicle itself. He comes across as fiery and rustic and at the same time self-assured and assertive in this reckless and intrepid character." Komal Nahta adds "Arjun Kapoor makes a fine debut as Parma. He emotes well, acts with a swagger and dances delightfully. He has a very good screen presence as well. Arjun and Parineeti’s on-screen chemistry and excellent performances are the highlights of the film." Furthermore, Anupama Chopra praises the chemistry of the lead actors, saying "Kapoor and Chopra are terrific as the explosive twosome."
As of January 2012, Kapoor is filming for "Aurangzeb", in which he will star opposite newcomer Sashaa Agha; as well as "Gunday", alongside Ranveer Singh and Priyanka Chopra. He will also feature opposite Alia Bhatt in "2 States".
