Alan Wolf Arkin (born March 26, 1934) is an American actor, director, musician and singer. He is known for starring in such films as "Wait Until Dark", "The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming", "The Heart is a Lonely Hunter", "Catch-22", "The In-Laws", "Edward Scissorhands", "Glengarry Glen Ross", "Thirteen Conversations About One Thing", "Little Miss Sunshine", for which he won an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor and "Argo", for which he received another nomination for Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. He is the father of actors Adam Arkin, Anthony Arkin, and Matthew Arkin.
Early life.
Arkin was born in Brooklyn, New York City, the son of Beatrice (née Wortis), a teacher, and David I. Arkin, a painter and writer who mostly worked as a teacher. Arkin was raised in a Jewish family with "no emphasis on religion"; his grandparents were immigrants from Odessa, Ukraine, Russia, and Germany. The family moved from Brooklyn to Los Angeles when Arkin was 11 years old, but an eight-month Hollywood strike cost Arkin's father a set designer job he had wanted to take. During the 1950s Red Scare, Arkin's parents were accused of being Communists, which led to David Arkin losing his job when he refused to answer questions about his political affiliation. David challenged the dismissal and was ultimately vindicated, but only after his death. Arkin attended Bennington College in Vermont.
Career.
Early work.
Arkin, who had been taking acting lessons since age 10, became a scholarship student at various drama academies, including one run by the Stanislavsky student Benjamin Zemach, who taught Arkin a psychological approach to acting. Arkin attended Los Angeles City College from 1951 to 1953. He also attended Bennington College. With two friends, he formed the folk music group The Tarriers, in which Arkin sang and played guitar. The band members co-composed the group's 1956 hit "The Banana Boat Song", a reworking, with some new lyrics, of a traditional, Jamaican calypso folk song of the same name, combined with another titled "Hill and Gully Rider". It reached #4 on the "Billboard" magazine chart the same year as Harry Belafonte's better-known hit version. The group appeared in the 1957 Calypso-exploitation film "Calypso Heat Wave", singing "Banana Boat Song" and "Choucoune".
From 1958 to 1968, Arkin performed and recorded with the children's folk group, The Baby Sitters. He also performed the role of Dr. Pangloss in a concert staging of Leonard Bernstein's operetta "Candide", alongside Madeline Kahn's Cunegonde. Arkin was an early member of The Second City comedy troupe in the 1960s. Arkin and his second wife, Barbara Dana, appeared together on the 1970–71 season of "Sesame Street" as a comical couple named Larry and Phyllis who resolve their conflicts when they remember how to pronounce the word "cooperate." In 1985, he sang two selections by Jones & Schmidt on Ben Bagley's album "Contemporary Broadway Revisited".
Acting.
Arkin is one of only six actors to receive an Academy Award nomination for Best Actor for his first screen appearance (for "The Russians Are Coming, the Russians Are Coming" in 1966). Two years later, he was again nominated, for "The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter". By 1968, he appeared in the title role of "Inspector Clouseau" (Peter Sellers has disassociated himself with the signature role), which was not well received.
Among the films for which he has garnered the most favorable critical attention are his Oscar-nominated turns above; "Wait Until Dark", as the erudite killer stalking Audrey Hepburn; "Catch-22"; "The Seven-Per-Cent Solution", "Little Murders", "The In-Laws", "Glengarry Glen Ross" and "Little Miss Sunshine", for which he received his third Oscar nomination, in the category of Best Supporting Actor. His portrayal of Dr. Oatman, a scared and emotionally conflicted psychiatrist treating John Cusack's hit man character Martin Q. Blank in Grosse Point Blank was also well received. On February 11, 2007 he received a BAFTA Film Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for his portrayal of Grandfather Edwin in "Little Miss Sunshine". On February 25, 2007, upon winning the Academy Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role, Arkin, who plays a foul-mouthed grandfather with a taste for heroin said, "More than anything, I'm deeply moved by the open-hearted appreciation our small film has received, which in these fragmented times speaks so openly of the possibility of innocence, growth and connection". At 72 years old, Arkin became the sixth oldest winner of the Best Supporting Actor Oscar. In 2006–07, Arkin was cast in supporting roles in "Rendition" and "" as Bud Newman (Carol's Dad), starring with Tim Allen, Martin Short, Elizabeth Mitchell, Judge Reinhold and Wendy Crewson.
On Broadway, Arkin starred in "Enter Laughing", for which he won a Tony Award, and "Luv". He also directed "The Sunshine Boys", among others.
Directing.
Arkin's directorial debut, in 1969, was a 12-minute children's film, "People Soup", starring his sons Adam Arkin and Matthew Arkin. Based on a story he had published in the "Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction" in the 1950s, "People Soup" is a fantasy about two boys who experiment with various kitchen ingredients until they concoct a magical soup which transforms them into different animals and objects.
Arkin's most acclaimed directorial effort is "Little Murders", released in 1971. Written by cartoonist Jules Feiffer, "Little Murders" is a black comedy film starring Elliott Gould and Marcia Rodd about a girl, Patsy (Rodd), who brings home her boyfriend, Alfred (Gould), to meet her severely dysfunctional family amidst a series of random shootings, garbage strikes and electrical outages ravaging the neighborhood. The film opened to a lukewarm review by Roger Greenspan, and a more positive one by Vincent Canby in the New York Times. Roger Ebert's review in the Chicago Sun Times was more enthusiastic, saying, "One of the reasons it works, and is indeed a definitive reflection of America's darker moods, is that it breaks audiences down into isolated individuals, vulnerable and uncertain."
Arkin also directed "Fire Sale" (1977), "Samuel Beckett Is Coming Soon" (1993) and "Arigo" (2000).
Writing.
Arkin is the author of many books, including the children's stories "Tony's Hard Work Day" (illustrated by James Stevenson, 1972), "The Lemming Condition" (illustrated by Joan Sandin, 1976), "Halfway Through the Door: An Actor's Journey Toward Self" (1979) and "The Clearing" (1986 continuation of "Lemming"). In March 2011, he released his memoir, "An Improvised Life".
Personal life.
Arkin has been married three times. He and Jeremy Yaffe, to whom he was married from 1955 to 1961, have two sons: Adam Arkin, born August 19, 1956, and Matthew Arkin, born March 21, 1960. In 1967, Arkin had son Anthony (Tony) Dana Arkin with actress-screenwriter Barbara Dana (born 1940), to whom he was married from June 16, 1964 to the mid-1990s. In 1996, Arkin married a psychotherapist, Suzanne Newlander. As of 2007, they live in New Mexico.
