The seventeenth season of "The Bachelor" premiered on January 7, 2013. This season features 28-year-old Sean Lowe, an insurance agent from McKinney, Texas. Lowe placed third as a contestant during the eighth season of "The Bachelorette" with Emily Maynard.
Casting.
Casting began during the airing of the sixteenth season of the show. First "The Bachelor" approached Tim Tebow, then-quarterback of the Denver Broncos; but he never signed an agreement. Lamar Hurd, a sportscaster from Portland, Oregon, had been another potential candidate, vying to become the first African-American "Bachelor." Other possible candidates included "The Bachelorette" season 6 winner Roberto Martinez, Lowe's fellow "The Bachelorette" castmate Arie Luyendyk, Jr. (runner-up from Maynard's season), and eleven-time Olympic medalist Ryan Lochte. Luyendyk dropped out to focus on his racing career. Martinez and Lochte also declined.
Contestants.
This season has been the first time the official website listed 24 new contestants along with one contestant from "Bachelor Pad" who joined the others, for a total of 25 suiters. In addition to the 25 new contestants, the premier revealed one mystery woman, bringing the total to 26. 
Paige Vigil, a "superfan" from the third season of "Bachelor Pad" is included in the list.
In addition to 25 other women, Kacie Boguskie, 25 and from Clarksville, Tennessee, competes this season. Boguskie competed in Ben Flanjnik's season 16 of "The Bachelor" and finished fourth. Host Chris Harrison invited her back for a second shot via a meet-and-greet with the bachelor—after the 25 ladies arrived at the mansion. (Source: realitysteve.com)
Elimination Summary.
Episodes (dates).
Week 1.
Original airdate: January 7, 2013
No dates this week. Before Sean begins his quest to find love, his fellow contestant from "Bachelorette" Arie Luyendyk, Jr. visits at Sean's Bachelor home in Los Angeles and provides some insight and advice. Memorable moments from the ladies arriving in the mansion include: Jackie gives Sean a kiss on his cheek, leaving a lipstick mark later wiped off on Selma's napkin; Ashley P. shows an obsession for "Fifty Shades of Grey" as she pulls a blue-grey tie from her cleavage and waves it at Sean; and Robyn attempts a back flip, but stumbles. Upon meeting Tierra, Sean asks her to wait outside the mansion; he goes inside and returns to present her with the first impression rose. Lindsay exits the limousine wearing an elegant wedding dress and mentions her interest in being a bride. Chris Harrison provides a surprise "twist" for Sean as he reveals a mystery woman: Kacie B. from a previous season.
Although Tierra already has the first impression rose, Sean changes the former method by presenting eleven other women with first impression roses throughout the night, making them safe in the first rose ceremony. Ashley H., Ashley P., Kelly, Keriann, Lacey, Lauren and Paige do not receive roses, going home disappointed. Paige becomes the first contestant to fail to receive a rose twice in "The Bachelor" franchise history.
Week 2.
Original airdate: January 14, 2013
One-on-one date: Sarah. Sean meets her at the mansion and, going outside, heads towards a helicopter which whisks them away. They arrive at the top of a Los Angeles skyscraper for a free fall via ropes, from the roof down 360 feet to the base where champagne awaits. Although Sarah had been born without a left forearm and hand, she overcomes the pressure and takes the leap of faith with Sean. That evening Sarah tells Sean that she intended to try a zip-line in Las Vegas, but couldn't because the rules would not allow her to participate with her "disability." She receives a rose.
Group date: Amanda, Brooke, Catherine, Daniella, Diana, Kacie B., Katie, Kristy, Lesley M., Robyn, Selma, Taryn, Tierra. The women travel to a mansion and meet Sean. Professionals take care of attire and makeup for various groupings of photo shoots for a romance novel. Sean becomes nearly shirtless, Lesley touches his abs and looks very seducing. In a vampire outfit, Amanda expresses her feelings with Sean. Kristy, who has experience in modeling, wins a three-book deal for "Harlequin" covers from the photo shoot. Kacie B. talks to Katie about opening up and her possible decision to leave the competition; Katie has anxiety and a meltdown, then decides to leave the show. Sean gives Kacie B. a rose.
One-on-one date: Desiree. Sean has set up a fake Art Museum to see Desiree's (self-nicknamed "Des") response to a prank. Taken through the art show and having met the artist, Sean escorts Des into an art room where she can see a sculpture that is to be the pinnacle of the exhibit; soon he is "asked" to return to the exhibit hall, and leaves Des with the art, saying he will return. Going to a back room with Chris (host), Sean is able to watch Des in the art room. Although she does nothing, the sculpture falls and shatters into many pieces. First the exhibit manager and then the artist come into the room and they ask Des what she has done to the precious artwork. Des does not know how to respond...and Sean returns to the room to save her, telling her that the art staff are actually professional actors and the artpiece is worth less than $100. Then Sean accompanies Des in his TV home for dinner; she receives a rose for being a good sport.
Cocktail party: The ladies are anxious about Amanda; some ladies dislike her.
Rose ceremony: Brooke and Diana are eliminated in the rose ceremony, leaving only sixteen ladies in the competition.
Week 3.
Original airdate: January 21, 2013
One-on-one: Lesley M. Sean picks up Lesley on heading to Hollywood and arriving at Guinness World Records Museum. They spotted a "longest on-screen kiss" stand outside and would begin to set a record for the world's longest on-screen kiss along with crowded cheers on stage and make a kiss time at within three minutes and fifteen seconds, they eventually made their kiss time for the longest kiss record. That evening, they have a toast above on a penthouse lounge. Lesley M. received a rose.
Group: Amanda, Catherine, Daniella, Desiree, Jackie, Kacie B., Kristy, Leslie H., Lindsay, Robyn, Taryn, Tierra. They meet with Sean to a beach for a game of beach volleyball. They split into two groups of six, the first group are Catherine, Daniella, Kristy, Leslie H., Taryn and Tierra and known them as the red them, while the second group are Amanda, Des, Jackie, Kacie B., Lindsay and Robyn and also known them as the blue team. The blue team won the match and then proceed to Sean's "Bachelor Pad" place for a little party. While the red team lost and sent back to the mansion, several ladies cried on devastating defeat including Kristy. Amanda is very serious for her feelings with Sean and he is nothing to find a better woman for her. In the end, Sean gave the rose to Lindsay.
One-on-one: AshLee F. While Tierra read the date card she pretended to joke that Selma was on the date and that made some girls upset like AshLee F. and Sarah. Just before the start of the date, Tierra fell down to the stairs and hit her head. Sean comes to the mansion to see her. With the ambulance and paramedics arrive, she puts a neck brace on and made herself fine, but she did not send to the hospital. Finally, AshLee and Sean arrive at Six Flags Magic Mountain for a fun ride, they invite two girls suffered with chronic illness. Then, the park itself closed and they are invited on watching a performance from Eli Young Band. AshLee F. reveals to Sean that she is adopted and had a rough childhood life, lives with her current family since at the age of six and she received a rose.
Cocktail party: Sean talks to Sarah on focuses on her disability and brings her dog to play at the mansion. Tierra isn't emotional on what was she done on a fall, she wants herself to leave and Desiree interrupted Tierra's conversation.
Rose ceremony: The ceremony is going to be start, Sean asked Kacie B. to talk for a private conversation for a minute, she proves that could not be right on her bickering relationship with Sean and was sent home. Kristy and Taryn were also sent home in the rose ceremony. Thirteen ladies are remained and the journey continues.
Week 4.
Original airdate: January 28, 2013
One-on-one: Selma. Sean takes Selma on a private plane to Joshua Tree National Park to go rock climbing. Selma was surprised that he took "the Iraqi to the desert", when she was expecting to go somewhere glamorous. Afterward, they go to a "country glam" trailer park, where Sean reveals he has only had one serious relationship since he graduated from college, and he broke it off because he couldn't see himself marrying the woman. Selma tells Sean she cannot kiss Sean because it goes against her Muslim culture, and she doesn't want to disrespect her family. Sean respects Selma's wishes, and he gives her a rose.
Group: Amanda, AshLee F., Catherine, Jackie, Lindsay, Robyn, Sarah, Tierra. The girls go to a roller derby, where Amanda lies to the rest of the girls, saying she has done a roller derby before. She later falls and hits her chin on the ground, and she has to be taken to the hospital. Sarah struggles with her balance due to her disability, but Sean encourages her to only do what makes her comfortable. After Amanda's accident, Sean cancels the roller derby competition. He and the rest of the ladies skate freely instead. The girls and Sean spend the night relaxing outside, where an argument between Tierra and Robyn causes Tierra to contemplate going home. In retaliation, Sean gives her the rose to show how much he wants her there, leaving the rest of the girls infuriated.
One-on-one: Leslie H. Sean and Leslie embark on a "Pretty Woman"-esque date, where they go shopping on Rodeo Drive, and Leslie leaves with a dress, shoes, purse and diamond earrings. To top off the ensemble, Sean and Leslie visit a Neil Lane jewelry store, where Mr. Lane himself gives Leslie a 120-carot diamond necklace. They go to dinner, where Leslie and Sean discuss past relationships. Leslie also reveals the impact of her parents' divorce on her love life. Sean decides that he does not have a connection with Leslie as he hoped, and she is asked to go home.
Cocktail party: Tierra confronts Robyn and Jackie, "apologizing" for her actions during the group date. She decides to be fake in order to avoid Sean hearing negative things about her from other girls. Sean believes Tierra has a good heart and accepts that she needs more reassurance than other girls.
Rose ceremony: Because Leslie H. was sent home during her one-on-one date, only one girl leaves. Amanda left during the rose ceremony, leaving eleven girls to continue to find love with Sean.
Week 5.
Original airdate: February 4, 2013
One-on-one: Lindsay. She and Sean took a helicopter ride on a tour to a mountainous glacier near above Glacier National Park for an outdoor picnic activity at Blackfeet Indian Reservation. Lindsay tells Sean that she grew up in different countries when her dad is a member of United States Army. Then, they decided to take on stage for Sarah Darling concert at downtown with thousands of the town's residents cheering on, including an autograph. Lindsay receives a rose.
Group: AshLee, Catherine, Daniella, Desiree, Lesley M., Robyn, Sarah, Selma. They proceed by bus to the park for taking a relay race at the park and they split into two teams of four. The blue group was made up of AshLee, Catherine, Daniella and Lesley, while the red group consisted of Desiree, Robyn, Sarah and Selma. The girls had to race in a canoe, carry barrels of hay, saw a log and milk a goat, with one girl drinking the goat milk to win the race. Des drank the milk, and the red team won. Sean felt bad about sending the blue team home, and he invited them to come back later in the night. Tierra unexpectedly showed up on the group date to tell Sean she was concerned about her impending two-on-one date with him the next day. In the end, Daniella received a rose, leaving the girls on the blue team angry that Sean invited the other girls back in the first place.
Two-on-one: Jackie and Tierra. The two women met with Sean for a horseback ride across a wilderness. Sean spends time alone with Jackie, who warns Sean of Tierra's dangerous personality. Tierra tells Sean she was in a 5-year relationship with an addict who then passed away, stating this event as a reason for her strong personality. Sean gave the rose to Tierra for a second straight time, and Jackie was sent home. Sean and Tierra ended the night with a firework show.
Cocktail party: Robyn and Lesley confront Tierra regarding her negative personality, which leaves Tierra with a sour taste in her mouth. Des doubts her feelings for Sean due to his interest in Tierra. Sean senses tension among the ladies, and he asks Lesley why the girls don't like Tierra, leaving him unsure if finding love on the show is possible.
Rose ceremony: Although Jackie was already sent home during two-on-one date, Robyn was eliminated during that ceremony. The nine remaining ladies continued their quest for love with Sean.
Week 6.
Original airdate: February 5, 2013
One-on-one: Catherine. Sean picks up Catherine in a glacier vehicle to Jasper National Park, and they spend the day playing in the snow. Catherine reveals that her friend passed away in a freak accident when they were both twelve years old. Sean and Catherine then travel to an ice palace, where Sean gives her a rose.
Group: AshLee F., Daniella, Lesley M., Lindsay, Sarah, Selma, Tierra. The girls and Sean canoed across Lake Louise. Everyone was upset when Lesley jumped in Sean's canoe. Sean invited the girls to jump in icy water with him. Selma refused to jump, which disappointed Sean. The rest of the girls completed the dive, with Tierra suffering from hypothermia upon resurfacing from the water. She was treated by a paramedic and told to stay in her hotel room to rest. Not one for following orders, Tierra makes an entrance at the group date dinner later in the evening. However, Sean gives Lesley the rose. Later that day, Sean pulls Sarah aside to tell her that he does not think she is the one for him, and he didn't want to wait until the rose ceremony to tell her. Sarah then leaves, shocking the other girls.
One-on-one: Desiree. Sean takes Des at Banff National Park and have a picnic at Tunnel Mountain, but they have to repel down a mountain in the Canadian Rockies in order to reach their destination. They have dinner in a tepee. Des tells Sean she grew up with little money, and he found himself wanting to be the man that supported Des for the rest of her life. Sean gives Des a rose.
Cocktail Party: AshLee tells Sean she is afraid of not being in control, so he blindfolds her as a trust exercise. Sean witnesses Tierra acting out to other girls, but she quickly tries to calm down the situation. 
Rose Ceremony: Although Sarah was already sent home following after the group date earlier this episode, Sean sent two more ladies home: Daniella, who never got a one-on-one date, and Selma, who finally kissed Sean on camera in this episode despite her family beliefs. Six girls are left in their quest for love with Sean continues at Saint Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands, an American insular area.
Week 7.
Original airdate: February 11, 2013
One-on-one: AshLee. Sean and AshLee went out on the beach and jumped off a catamaran to reach a private island for the two. When they were on the beach, Sean asked about the drama in the house. AshLee explained that Tierra's rudeness was causing a stir in the house. AshLee then told Sean over dinner that she was married at 17 and divorced at 18 while she was dealing with being in a broken home.
One-on-one: Tierra. Tierra was presented with her one-on-one date card and immediately began complaining about walking around and having bugs bite her. She preferred a tropical date with a beach setting. They walked through the city and went shopping in the town. After some fun and buying two snow cones, they sat and talked. After the conversation, Tierra felt like Sean was a little distant from her.
Group: Desiree, Lindsay, and Catherine. Sean woke the girls up at dawn, and they left the house very early and travelled to Point Udall, which is the easternmost point in the United States, to be the first people in the US to see the sun rise that day. They then went on a trip across the island of St. Croix in a Jeep Wrangler, visiting several local sites along the way. They ended up on the beach at the westernmost point on the island (to be the last people on St. Croix to see the sun set that day). Catherine talked to Sean about her past when her father attempted suicide when she was 14 years old. After his conversations with the three ladies, Sean gave Lindsay the rose. 
One-on-one: Lesley. Sean and Lesley walked through sugar plantation ruins at Estate Mount Washington Plantation. Sean was hoping that Lesley would open up to him, but she seemed distant throughout the date. Sean realized that it took Lesley longer than other girls to warm up to him, but he was worried that it was too little too late.
On the day of the rose ceremony, Tierra and AshLee got into a huge argument because AshLee talked about Tierra on her date with Sean. Sean's sister, Shay, came to St. Croix. Sean wanted Shay to meet Tierra because she was a good judge of character. Sean went to get Tierra at the house, only to find her crying in her room. After talking to Tierra about what happened, he realizes that he needs to send her home. The other girls were unsure of Tierra's fate going into the rose ceremony, when in reality, she left St. Croix at Sean's request.
Rose ceremony: Sean told the other girls that he sent Tierra home, but another girl would still be eliminated that night. He also expressed his frustration over the drama in the house. AshLee was concerned that she would be sent home because she was involved in Tierra's drama. Sean gave roses to Desiree, Catherine and AshLee, forcing Lesley to go home. After her elimination, Lesley tells the cameras that she was falling in love with Sean. During a special episode of the Bachelor entitled "Sean Tells All", Sean expressed that if Lesley expressed these feelings to him, he would have given her a rose that night. In the end, the remaining four ladies prepare to take Sean home to meet their families.
Week 8.
Original airdate: February 19, 2013
AshLee: AshLee's hometown date took place in Houston, Texas at a park. When they arrived at her home, her religious parents talked to Sean about on her rough childhood life and her story began when she lived in different foster homes ever since she was born until was given by adoption to her current family. Ashlee professed her love to Sean before the date ends. 
Catherine: Catherine's hometown date took place in Seattle, Washington. Sean and Catherine took a tour of the Pike Place Market. Upon arriving at her home, Sean met Catherine's Filipino grandmother who speaks Tagalog. He greeted her using traditional Filipino culture that Catherine taught him. He also met her Filipino mother and her two sisters. Catherine's sisters were skeptical about Sean and Catherine's relationship, and they left Sean unsure as to whether or not Catherine was ready to settle down. Catherine's mother was not ready to give her daughter's hand in marriage yet.
Lindsay: Lindsay's hometown date took place at her parents' home in a military base at Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri. They explored the town, and Lindsay put Sean through boot camp. Sean met Lindsay's younger brother and her parents. Sean struggled with how to address Lindsay's father because he is a two-star general. Ultimately, her father gave Sean his blessing if he were to propose to Lindsay in the end.
Desiree: Desiree's hometown date took place in Newport Beach, California. Sean and Desiree hiked in a park and later went to Des' home to host her parents and her brother for dinner. In order to get Sean back for the practical joke he played on her on their first date, Des hired an actor to play her ex-boyfriend who came to her house professing his love for Des. Sean fell for the prank, but Des told him the truth and they shared a laugh. Sean got along with Des' parents, but her brother called Sean a "playboy" to his face, which upset him.
Rose ceremony: Sean and the remaining ladies returned to Los Angeles for the rose ceremony. Before the ceremony began, Desiree pulled Sean aside and apologized to him for her brother's rude behavior. Sean then gave roses to AshLee and Lindsay, but he had a hard time deciding between Catherine or Desiree. He decided to give the final rose to Catherine. Des was eliminated, telling Sean he was making a mistake as they said goodbye. The remaining three ladies will travel with Sean to Thailand for their overnight dates.
