Big Time Rush (or BTR) is an American television series created by Scott Fellows about the Hollywood misadventures of four hockey players from Minnesota—Kendall, James, Carlos, and Logan, after they are selected to form a boy band. The series premiered with an hour-long pilot episode, "Big Time Audition", on Nickelodeon, on November 28, 2009. Its official debut episode premiered on January 18, 2010, earning 6.8 million viewers, making it Nickelodeon's highest-rated live-action series debut ever. On May 24, 2011, "Big Time Rush" was renewed for a third season with production scheduled to begin January 2012 Season three premiered May 12, 2012.
On August 6, 2012, Nickelodeon renewed Big Time Rush for a 13-episode fourth season. Production began on January 7, 2013.
Cast and characters.
Recurring cast.
Carlos Pena, Jr., Spencer Locke, Daran Norris, Carlie Casey, Ted Garcia, Tristin Mays, Linda Cevallos, Charles Rahi Chun, Fabio Lanzoni and Hamilton Mitchell all worked with Scott Fellows previously on Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide.
Production.
The series was conceived and created by Scott Fellows, formerly the creator, executive producer and showrunner of "Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide". Fellows says his inspiration for the show was the musical comedy show, "The Monkees"—a popular and culturally significant American television series from the 1960s about a group of four young male adults who form a rock band, and perform songs while having comedic adventures. Although the show had a concept as early as 2007, the series had no actual title as late as August 2009.
Music.
"Big Time Rush" is a Nickelodeon Viacom Music Productions Band consisting of four members: Kendall Schmidt, James Maslow, Logan Henderson, and Carlos Pena jr. Nickelodeon partnered with Columbia/Epic Label Group to produce the show, which is why music and instrumentals are incorporated throughout the series.
Big Time Rush's debut album, "B.T.R.", was released on October 11, 2010 via Sony/Columbia. Their second full-length album, entitled "Elevate", was released on November 21, 2011. Big Time Rush released their new song "If I Ruled the World" ft. Iyaz on iTunes July 22. They have also released a number of new songs such as "Music Sounds Better With U" (feat. Mann), "Love Me Love Me", "You're Not Alone" and "Superstar". They will also release three singles, "Paralyzed", "Blow Your Speakers" and "Epic" in 2012. Note: These songs were bonus tracks on their album "Elevate". "Blow Your Speakers" was the bonus track for iTunes, "Paralyzed" was the bonus track on Big Time Rush's Official Website (http://www.btrband.com/us/home), Then, "Epic" was the bonus track on the U.K album version.
The closing credits of Nickelodeon airings of the show contain short clips of music videos for singles featured the series. Occasionally, full versions of the videos are featured.
The show incorporates laugh-like noises, music, and editing cuts designed to make it more humorous to the intended demographic of viewers age 10 to 18; this was also typical of creator Scott Fellows' previous work on Nickelodeon. Big Time Rush made an appearance at the 2010 Kids' Choice Awards, the 2010 Teen Choice Award and performed at the 2011 Kids' Choice Awards. they also appeared in an episode of BrainSurge during the week of April 18–22, 2011. On November 24, 2011, the group performed the National Anthem at Cowboys Stadium for the Thanksgiving NFL game which was broadcast on CBS.
Big Time Rush has released 2 albums, B.T.R and Elevate. More singles will be released in 2012. It is confirmed that Big Time Rush covered The Beatles songs in their new movie "Big Time Movie" which was released March 10, 2012.
It is also confirmed that on their summer tour, they will be going to places such as Alaska, Canada, Mexico, and South America. They have released that they will be going to Anchorage, Alaska as their first concert of the summer tour.
Casting.
A nationwide casting effort began in 2007. More than 1,500 teens and young adults auditioned for the four roles. James Maslow and Logan Henderson were the easiest and first actors cast. Kendall Schmidt was the last actor cast, and the most difficult role to cast. The role of Kendall Knight was originally to go to Curt Hansen, who now plays Dak Zevon on the show, but when he appeared a lot older than the others and sounded too much like James in the pick up pilot, the producers auditioned and cast Schmidt after a recommendation by Logan Henderson, who was also friends with the actor before casting. Filming of the series began in August 2009. Actor Carlos Pena, Jr. previously worked with Scott Fellows on "Ned's Declassified School Survival Guide". As he had just entered the Boston Conservatory to study musical theatre, Pena was reluctant to audition but sent in a tape at the encouragement of his manager. Executive producer Scott Fellows was inspired to write each character by the personality of the actor playing him.
In addition to Pena, five are alumni of Scott Fellows make appearances in this show: Spencer Locke, Carlie Casey, Daran Norris, Adam Conway (as recurring cast members), and James Arnold Taylor (as a guest star).
Locations.
The series is filmed in Studio 27, Paramount Pictures in Hollywood, Los Angeles, California. The series premiere's one-hour special takes place in the suburbs of Los Angeles and a small town in Minnesota.
Settings.
The Palm Woods.
The Palm Woods Hotel is the fictional hotel where Big Time Rush boys, Mrs. Knight and Katie Knight live in Hollywood. It is the main setting for the series and plenty of the scenes are taking place in the Palm Woods lobby, park or pool as well as in the apartments and even the air ducts. It's commonly described as the home for the future famous since its residents are mostly aspiring actors/actresses, singers, models or performers such as Camille, Jo, The Jennifers, Lucy, Guitar Dude, Tyler and many others. It is run by the strict manager Mr. Bitters while Buddha Bob works as the janitor.
Rocque Records.
Rocque Records is the fictional record label owned by RCMCBT Global Net Sanyoid Corporation, Big Time Rush's label and the workplace of Gustavo Rocque and his assistant Kelly. It is supplied with songwriting and recording equipment and either Gustavo or the boys are seen producing there. It is the second most used setting of Big Time Rush stories. Names that worked with Rocque Records include "Jordin Sparks" and "Nicole Scherzinger" while its rival company is named Hawk Records. Rocque Records places include Gustavo's office, the bathroom and the recording studios (A and B). It is hinted that the record label is a parody of Interscope Records and Jive Records.
Apartment 2J.
The apartment 2J is the Big Time Rush's apartment of the Palm Woods Hotel. It got its current form in Big Time Crib as it used to be simplistic, dirty and messy before. It features a swirly slide and latest home electronics and arcade games. It is claimed that "Lindsay Lohan", "Shia LeBeouf" and "Kanye West", all stayed in that room in the past. Its interior altered once more when James left Big Time Rush in Big Time Concert and re-moved into 2J, but it came back to normal soon. Other known apartments of the Palm Woods are the ones of Camille (4J) and Lucy (3B).
Opening sequence.
Each episode begins with a pre-opening sequence, leading into the theme song. The opening theme is "Big Time Rush," and is presented as shots of characters mixed in with animated booklet pictures, scenes from various episodes, and graphic effects. As of season 2, Tanya Chisholm appears in the opening sequence as she has been added to the main cast.
Reception.
Audience reception.
A one-hour special preview (which serves as the series pilot and first episode) debuted on Nickelodeon on November 28, 2009, drawing an audience of 3.6 million viewers. The series' official premiere on January 18, 2010 (which followed the premiere of the "iCarly" special "iSaved Your Life"), was watched by a total of 6.8 million total viewers, Nickelodeon's highest-rated live-action series debut.
Critical reception.
The show has received mixed reviews.
The "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" stated the show was "Nick's attempt at building a Jonas Brothers-style pop band. It's Nick's answer to Disney Channel's 'JONAS,' albeit slightly less organic since 'Rush' doesn't feature siblings." The "Hartford Courant" stated the series a "not so good" show "with their thin pop and unfunny comedies". The "Boston Globe" stated the show as "one example in a growing list of kid shows selling showbiz fantasies to children. The genre is stronger than ever now and more fixated on the perks of the glamorous Hollywood lifestyle ... wish fulfillment at a time when tabloid dreams are ubiquitous." DVD Talk had the following review of the Big Time Rush: Season 1, Volume 1 DVD. "It would be hard to craft a description engineered to be less interesting to me, and yet, as I plowed through this collection from the series' beginnings, I frequently found myself amended and entertained. Say what you will about Nickelodeon's teen programming, but they've got the art of making a solid sitcom down to a science."
Broadcast history and release.
"Big Time Rush" was first broadcast in the U.S. in November 2009. It was shown as a sneak preview in Australia on April 10, 2010, and then again on May 15, 2010. In Canada a sneak preview was shown August 6, 2010, and then the series started September 6, 2010. In Ireland and the U.K. a sneak preview was shown May 27, 2010 and then began broadcasting June 21, 2010.
Ecuador, Released 15 April 2010
Bulgaria, Released August 2011 on TV7
