, also known as , is a Japanese light novel series written by Yomi Hirasaka, illustrated by Buriki, and published by Media Factory. It has twice been given manga adaptations; the first incarnation, its title and basic plot unchanged, began serialization in 2010; it was written and illustrated by Itachi and published in "Monthly Comic Alive". A second adaptation with a different story, written by Misaki Harukawa and illustrated by Shōichi Taguchi, was called "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai +" and published in "Jump Square". A 12-episode anime adaptation by AIC Build aired in Japan between October and December 2011. An original video animation episode was released on September 26, 2012. A second anime season, "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai NEXT", began airing on January 11, 2013.
Plot.
Kodaka Hasegawa is a recent transfer student to St. Chronica's Academy, a Catholic high school. As with every other school he has ever attended, he finds it difficult to make friends there because of his naturally-blond hair (inherited from his deceased English mother) and fierce-looking eyes, which make him look threatening to his prejudiced schoolmates.
One day, Kodaka accidentally comes across the equally solitary and very abrasive Yozora Mikazuki while she converses with her imaginary friend, Tomo. Realizing that neither of them have any social lives, they decide that the best way to improve their situation is to form a club––precisely intended to make friends and learn social skills.
Five other members soon join the club, starting with the school's well-connected but arrogant idol Sena Kashiwazaki, who has no female friends of her own because of their jealousy over her many male admirers. The next to join is Yukimura Kusunoki, a feminine underclassman of Kodaka's who rather idolizes him and follows him in the hope that it will teach him to become manlier. Maria Takayama is a 10-year-old "genius" teacher and nun at the academy whom Yozora recruits to become the club adviser. Rika Shiguma is an underclassman and well-known scientific genius with fujoshi tendencies who joins the club after Kodaka rescues her from a laboratory accident. Finally, Kodaka's younger sister Kobato is in St. Chronica's middle school division and is a fan of Gothic anime.
Media.
Light novels.
The original Light Novel series is written by Yomi Hirasaka, it began serialization in 2009 by the Japanese publisher Media Factory and was printed by MF Bunko J. Currently has 8 volumes published, as of June 25, 2012.
Manga.
There are currently two manga series being serialized. Both started serialization on 2010, the first one is written and illustrated by Japanese author Itachi, which was published in "Monthly Comic Alive", titled "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai"; the second which was written by Misaki Harukawa and illustrated by Shōichi Taguchi, published in "Jump Square", titled "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai+". Seven Seas Entertainment has licensed the first manga series in North America under the title "Haganai: I Have No Friends". The first volume was published on 13th November, 2012 with the second set for release in February, 2013. In addition, two spinoff oneshot collections have been released, titled "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai: Hiyori" and "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai: Shobon!".
Anime.
In May 2011, an anime television series based on the light novels was announced on the wraparound jacket of the sixth light novel, with an original video animation bundled with the seventh light novel. Produced by AIC Build under the direction of Hisashi Saitō, the series aired in Japan between October 7, 2011 and December 23, 2011. The opening theme is by Marina Inoue, Kanae Itō, Nozomi Yamamoto, Misato Fukuen, Kana Hanazawa, and Yuka Iguchi, while the ending theme is by Marina Inoue. The anime is based on the first three volumes and the beginning of volume four. The anime was licensed for streaming by Funimation Entertainment, who hosted the stream on the website and Nico Nico, before licensing the series for home video release.
An original video animation episode was released on September 26, 2012. The ending theme is by Inoue, Itō, Yamamoto, Fukuen, Hanazawa, Iguchi and Ryohei Kimura.
On July 29, 2012, the official Twitter account of the anime announced that a second season of the series has been green-lit for production and it began airing on January 11, 2013 with each episode airing every Friday. This series, titled "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai NEXT", is directed by Toru Kitahata whilst Hirasaka is in charge of the scripts. The opening and ending themes respectively are "Be My Friend" and , both performed by Inoue, Itō, Yamamoto, Fukuen, Hanazawa and Iguchi.
Game.
A visual novel, "Boku wa Tomodachi ga Sukunai Portable", was developed by Namco Bandai Games for the PlayStation Portable and released February 2012, and sold 56,969 units.
Reception.
The second volume of the manga adaptation landed 7th place on the top 30 of Japanese Comic Ranking, in the days between May 23 and 29.
