"Dexter" is an American television drama broadcast on the premium cable channel Showtime since October 1, 2006. The series is based on characters created by Jeff Lindsay for his "Dexter" series of novels. The series follows the life of protagonist Dexter Morgan (Michael C. Hall), a Miami Metro Police Department blood pattern analyst with a double life. While investigating murders in the homicide division, Dexter hunts and kills murderers and criminals who have escaped the justice system. Although the first season is based on the events of "Darkly Dreaming Dexter", the series' subsequent seasons do not follow the novels in the series. Departing from the narrative of Lindsay's second Dexter novel "Dearly Devoted Dexter", the show's writer Daniel Cerone said that the writers "didn't see the opportunity in the second book" to adapt it.
The series has received generally favorable reviews from critics. The pilot episode, which aired on October 1, 2006, attracted more than a million viewers, giving Showtime its highest series ratings in nearly two years. Encouraged by its critical success and high ratings, CBS began broadcasting "Dexter" for free-to-air on February 17, 2008, thus making "Dexter" the first program in two decades to air on a national broadcast network after being shown on a premium cable channel. Seven seasons comprising twelve episodes each have been broadcast in the United States. The first six seasons have been released on DVD and on Blu-ray; box sets containing the first three seasons were released on August 18, 2009, on both DVD and Blu-ray.
The show received multiple nominations for various awards, winning 19—including two Primetime Emmy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, seven Satellite Awards, five Saturn Awards, one Screen Actors Guild Award, and one TCA Award—and was twice selected by the American Film Institute as one of the ten best television programs of the year in 2006 and 2007. Other nominations include PGA Awards, WGA Awards, and Peabody Awards. As of May 2012, the show has been nominated for over 125 awards, 32 of them for Hall for playing the title character.
As of December 16, 2012, 84 episodes of "Dexter" have aired, concluding the seventh season.
Episodes.
Season 8 (2013).
On January 12, 2013, Showtime announced that season 8 would premiere three months earlier than its regular intended premiere. The season will debut on June 30, 2013. Though it had been originally announced that the eighth season would be the last, executive producer Scott Buck said: "As far as I know, no actual decision ending the series has been made yet. ... We are absolutely writing it with an end in sight but if we get told otherwise somewhere along the way, we’ll take it in a different direction but we are definitely working toward the finale of the series."
"Dexter: Early Cuts".
In 2009, Showtime started releasing an animated Dexter webseries. Each story is told in several two-minute chapters, the first three of which were written by series writer and producer Lauren Gussis, and premiered in 2009. More episodes were released in 2010 and 2011.
