 Thuppakki () is a 2012 Indian Tamil action thriller film written and directed by A. R. Murugadoss. It features Vijay and Kajal Aggarwal in the lead roles, with Vidyut Jamwal, Jayaram and Sathyan in supporting roles. The film, produced by S. Thanu, features background score and soundtrack composed by Harris Jayaraj with cinematography handled by Santhosh Sivan, who with "Thuppakki", introduced the Arri Alexa camera to Indian cinema. The story revolves around a youngster from a Mumbai-based Tamil family and his decisions he takes after his life undergoes a sudden turn. The film, which commenced production in December 2011 in Mumbai, was released on 13 November 2012, coinciding with the festival of Diwali. Upon release, the film opened to mostly positive reviews from critics. A Telugu-dubbed version that released simultaneously under the same title in Andhra Pradesh, was also very well received.
Plot.
Jagdish (Vijay), a captain in the Indian Army, returns to Mumbai from Kashmir. On his arrival, he is forced by his parents and younger sisters into seeing Nisha (Kajal Aggarwal), a girl of their choice for their son to get married to. At the bride-viewing ceremony, Jagdish makes up excuses to avoid marrying her, such as commenting that she is old-fashioned. On the contrary, Nisha turns out to be a college-level boxer who is completely modern in outlook. Jagdish realises this and falls for her, which she reciprocates.
One day, while hanging out with his police officer-friend Balaji (Sathyan), Jagdish witnesses the explosion of a bus in which they had travelled. He captures the man who planted the bomb in that bus and soon finds out that he is a mere pawn (a sleeper cell) whose only role was in planting the bomb and that the terrorist group he belongs to have planned various such attacks in the city in a couple of days. Enlisting the help of his fellow Army men and Balaji, Jagdish manages to thwart these attacks. 
When the leader of the terrorist group (Vidyut Jamwal) finds out about the role of Jagdish in the failure of the terrorist attack, he begins to target the families of the Army men (except Jagdish), kidnapping someone close to them. When Jagdish finds out, he substitutes one of the people to be kidnapped with his younger sister. Using his pet dog and his sister's dupatta, he manages to reach the terrorists' hideout, rescuing his sister (who was about to be killed after Jagdish's bluff was exposed) and the others and killing the terrorists.
With this attack too failed, the terrorist leader decides to target Jagdish himself. He asks Jagdish to surrender to him, failing which there would be more terrorist attacks. Jagdish decides to sacrifice his life and hatches a plan with his fellow Army men. Jagdish meets the leader in a ship, which has been rigged with a bomb planted by Jagdish's henchman. When he finds out about the leader's plan however (which is to expose Jagdish's Army team as terrorists), he fights the leader and escapes with him in a boat. After the ship explodes, he kills the leader.
The movie ends with Jagdish and his team returning to Kashmir.
Production.
Development.
In July 2011, sources reported that Vijay and A. R. Murugadoss would collaborate to make an action film, after completing their respective ongoing projects, "Velayudham" and "7aum Arivu". Vijay's father S. A. Chandrasekhar was to produce the film initially, before Kalaipuli S. Thanu took over the project. Although "Maalai Nerathu Mazhaithuli" was considered as the title initially, the film became titled as "Thuppakki". National Film Award winners A. Sreekar Prasad, Thotta Tharani, who was making a comeback to Tamil films after a three-years hiatus, and Santhosh Sivan were roped in for editing, art direction and cinematography, respectively; all of whom worked on an A. R. Murugadoss film for the first time.
Casting.
Deepika Padukone was first reported to essay the female lead. Subsequently several actresses, including Bollywood actresses Sonam Kapoor, and Priyanka Chopra, who later clarified that she was never approached for the film, Priya Anand, who played the female lead in "Vaamanan", Pranitha, and Kingfisher Calendar model Angela Jonsson were rumoured to play the role, with the latter even taking part in a brief photo shoot in Chennai. Kajal Aggarwal was eventually confirmed, Akshara Gowda was cast to play the second female lead. Gautham Kurup was chosen to play a significant role, while Vidyut Jamwal, who was simultaneously shooting for Ajith Kumar's "Billa II", would be playing a role with negative shades. Sathyan, following several collaborations with Vijay, confirmed that he was part of this project, too. Further Malayalam actor Jayaram also confirmed his presence in this project. Murugadoss denied reports which claimed that Jai was acting in the film, while confirming that he himself would appear in a cameo role. Sarath Kumar was rumoured to be acting in the film, however the actor denied the reports.
Filming.
According to early reports, filming was to commence at Thiruchendur and continue in Mumbai. Supposed to start on November 26, 2011, it began on 5 December in Mumbai. Vijay would appear in a completely different with a different hairstyle as well as a facial makeover. The first schedule that lasted for 35 days was completed by January 2012. The climax featuring a stunt sequence involving Vijay and 60 fighters was shot using nearly 7 cameras towards the end of January. At Linking Road in Bandra, Mumbai, Vijay acted and operated the camera himself for one scene with cinematographer Santosh Sivan's assistance, which had to be taken quickly with the unaware public. Sivan commented that it was shot perfectly and decided to retain it in the film. Sivan further told that a major part of the film was being shot in real locations with hidden cameras. He did not use the usual 35 MM camera to shoot the film, but was said to have exploited the latest Arri digital technology that was introduced in 2011, becoming one of the first persons in the world to make use of the technology.
In March, the unit completed a 10 day shoot in Bangkok for a song sequence featuring Vijay and Kajal. The second schedule started on April 12 in Mumbai. The third schedule was wrapped up in May 2012, following which only two songs were remining, both of which had been scheduled to be shot in Thailand. Vijay met with a minor accident during the shoot and hurt his knee. The shooting was stalled following the incident and the actor left to London to undergo treatment. The team then moved on to Pune for canning three songs. One of the songs was shot atop of a train, along with 300 dancers constructed by art director Sunil Babu. The dance sequence, choreographed by Shobi, was shot in the Mumbai Pune Expressway. The crew then left for Switzerland to shoot a romantic number on Vijay and Kajal Aggarwal at various locations. For which Sivan was unable to give dates, and the man behind the lens was a popular cameraman in bollywood Nutty. The final song shoot took place at DY Patil Stadium in Mumbai, with which the entire filming was wrapped up.
Marketing.
Murugadoss approached a leading Mumbai-based trailer specialist for the first official teaser for "Thuppakki". The makers confirmed that it would be released on 22 June coinciding with Vijay's birthday. However, Murugadoss announced that the teaser is to be released on July 1, ten days later. Upon progression, the teaser and poster launch event got delayed following an injunction order from the court, which has directed the makers of the film not to use the "Thuppakki" title in any form. 
With the court case finally coming to an end on October 5, the first teaser was released on 10 October 2012, a day before the audio launch of the film and the teaser garnered 1,000,000 plus views within few days on YouTube. It recorded the highest-ever hits for a Tamil movie breaking the record of "Neethaane En Ponvasantham" and "Billa 2". It has also to be noted that the teaser was trending on social networking sites like Twitter. While it became buzz words in Chennai on Twitter by 11 am, it took four more hours to become hot keywords searched by people in India. The teaser of "Google Google" song was uploaded on 22 October 2012 receiving positive response from viewers. The theatrical trailer was released on October 26 and got an overwhelming response as well, fetching over 600,000 hits on YouTube and over 7,000 likes in just three days.
Soundtrack.
Harris Jayaraj composed the soundtrack, teaming up with A. R. Murugadoss for the third time. The soundtrack album consist of 7 tracks. The lyrics were written by Na. Muthukumar, Vivega and Madhan Karky, who had written over 35 pallavis for one of the songs. Reports stating that Senegalese American R&B singer Akon would sing the title song of the film were dismissed. Vijay, years after his last attempt at playback singing, and Andrea Jeremiah lent their voices for the track "Google Google", a party number in the film. Though Harris Jayaraj had announced in August, that "Thuppakki"'s music launch would take place the following month, the audio was eventually released on 10 October 2012.
The album met with mixed to positive reviews. Sify wrote: "Overall, it is a classy and refreshing album". Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff claimed that the music had "nothing new to offer" and that "except Google Google and the mildly melodious Poi Varavaa, the rest are all oft-heard, and seem a mish-mash of his (Jayaraj's) earlier tunes. Top10cinema stated that each of the songs was "bursting out like a cannon shot". Behindwoods gave 3.5 out of 5 stars and mentioned: "Overall it’s a good album with tracks that you can trust Vijay to add a lot of weight to with his dancing skills". Indiaglitz gave a 3.5 out of 5 star rating but cited: "Lots of ammo getting packed, but needs to fire better".
Release.
The distribution rights for "Thuppakki" in Tamil Nadu were bought by Gemini Film Circuit, which had produced and distributed Vijay's previous film, "Nanban". Several distributors including Bellamkonda Suresh, Geetha Films and Suresh Films were competing for the Telugu dubbing rights, with SVR eventually bagging the rights for 15 crore the second highest in terms of obtaining the Telugu rights after Kamal Hasan's "Dasavatharam". ATMUS Entertainment had reportedly paid the highest price for a Vijay film to distribute the film in North America. It was distributed in France by BR Films International in more than 10 centers. The film's television rights were purchased by Vijay TV for a record price. The film released in more than 1500 screens, becoming the widest release for a Vijay film. "Thuppakki" was originally passed with a U/A certificate from the Indian censor board, but "slight alterations" were later made to the film in order to get a U certificate. The film was initially due to release on November 9, 2012, but was postponed by four days to 13 November, coinciding with Diwali day.
Critical reception.
"Thuppakki" received mostly positive reviews from critics. L Romal M Singh of DNA India stated that the film "is different. The difference is visible in every shot, every dialogue spoken and the amazing attention to detail. What stands out most in this incredibly entertaining film is that Tamil films have finally come of age — in so many interesting ways". Behindwoods.com rated the film 3.5 out of 5 stars, calling it "a fully loaded festival package from Vijay, Murugadoss and co". "Deccan Chronicle" rated it 3.5/5 and cited: ""Thuppaki" has come out as an action thriller that depends on mind games and smart plans rather than bloody fights. This is Murugados’s film in its true sense and Vijay adds immense value to it by his performance". "IBNLive" named it a "well written Tamil film that engages the audience" and added that it had "the energy of Vijay and intellect of AR Murugadoss". Manoj Kumar from "International Business Times" wrote: "Director AR Murugadoss makes sure that he does not regress with any of his films. He frequently comes out with a different plot and narration style, and ""Thuppaki" is a brilliant example of this." Sify's critic stated that Murugadoss "has made a complete entertainer that blends with Vijay’s mass image, thanks to his racy script", calling it a "perfect Diwali entertainer". Sangeetha Devi Dundoo from "The Hindu" commented: "One of the first promos of the film, with snapshots of Mumbai, lurking terror, the antagonist threatening Vijay to which he responds ‘I am waiting’ went viral on social networks. The wait, clearly, has been worth it for the audience. And the man who’s probably having the last laugh is Murugadoss". OneIndia rated the film 3 out of 5 and said, "Vijay is stupendous in the role of an army officer. He brings a lot of energy to his character and thrills the audience in action sequences. Kajal Aggarwal looks good. Vidyut Jamwal has done decent job and Satyan is good". In contrast, Pavithra Srinivasan of Rediff rated it 2.5 out of 5, saying "Vijay fans will find plenty to rejoice in this subdued avatar of their star, but audiences who seek intelligence in their movies will find it rather dull". Vivek Ramz from in.com rated it 3 out of 5 and said that it "doesn't meet the huge expectations it had created for itself", calling it "another regular commercial film which entertains in bits and pieces". 
The Telugu version also met with positive reviews from critics. Jeevi of idlebrain.com gave 3.25/5, naming it a "stylish and slick entertainer", going on to add: "The director has stuck with the main theme and didn’t dilute it for the sake of masala. It is a subject that has pan-India appeal and it’s an intelligent game between two individuals who are working for and against the country". Mahesh K S of 123telugu.com gave 3.5/5 claiming that it was "one film which has everything going right for it. A stylish Vijay, some exceptional thrilling moments and edge of the seat action makes this film surely worth a watch". Oneindia Entertainment stated: "Vijay has improved his performance and body language to suit the Telugu nativity. Because of the director's exceptional ideas, the action scenes, kidnap scenes and mind games worked out well. Kajal Aggarwal did not have much scope to perform but did her part well, as she was almost limited to dance sequences. Vidyut Jamwal did a very good job as a bad guy. "Thuppakki" is a good action-thriller".
Box office.
India.
On the opening day "Thuppakki" netted around in Tamil Nadu box office alone. It collected a sum of in its first week, and worldwide by its first week. In Chennai city alone the film netted in its first week with an average theater occupancy of 99%. The second week witnessed an occupancy of 90% in the city and netted around creating a new record for vijay by taking a distributor share of in 13 days. It still stood in the number one position by the third week resulting in a total collection of . After a long run for 8 weeks at the Chennai box office the film netted which is the second highest figure of all tamil movies released. Ten days after the release, "Thuppakki" was released in 31 screens in Mumbai and roared success as well. Thuppakki was bought for a record price in Karnataka by a leading distributor, and it even opened well at the box office there. The opening 3 day collection from 8 multiplexes of Bangalore alone netted at "Thuppakki" was released in 126 screens in Kerala and raked in in just two days with a distributor share of which is a record for any Tamil release. Many of the centers witnessed police charging before the shows and were forced to go for a fifth show on the first day which resulted in almost 600 shows in a single day: a record number of screenings for any vijay film in the state. The film reached the mark in just 11 days of its release.
Overseas.
In its first weekend, Thuppakki has earned £1,34,280 (1.18 crore) at the UK Box office, with the per screen average working out to £5,371 (4.69 lacs) at 25 screens. The film has collected 50 lacs in the second weekend on 11 screens. The total collection of the film in the UK and Ireland region is 1.85 crores after the fourth weekend. In the US, the film collected $3,20,349 (1.76 crore) on 36 screens for the first week. The per screen average stands at $8,899 (4.88 lacs) and the Telugu version earned 8.46 lacs from nine screens. At the end of its second week it once again topped the collection chart by adding 75 lacs to its 13 day total 2.51 crore ($ 4,52,734). In Australia, Thuppakki grossed A$80,264 (46.73 lacs) on 6 screens and the average per screen collection of the film stands out at A$1656 after two weeks. The film continued to do good business at the International box office in its second week.
It has also performed exceedingly well in Malaysia and grossed around in the box office there after 3 weeks.
Controversies.
"Thuppakki"'s first look poster, depicting Vijay holding a cigar in his mouth, created a stir, since the Government of India had imposed a rule that later films should not feature scenes relating to tobacco or smoking. Director Murugadoss however defended the poster, saying that it was only for promotional purposes and that the film had no such scenes.
A city court stayed advertisements of "Thuppakki", on a civil suit filed by a former assistant director who has claimed that he had already registered a title "Kalla Thuppakki" along with the logo now being used in the "Thuppakki"'s advertisements.
The II assistant judge of the city civil court granted stay until July 16 after C Ravi, an assistant director-turned producer, complained that though he has registered a title "Kalla Thuppakki" and has been renewing it every year since 2009, the producers of the had been using a similar title and a gun logo infringing on his rights.
Noting that he had renewed the title last on April 27, Ravi said that as per norms a title registered with any of the three bodies; Tamil Film Producers Council, the Film and Television Producers Guild of South India and the South Indian Film Chamber of Commerce, cannot be used by another producer unless the original title-holder issues a no-objection certificate. Kalaipuli S Dhanu filed a counter affidavit denying the accusations made against them and said that Thuppakki and Kallathuppakki are not the same and the comparison should not be drawn between the titles. "Thuppakki means a licensed weapon and Kallathuppakki means an unlicensed weapon," he pleaded. The case eventually came to an end on October 5, when the crew of "Kalla Thuppaki" withdrew the court case.
Another promotional poster, which depicted a police-uniform clad Vijay carrying Kajal Aggarwal on his hands was claimed to have been lifted from a poster of the 1982 film "An Officer and a Gentleman" which depicted its lead, actor Richard Gere lifting actress Debra Winger. Murugadoss claimed that "Thuppaki" did not have an army backdrop like Gere's film but was set in Mumbai instead, going on to assert that everything in his film was original. He however admitted to "stealing" the poster of "An Officer and a Gentleman", and stated, "Sometimes, you admire something so much that sub-consciously it becomes a part of your work".
Upon release, an Islamic group violently protested against the film, claiming that it portrayed Muslims as terrorists and traitors. Murugadoss, producer S. Dhanu and Vijay's father S A Chandrasekar later tendered an open apology to representatives of 23 different Muslim outfits, and agreed to delete the scenes to which objections were raised, after activists had gathered near Vijay's residence at Neelankarai and raised slogans against him and the film in Arabic and Urdu. In response to the Muslim protests, S. A. Chandrashekaran said, "We did not intend to hurt the sentiments of Muslims. I want Vijay to be in the hearts of all mothers. My son and I respect all religions. At this juncture, I wish to state that Vijay will play a Muslim in his next film."
