Russell Edward Brand (born 1975) is an English comedian, actor, radio and television presenter, singer, columnist, and author.
In 2004, Brand achieved mainstream fame in the UK as the host of "Big Brother's Big Mouth", a "Big Brother" spin-off. In 2007, he had his first major film role in "St Trinian's". He became known in the United States in 2008, after his major role in "Forgetting Sarah Marshall"; the film led to a starring role in "Get Him to the Greek" in 2010. He also worked as a voice actor for animated films "Despicable Me" in 2010 and "Hop" in 2011. He starred in the 2011 remake of the 1981 Dudley Moore film "Arthur".
Brand is noted in the British media for his eccentricity and for controversies such as his dismissal from MTV after he dressed as Osama bin Laden, his behaviour as presenter of various award ceremonies and his former drug use. In 2008, he resigned from the BBC following prank calls he made to actor Andrew Sachs on "The Russell Brand Show", which led to major changes to the BBC's policy. His drug use, alcoholism and promiscuity have influenced his comedic material and public image. He married American pop singer Katy Perry in October 2010; they separated in December 2011 and were divorced the following year.
Early life.
Brand was born in Orsett Hospital in Grays, Essex, England. He is the only child of Barbara Elizabeth (née Nichols) and photographer Ronald Henry Brand. Brand's parents divorced when he was six months old, and he was raised by his mother. He has described his childhood as isolated and lonely. When he was seven, he was sexually abused by a tutor. When Brand was eight, his mother contracted uterine cancer and then breast cancer one year later. While she underwent treatment, Brand lived with relatives. When he was 14, he suffered from bulimia nervosa. When he was 16, he left home because of disagreements with his mother's live-in partner. His mother had lymphoma at the time. Brand then started to use illegal drugs such as cannabis, amphetamines, LSD and ecstasy. In an interview on National Public Radio's "Weekend Edition Saturday" Brand says he had a strange relationship with his father, whom he saw sporadically and who took him to visit prostitutes during a trip to the Far East. In an interview with Piers Morgan, Brand stated that he thought his dad was "the coolest dad in the world", and would turn up in a Porsche one moment to collect him from school and then be reduced to nothing another and have to move in with Russell's grandmother again. After his parents' divorce, Brand's father remarried twice.
Brand attended Grays School Media Arts College, a comprehensive school. His theatre debut was at the age of 15 when he played Fat Sam in a school production of "Bugsy Malone"; this inspired him to become an actor, and he began to work as an extra. In 1991, he was accepted to the Italia Conti Academy, and his tuition was funded by Essex council for his introductory year with potential funding for three additional years. He later played small roles in children's show "Mud" and police drama "The Bill".
In 1995, Brand applied for both the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art and the Drama Centre London and was accepted to Drama Centre. He then decided to focus on comedy and began to write material with Karl Theobald.
Career.
Stand-up.
Brand's first significant stand-up appearance was at the Hackney Empire New Act of the Year final in 2000. Although he finished fourth, his performance attracted the attention of "Gagged and Bound Comedy Ltd" agent Nigel Klarfeld. That year, he also made his Edinburgh debut as one-third of the stand-up show "Pablo Diablo's Cryptic Triptych", alongside ventriloquist Mark Felgate and Anglo-Iranian comic Shappi Khorsandi.
In 2004, he took his first one-man show, the confessional "Better Now" to the Edinburgh Festival, giving an honest account of his heroin addiction. He returned the following year with "Eroticised Humour". He launched his first nationwide tour, "Shame", in 2006. Brand drew on embarrassing incidents in his own life and the tabloid press's treatment of him since he became famous. The show was released on DVD as "Russell Brand: Live".
Brand appeared in a sketch and performed stand-up at the 2006 "Secret Policeman's Ball". In , he co-hosted an evening of the Teenage Cancer Trust gigs with Noel Fielding. In , Brand performed for HM Queen Elizabeth II and HRH Prince Philip as an act in the 2007 Royal Variety Performance.
His second nationwide tour, in 2007, was called "Russell Brand: Only Joking" and released on DVD as "Russell Brand: Doin' Life".
Brand began performing in the US, and recorded a special for Comedy Central titled "Russell Brand in New York", which aired in . Brand began touring the UK, America and Australia from January to on a tour called "Russell Brand: Scandalous". In October, a further four dates that were performed in November were added to raise money for Focus 12, the drug charity for which Brand is a patron. "Russell Brand: Scandalous" was released on DVD on 2009.
Presenting.
Brand's first presenting role came in 2000 as a video journalist on MTV. He presented "Dancefloor Chart", touring nightclubs in Britain and Ibiza, and hosted the tea-time request show "Select". However, Brand was fired after coming to work dressed as Osama bin Laden the day after the 11 September 2001 attacks and bringing his drug dealer to the MTV studios.
After leaving MTV, Brand starred in "", a British documentary and comedy television programme that aimed to take a challenging look at cultural taboos. It was conceived, written, and hosted by Brand, with the help of his comic partner on many projects, Matt Morgan. The series was shown on the now-defunct digital satellite channel UK Play in 2002.
In 2004, he hosted "Big Brother's Eforum" on E4, a sister show to "Big Brother 5". The show gave celebrity guests and the public the chance to have their say on the goings-on inside the "Big Brother" house. For "Big Brother 6", the show's name changed to "Big Brother's Big Mouth". Following "Celebrity Big Brother 5", Brand said he would not return to host the "Big Brother 8" series of "Big Brother's Big Mouth". In a statement, Brand thanked all the producers for "taking the risk of employing an ex-junkie twerp" to front the show. Of his time presenting the show, he said, "The three years I've spent on "Big Brother's Big Mouth" have been an unprecedented joy".
Brand hosted a one-off special called "Big Brother According to Russell Brand", in which Brand took a surreal, sideways look at "Big Brother" through the ages. On 2008, Brand was the fifth celebrity to "hijack" the Big Brother house, in the E4 show "". Brand next returned to MTV in the spring of 2006 as presenter of the chat show "1 Leicester Square", which initially aired at 8 pm on Sundays before being shifted to a post-watershed time of 10 pm on Mondays, allowing for a more adult-oriented theme. Guests have included Tom Cruise, Uma Thurman, The Mighty Boosh, and Boy George. A second series began in on MTV UK. After "Big Brother 7" finished, Brand presented a debate show called "Russell Brand's Got Issues", on digital channel E4. The viewing figures for the first episode were seen as disappointing, being beaten by nearly all of E4's main multi-channel rivals despite a big publicity and promotional campaign for the show. The poor ratings prompted the network to repackage the show as "The Russell Brand Show" and move it to Channel 4. The first episode was broadcast on on Channel 4, and it ran for five weeks.
Brand presented the 2006 NME Awards. At the ceremony Bob Geldof, who was accepting an award from Brand, said at the podium, "Russell Brand – what a cunt", to which Brand replied, "Really it's no surprise such an expert on famine. He has after all been dining out on 'I Don't Like Mondays' for 30 years". Brand hosted the 2007 BRIT Awards and presented Oasis with an "Outstanding Contribution to Music" award at the event. He also hosted one hour of Comic Relief. On 2007, he presented at the UK leg of Live Earth at Wembley Stadium, London.
On 12 December 2007, BBC Four aired "Russell Brand On the Road", a documentary presented by Brand and Matt Morgan about the writer Jack Kerouac and his novel "On the Road". Brand returned to Channel 4 to host "Russell Brand's Ponderland", in which he discussed topics like childhood and science through stand-up comedy. The show first aired on 2007, and continued for the next five nights. A second series began on 2008, drawing more than a million viewers, and was broadcast every Thursday night for four weeks, plus a Christmas special that aired in December.
Brand was later announced as the host of the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards, which drew scepticism from the American media, as he was relatively unknown to the American public. Brand's stint as host of the 2008 MTV Video Music Awards was not without controversy. At one point, he said the night "marked the launch of a very new Britney Spears era", referring to it as "the resurrection of He also said, "If there was a female Christ, it's Britney". Brand implored the audience to elect Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama and later called then–U.S. President George W. Bush "a retarded cowboy fella", who, in England, "wouldn't be trusted with scissors". He made several references to the purity rings worn by the Jonas Brothers, but apologised for the comments later in the show. These comments led to Brand receiving death threats by some offended viewers. Brand claimed that MTV asked him to host the 2009 awards after the ratings for the 2008 show were 20% up from the previous year. Also in 2008 Brand hosted a one off stand up comedy show called Comedy Live Presents: Russell Brand and Friends shown on Channel 4 on 25 January 2008. Brand hosted the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards on 2009, at Radio City Music Hall in New York City. The ratings for the 2009 show were the best since the 2004 VMAs. On 12 February 2011, Brand guest hosted an episode of the hit American sketch comedy "Saturday Night Live".
Acting.
In 2002, Brand appeared on the TV shows "Cruise of the Gods" and "White Teeth". In 2005, he played Tommy in the BBC sitcom "Blessed", which was written and directed by "Young Ones" creator Ben Elton. Brand auditioned for the part of Super Hans in the Channel 4 sitcom "Peep Show"; the role eventually went to Matt King.
In 2007, Brand appeared in "Cold Blood" for ITV, playing an ex-con called Ally. Brand played a recovering crack addict named Terry in the pilot for the ITV comedy "The Abbey", written by Morwenna Banks.
He voiced an Earth Guardian in "Robbie the Reindeer in Close Encounters of the Herd Kind".
Brand had a small role in the 2006 movie "Penelope", though his first major film role was as Flash Harry in the 2007 film "St Trinian's". He did not reprise the role for the sequel, "".
He achieved American fame when he starred in the 2008 film "Forgetting Sarah Marshall", in which he played Aldous Snow, the boyfriend of the title character (played by Kristen Bell). Brand received rave reviews for his performance as Snow, and he revealed the character was changed from an author to a rockstar because of his audition.
Brand starred alongside Adam Sandler in the Disney film "Bedtime Stories", which was released on Christmas Day 2008.
He reprised the role of Aldous Snow for a buddy comedy titled "Get Him to the Greek", co-starring Jonah Hill. He reunited with "Forgetting Sarah Marshall" director Nicholas Stoller and producer Judd Apatow for the film.
Brand had a role in Julie Taymor's version of William Shakespeare's "The Tempest", as Trinculo.
In 2010, Brand voiced Dr. Nefario in the Universal movie "Despicable Me", and is set to reprise the role in the sequel in 2013. Brand also guest starred in "The Simpsons" episode "" as himself. Brand also starred in the 2011 live action/CGI animated film "Hop", in which he voiced the film's main protagonist E.B. "Hop" opened at number one at the Friday box office in the US, earning $11.4 million. The same month, April 2011, he played the title character in a remake of "Arthur", written by Peter Baynham.
Brand starred as Lonny in a movie adaption of '80s-set musical "Rock Of Ages", released in cinemas in June 2012. His upcoming projects include a remake of "Drop Dead Fred". Brand will also appear in an Oliver Stone film. Sandler has cast Brand in another film and will produce yet another, co-written by Brand and Matt Morgan, about a con-man posing as a priest; it is tentatively titled "Bad Father". and he is also set to star as Fred Mumford in a movie adaption of the hit 70s programme "Rentaghost".
Brand has also set up his own production company with his friend Nik Linnen called 'Branded Films' and will be run from the Warner Bros studios in Burbank, California. It has been reported that the company is set up to primarily develop films for Brand himself to star in.
Radio.
Brand's radio career began in early 2002, when he hosted a Sunday afternoon show with Matt Morgan on London's Indie Rock station Xfm. Brand was fired from the job after reading pornographic material live on-air.
Brand co-hosted "The Russell Brand Show" beginning in on BBC Radio 6 Music. In , the show transferred to BBC Radio 2 and aired on Saturdays from 9 – 11pm. The show regularly drew about 400,000 listeners. In an episode of the show broadcast on 2008, Brand and fellow Radio 2 DJ Jonathan Ross made a series of phone calls to actor Andrew Sachs that crudely discussed Sachs' granddaughter. Sunday tabloid "The Mail on Sunday" broke the story and regarded the phone calls as obscene. Both presenters were later suspended by the BBC due to the incident, and Brand resigned from his show. The BBC was later fined £150,000 by Britain's broadcast regulator for airing the calls.
Brand returned to radio when he and Noel Gallagher hosted a football talk show on 2009 for talkSPORT which led to a 250% boost in web traffic.
Brand returned to talkSPORT in 2010, with a Saturday night show that will last 20 weeks. The show will feature clips and back-stage recordings from his "Booky Wook 2" promotional tour. Brand will be joined by a host of guests, including the likes of Noel Gallagher and Jonathan Ross.
Writings.
From May 2006 till May 2009, Brand wrote a column for "The Guardian" that focused on West Ham United and the England national football team. A collection of the columns from through was released on 2007 in a book titled "Irons in the Fire". A second collection of the columns from through was released on 2008, titled "Articles of Faith". The book also includes Brand interviewing Noel Gallagher, James Corden and David Baddiel about football.
Brand's autobiography, "My Booky Wook", published by Hodder & Stoughton, was released on 2007 and received favourable reviews. "The Observer" commented that "Russell Brand's gleeful tale of drugs and debauchery in "My Booky Wook" puts most other celebrity memoirs to shame".
Brand signed a £1.8 million two-book deal with HarperCollins in . The first book was "Articles of Faith" which examined Brand's philosophy, with the second being "" released on 2010.
Following the 2011 London riots, Brand wrote a guest column in The Guardian, in which he criticised the Government's response to the rioters as failing to address the root causes.
Music.
Brand recorded a cover of The Beatles song "When I'm Sixty-Four" with composer David Arnold for the 40th anniversary of "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band". He contributed two songs to the soundtrack of the 2008 film "Forgetting Sarah Marshall" in which he appeared as Aldous Snow, lead singer of the fictional band Infant Sorrow. He reprised his role as Aldous Snow in "Get Him to the Greek" and recorded sixteen songs for the soundtrack.
Brand appeared on the 2010 version of 3 Lions alongside Robbie Williams. He also appeared in the music video to Noel Gallagher's High Flying Birds's single AKA... What a Life! playing a drug pusher.
Brand performed in the closing ceremony of the 2012 Olympic Games on 12 August 2012, singing "Pure Imagination" from Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory and The Beatles song "I Am the Walrus".
Personal life.
Brand lives in Los Angeles and has been a vegetarian since the age of 14 and a vegan since October 2011. PETA named him 2011's Sexiest Vegetarian. He dresses in a flamboyant bohemian fashion, describing himself as looking like an "S&M Willy Wonka". He has been diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and bipolar disorder, has suffered from bulimia, and went through a period of self-harming. Brand has shown interest in the Hare Krishna Movement and chants the Hare Krishna mantra for drug rehabilitation. During an interview with Ellen DeGeneres on her show in , Brand talked about his love of Transcendental Meditation.
Relationships.
After a string of high-profile relationships, Brand developed a reputation in the media as a ladies' man. His dating life won him "The Sun"'s Shagger Of The Year award in 2006, 2007, and 2008. The award has been renamed "The Russell Brand Shagger of the Year Award" in honour of Brand having won three years in a row.
Brand first met American singer/songwriter Katy Perry in summer 2009 when Perry filmed a cameo for Brand's film "Get Him to the Greek" (although the cameo did not make it into the final cut of the film). Brand and Perry began dating after meeting again in September 2009 at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, where Brand, as host, remarked "Katy Perry didn't win an award and she's staying at the same hotel as me, so she's gonna need a shoulder to cry on. So in a way, I'm the real winner tonight." Perry says she threw a bottle of water at Brand to get his attention and then they went clubbing together the same night. The couple became engaged in when Brand proposed to Perry while on a holiday in India. The couple married on 2010 in a traditional Hindu ceremony, near the Ranthambhore tiger sanctuary in Rajasthan, India, the same location where Brand proposed. After 14 months of marriage, Brand filed for divorce from Perry on 30 December 2011 in Los Angeles, citing irreconcilable differences. After Brand and Perry reached an agreement on financial issues, a judge granted the divorce request in February 2012; however the divorce did not become effective until July 2012 due to California law requiring a six-month wait.
Activism.
Brand and several other celebrities wrote to "The Independent" (as supporters of the Hoping Foundation) to condemn Israel's assault on Gaza, and the "cruel and massive loss of life of the citizens of Gaza". In , Brand and several other entertainers wrote to "The Times" defending Bahá'í leaders then on trial in Iran. In , he attended the 2009 G-20 London summit protests and spoke to the press. He has been a long time defender of the Tibetan cause.
Substance abuse and legal issues.
Brand is a former heroin and sex addict and a recovering alcoholic. He has had numerous run-ins with the police, having been arrested 12 times. Brand was ejected from the Gilded Balloon in Edinburgh, and he infamously introduced his drug dealer to Kylie Minogue during his time at MTV. He has abstained from drug use since 2003 and is now a patron of the addiction charity Focus 12. His abandonment of drugs and alcohol was instigated by his agent, John Noel, after Brand was caught taking heroin in a bathroom during his Christmas party. Brand regularly attends AA and NA meetings and cites his practice of Transcendental Meditation as a significant factor in his recovery from drug addiction.
On 16 September 2010, Brand was arrested on suspected battery charges after he allegedly attacked a paparazzo who blocked his and then-fiancé Katy Perry's way to catch a flight at the Los Angeles International Airport. On 2010, he was released from custody after posting $20,000 bail. Footage of the incident was later sent to TMZ. Perry later defended Brand's actions, and offered an insight into the reasons for his outburst, posting on Twitter that, "If you cross the line & try and put a lens up my dress, my fiancé will do his job & protect me."
Brand was deported from Japan on 22 May 2011 when he arrived with Perry to perform her California Dreams tour. The deportation was because of his criminal record.
On 15 March 2012, an arrest warrant was issued for Brand in New Orleans after allegations that he had grabbed a photographer's mobile phone and threw it through a window. The paparazzo was taking pictures of him with an iPhone, when Brand wrestled it from him and tossed it into a law firm's window. The warrant was for "simple criminal damage to property". He turned himself in to the police, and also offered to reimburse the replacement of the window. Brand was in New Orleans, filming the movie "Lamb of God".
