The Saturdays are an English-Irish girl group based in London, England. The group consists of Una Healy, Rochelle Humes, Mollie King, Frankie Sandford and Vanessa White. The band formed in 2007 and subsequently signed a record deal with Fascination Records, a sub-division of Polydor Records.
The band rose to fame with the release of their debut single "If This is Love", which gave them their first top-ten hit. They later released their debut studio album "Chasing Lights". It was accredited platinum certification by the British Phonographic Industry, while "Up", "Issues" and "Just Can't Get Enough" all received silver certifications. After the album, the band began their first sell-out tour "The Work Tour". While touring, the band began recording their second studio album, "Wordshaker" which was released in October 2009, gaining their second top ten album and silver certification by BPI. They released two singles from their album, with the lead single peaking i the top three and the second single gaining a sliver certification by BPI.
In 2010 the band released their third studio album, "Headlines!". The album included the first single "Missing You" and second single, "Higher" which featured guest vocals from Flo Rida. "On Your Radar" is their fourth studio album which was released in November 2011, featuring the top ten singles "Notorious" and "All Fired Up". To date, the band have released thirteen singles in the United Kingdom; eleven of which have become top-ten hits. 
2013 saw the group try and break America with a reality show titled "Chasing The Saturdays" and their first single and EP. They have furthermore written a book titled, "" and started their own line of clothing, jewellery and nail polish.
History.
2007–09: Formation, "Chasing Lights" and The Work Tour.
The Saturdays were formed in 2007 after a series of auditions to find potential members of the group. The group was put together by their record label Polydor Records and were signed to a record deal with Fascination Records, a sub-label of Polydor. The band began recording their debut album while touring with Girls Aloud on their "Tangled Up Tour". Whilst on tour with Girls Aloud, the band released their first single "If This Is Love". The song debuted at number eight on the UK Singles Chart after selling 14,990 copies in its first week of release. The single was also the second highest new entry of the week behind Katy Perry's "I Kissed a Girl" which debuted at number four. As well as supporting Girls Aloud, The Saturdays also supported the Jonas Brothers at their Hammersmith Apollo gig.
Their debut studio album, "Chasing Lights" was released in October 2008 and peaked at number 9 on the UK Albums Chart. Later the album was certified Platinum by the British Phonographic Industry. The band were often compared to other British female acts such as the Sugababes and Girls Aloud; however their debut album received praise for it's unique sound and strong lyrics and melodies. "Up" was confirmed as the second single from the album. The first studio version of "Up" premiered on Popjustice on 17 July 2008 in the form of a short clip, after the group previously performed the song live at various gigs in the United Kingdom. The song then officially premiered in full on 31 August 2008 on BBC Radio 1. On 19 October 2008 "Up" debuted at number five on the UK Singles Chart with first week sales of 26,593. In turn outpeaking and outselling previous single "If This Is Love" which debuted at number eight with first week sales of 14,990. The third single released was "Issues" which became a commercial success after charting at number four. Both "Up" and "Issues" found themselves gaining a certification of Silver by the British phonographic industry. In March 2009 The Saturdays released a cover of Depeche Mode's "Just Can't Get Enough" for Comic Relief, the single was a success and charted at number two on the UK Singles Chart and was also certificated Siver by the BPI. "Work" was released as the fifth and final single from the album and was their first single to miss the top ten on the Singles Chart.
Their first headlining tour, The Work Tour, had twenty-seven dates. Vanessa White tripped on some wires backstage and had a foot injury, she thus remained seated on stage for some shows. In 2008 and 2009 the Saturdays appeared in adverts for several products including a brand of deodorant, tampons, mobile phones, an operating system, and hair removal products. In March 2009 the girls teamed up with AirAsia and became the brand ambassadors. In the summer of 2009 they ended up going on a mini tour around Asia and eventually releasing music there. The band was also named as models for hair removal product, Veet. The band later became new faces of major campaign of Impulse women's deodorant. The Saturdays have said that fashion is a huge part of the band, with many people looking up to them as their style icons. Sandford stated in an interview with Mail Online: "We aren't models who can't sing. We all sing and we all dance. No one's telling us what to do. We're all different because we're just ourselves – and that's the way it should be."
2009–11: "Wordshaker" and "Headlines!".
Whilst performing on their first headlining tour, "The Work Tour", the band went back into the studio to record their second studio album in early March 2009. The group performed two songs from the recording sessions, "One Shot" and "Wordshaker", as part of the setlist of "The Work Tour" and will appear on the album. The official cover was revealed in a special mailer to fans on the group's official form/website on 23 September 2009. The band began working with a number of writers and producers, including; Louis Biancaniello, Chris Braide, Jörgen Elofsson, Quiz & Larossi, Steve Mac, Per Magnusson and Norwegian songwriter Ina Wroldsen who has written previously for the group as well as working with The Pussycat Dolls, Pixie Lott and Leona Lewis. "Forever Is Over" was released as the lead single from the band's second studio album and was originally written for former "American Idol" winner Kelly Clarkson by former Busted star James Bourne and production group, The Runaways, who is well known for their writing for the likes of Jordin Sparks' single "Battlefield". The single was also wanted by American pop rock artist, Pink. "Forever Is Over" charted at number-two on the UK Singles Chart.
"Wordshaker" was released in October 2010, one year after the release of "Chasing Lights". The album had almost identical peaks to their first studio album with the album peaking at number-nine on the UK Albums Chart. The album is the girls worst performing album to date reaching a certification of Silver (less than 50,000 copies) by the BPI. "Ego" was released as the second and final single from the album, which was written by Steve Mac and Ina Wroldsen. Mac also acknowledged the influence of producer RedOne's work with Lady Gaga, "There’s no question that without Gaga we wouldn’t be where we are at the moment, with what Red has done and how he has changed radio in America, and what’s acceptable, and where dance is. The band decided that "Ego" would be the final single from their second studio album. "Ego" charted at number-nine and number-ten on the UK and Irish Singles Charts and later gained a Silver certification by the BPI. Despite being one of the band's lowest chart peaking singles, it actually became one of the band's best selling singles.
The band originally intended not to release any material in 2010, but Rochelle Humes explained in an interview with Digital Spy that "come across some songs that [they were really excited about. [...] they wanted to just get everything out name="Copsey"></ref> "We finished ["Wordshaker" and we'd come across some songs that we were really excited about. The songs that we had found were so current, and we'd written a couple of songs ourselves, we wanted to just get everything out now." The band confirmed that the album would not be a studio album and would in fact be an Extended play also known as a Mini album. The band confirmed to be working with Steve Mac and Ina Wroldsen on the album as well as some new producers. "Missing You" was confirmed to be the first single released from the EP. Missing You" is an electropop song incorporating elements of trance and synthpop. It was written by Lukas Hilbert and Alexander Kronlund. The music video was shot at the end of May 2010, in Málaga, Spain and later premiered on 26 June on the group's official website. "Missing You" entered the UK Singles Chart at number three.
After "Headlines!" was released it charted at number-three on the UK Albums Chart and number-ten on the Irish Singles Chart which made it their third top-ten album in the United Kingdom and the band's first top ten album in Ireland. "Higher" was confirmed to be the second single from the EP. After the group's previous single "Missing You" was beaten to number one for a second time by Flo Rida, Humes joked that the group would have to record a song with the US rapper before they could top the UK Singles Chart. Then several days later it was confirmed that a collaboration had gone ahead with Flo Rida recording vocals for one of the group's songs. The single charted at number-ten on the UK Singles Chart and number-eleven on the Irish Singles Chart.
2011–12: "On Your Radar" and All Fired Up Tour.
The group announced they were working on their third full-length studio album in late 2010. While recording the album they worked with a variety of collaborators for the album, including producers Lucas Secon, Labrinth Danish pop band, Alphabeat, Taio Cruz, Space Cowboy, Carl Falk, Rami Yacoub, and Steve Mac. Humes confirmed that the record was "different" and "fierce". The band promised that their third studio album would be different and they would be taking risks in their music. They announced that their new sound is "dance floor" music. The band confessed that the album would be a lot "sexier" and a lot more R&B that their previous albums. The band confirmed that they have wrote the majority of the album themselves which makes the album a lot more personal to them. They said that the new album is; "it’s a very cool". The band said their new music was "current", "fun", "naughty", "girly" and "dancy". Emeli Sandé said that she wrote a track for the band which was very dark and a strong ballad. She said that the lyrics are dark and very honest. The first single released from the album was "Notorious". The single was released digitally on 22 May 2011 in the UK. The single peaked at number-eight on the UK Singles Chart and nineteen on the Irish Singles Chart. After the release of "Notorious" the band released a clothing line with high street store, Miss Selfridge. The t-shirts with feature lyrics from the band's song; "Notorious" and "Higher" with the lyrics on T-shirts saying. 'I'm Notorious' and 'Whatcha Doing Saturday Girl?' slogan tees. The T-shirts were designed by the band themselves and picked the lyric out themselves. "All Fired Up" was released on 4 September 2011, which charted at number-three on the UK Singles Charts and six on the Irish Singles Charts. It was confirmed that the album would be titled, "On Your Radar" with third single released "My Heart Takes Over" charting at number fifteen on the UK Singles Chart and number eight on the Scottish Singles Chart. .
After the band's previously tour finished, "The Headlines Tour" the band confirmed that they would go on tour again in December 2011, however this time the tour would be an arena tour, instead of a theatre tour like the band has previously done on the last two headlining tours. They also revealed that they are going to "fly" during the tour as it is a dream for the band. It was confirmed that the tickets would be released on Monday 13 June 2011 and tour would be titled "All Fired Up Tour". They said "It's an arena tour so we're forced to go all out for a big production." Mollie King said that fans should expect a lot of bright colours and brightly coloured blocks for the production. The Saturdays later revealed in late June Irish tour dates. The tour had 14 dates and was successful, playing to thousands of fans at arenas like Wembley and the o2 in Dublin.
2012–present: "Chasing The Saturdays" and "The Chase".
In May 2012, the group released the single, "30 Days", which charted at number seven on the UK Singles Chart.
In December 2012, the group released their first U.S. and worldwide single, "What About Us". It is the lead single from the group's fourth studio album, "The Chase". The upcoming album will be released in the UK in Spring and in the U.S. through Island Def Jam and Mercury Records. The Saturdays will also release the EP, "Chasing The Saturdays" in Canada and U.S. on 27 January 2013 on Itunes. The EP includes their latest single "What About Us" and 4 other singles they released in the UK.
The Saturdays also star in a reality series called "Chasing The Saturdays" which premiered on E! on 20 January 2013. The show features the group trying to make it in America.
Other endeavours.
Filmography.
In mid-2008, The Saturdays made a cameo appearance in "Hollyoaks Later". In 2009, they appeared in "Myths" which was their first acting role as a band. The band was featured performing in the episode they were also featured talking to the cast members and the cast members were their "fans".
In 2010 The Saturdays filmed a documentary series entitled "" for ITV2. Which witnessed the group touring while promoting the upcoming release of their single "Missing You", and recording sessions for the their first extended play, "Headlines!". The documentary had six episodes. The band later announced that they done the show to prove that there is no bitchiness in the band like the papers always rumour. "You always see in the papers, that me and girls are always arguing, we really don't, and there is no bitching at all." In the first episode of "The Saturdays: 24/7" the band were shown gigging around the UK, without King, after she was taken ill after being bitten by a horse-fly The show was a success and later the band confirmed to be doing another show, however entitled "The Saturdays: What Goes On, On Tour" which was also a six-part fly on the wall documentary for Channel 4. The program featured the band on tour and what happens on tour with the band and promotional activities including beginning to record their third studio album. It also showed the band travelling a lot. The Saturdays then also appeared in an episode of "Ghosthunting with..." towards then end of 2010, in which Yvette Fielding guided them through haunted locations. The Saturdays later released a DVD of them performing on tour, entitled "The Saturdays: Headlines Live!" Which was only included with the Deluxe Fan Edition of "On Your Radar".
Before the band, Frankie Sandford and Rochelle Humes were regular cast members in children's musical television comedy, "I Dream" they were featured in with their band mates of S Club 8. The programme aimed at and mostly about teenagers, which aired in 2004 (see 2004 in television). It was set at an esteemed performing arts college near Barcelona, Spain, and focuses on thirteen youths who are invited to enrol at the college, Avalon Heights, over the summer. Mollie King appeared on "The X Factor" as a solo act and in a band in aid to find fame as singer. Vanessa White made common appearances on "Almost Famous" she also appeared in a Cheese strings advert which she promoted.
Merchandise and sponsorship deals.
In 2010 The Saturdays each contributed their part to a book "" an autobiography which was released on 25 October 2010. The book was written with a ghostwriter and published by the Transworld imprint Bantam Press. The band also began a book signing tour starting at WH Smith in Bluewater. The book gives an insight into the world of each band members, where they explain the success with the band and before their lives in the band (Humes and Sandford's case their time in S Club 8). They also talk about they love life, their friendship within the band and a personal insight before they found fame. They give fashion and beauty tips throughout the book and gossip accompanied by photos from each other bands own collection. The band also put out their own jewellery range in 2010.
The Saturdays became the new face of hair removal product, Veet in 2009. In 2010 the band became the face of Impulse, a women's deodorant. They become ambassadors for "Nintendo 3DS" game, "Nintendogs + Cats" prior to the release of their third studio album, taking over from Girls Aloud. The band also worked with "FashionistA" to release a new brand of nail varnish, which was launched in Superdrug.
Philanthropy.
All five of the members have been involved in charity work. The Saturdays released a cover of Depeche Mode's "Just Can't Get Enough". The single was released on 1 March 2009 in aid to 2009's Comic Relief. The song debuted at number-two making the band the first artist to miss the number-one spot with a Comic Relief single. However, the single out sold the original version. The Saturdays later changed to yellow tabards and they toured London's Westfield Shopping Mall with buckets and asked customers to part with their cash. The Saturdays have supported Marie Curie, which provides nurses to help care for people with terminal cancer. King and Humes appeared on the episode of The Million Pound Drop on 24 March 2012 to raise money for Marie Curie, leaving with a £5000 consolation prize after missing the 8th and final question.
The band also have done a charity gig for Sport Relief. The band went onto become supporters of Elton John's charity, "Elton John AIDS Foundation". They also went onto do a charity gig with other artists for Help for Heroes to raise money for injured British soldiers.
Artistry.
Musical style.
Their first debut album was described as "sassy, modern, chart-ready pop is more straightforward than most Girls Aloud singles and younger than the music Sugababes are now recording." Petridis of "Allmusic" described "Wordshaker" "combining aggressive basslines and vocals that are a pinch of prowess" and "praised the catchiness the songs can't be denied". And said "If anything, the girls are showing even more confidence this time around" and said that the album was a "fresh-sounding". Later, when the band released their first Extended play, "Headlines!" critics said "offers a tantalising glimpse of what to expect from the group's next album proper". Others said that the band were "assert a more serious side of their personality" "packs a pop punch" and complimented the "sheer swooning, girly drama of "Died in Your Eyes". and "a feisty edge", and concluded by calling the album "short but sweet".
Influences.
The group's debut album, "Chasing Lights" takes influence from a number of genres such as, synthpop, power pop, and New Wave. The album also takes a big electro-pop influence in the album and dance-pop. Upon the release of the album, it was compared to Girls Aloud, Sugababes and Spice Girls. However, the band refused to accept that their music had comparisons. The band's debut single, "If This Is Love," featured elements of Synthpop and New Wave genres. Many critics pointed out that they believe that the band's music would appeal more to the gay community. However, the band's music has taken criticism from some; Sir Elton John labelled the band's music "crap" and stated that he could tell the difference between Girls Aloud's music and The Saturdays' music. Upon the release of the second album, "Wordshaker" the band released a pop rock track, "Forever Is Over". The album was also said to be a laid-back electro poppy offering that recalls the more subdued moments from their debut album." Talking about the album and the single "Ego"; We were searching for sounds and found the basic hook sound that’s in the verse and carries all the way through. I started playing along to it and then Ina started singing along, and the song was written over that. No drums were ever put down. "Headlines!" was released in 2010, which was the band's first Extended play on the EP, the band have made use of auto-tuning on their vocals, most notable on "Missing You" and "Higher" They said about the music on "Headlines!" "We finished ["Wordshaker"] and we'd come across some songs that we were really excited about. The songs that we had found were so current, and we'd written a couple of songs ourselves, we wanted to just get everything out now". The synth-laden "Higher" has become an instant fan fave following recent live performances and, with its infectious chorus and super-sassy lyrics.
"On Your Radar" the third studio album from the band, they said they were beginning to take risks in their music genre. They spoke; "I think every artist needs to, sort of, reinvent themselves and we don’t want any track to sound like it could have been on our previous albums. It’s going to be a step up from the last album but we’ll keep it The Saturdays-esque." The band described the songs lyrics as "playful" with a "drop-out chorus" and the song is often labelled "it’s a very cool" by the band. They described their album as "current", "fun", "naughty" and "girly". "Notorious" was described by critics "big" and that it was "quite amazing". Their new music was also compared to Rihanna, The Black Eyed Peas and Kelis' music. The Saturdays also teamed up with MNEK and Space Cowboy in order to help them to record "club bangers". "All Fired Up" is an Electro house and dance-pop track.
Solo projects.
Una Healy provided backing vocals for Ireland's Eurovision Song Contest 2006 entry, "Every Song Is a Cry for Love". Healy won Ireland's Glinsk Song Contest in both 2004 and 2006, Healy comes from a musical background and is the niece of country singer Declan Nerney. She is a cousin of Irish athlete Paul Hession and was an All-Ireland champion swimmer at age 9. and decided to teach herself to play using her mother's guitar and from then on began to write songs of her own. In 2006, Healy released an extended play, entitled "Sorry".
Rochelle Humes also rose to fame in 2001 when she joined band, S Club 8 alongside Sandford. Humes presented children's television programme "Smile" from 2004 to 2006.
Mollie King auditioned for "The X Factor" in 2005, however she was turned away by the judges. She joined girl-group, Fallen Angelz in 2006. The band failed to get the success they hoped and auditioned for "The X Factor" They made it to bootcamp but were turned away at the second stage. In 2007, she appeared on BBC Three's "Singing with the Enemy" with her previous girl band, Fallen Angelz 
Frankie Sandford first found fame in 2001 when she was previously in band, S Club 8. Sandford first took a solo project on when she featured on track, "Dreaming" along with Calvin Goldspink. The single charted at number nineteen on the UK Singles Charts. In 2010 Sandford took another solo project on and she featured on a song "Undercover Lover" with Kids in Glass Houses. She also appeared on the bands' "The Dirt Tour" (2010) for a number of dates. She appeared on television show "The Door" for charity where she was the first to be eliminated. In 2011 Zoo Magazine voted Sandford No. 1 Hottest Body in the World
Vanessa White appeared in several theatre productions, including the West End production of" The Lion King" as Young Nala and also played one of the King's daughters in The King And I from 2000–2002. She has a brother, Ryan, and a younger sister, Celine. Her vocal range has been compared to a number of American artists including, Nivea, Yummy Bingham, Javine and Deborah Cox. White provided guest vocals on Master Shortie's track, "Swagger Chick". In January 2010 White participated in the first series of British ITV1 celebrity reality television programme "Popstar to Operastar".
Discography.
Studio albums
Extended plays
Concert tours.
Headlining
Supporting
Guest act
