Pain & Gain is an upcoming action crime film written by Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely and directed by Michael Bay. The film is based on a 1999 series of "Miami New Times" articles by investigative journalist Pete Collins about "a couple of Florida steroid-abusing knucklehead bodybuilders who become criminals involved in an extortion ring and a kidnapping plot that goes horribly wrong." The film is scheduled for a release date of April 26, 2013.
Two members of the "Sun Gym Gang", Daniel Lugo and Adrian Doorbal received death sentences in Florida and sit on Florida's death row.
Plot.
Daniel Lugo (Mark Wahlberg) is a regular bodybuilder who works at the Sun Gym along with his friend Adrian Doorbal (Anthony Mackie). Sick of living the poor life Lugo concocts a plan to kidnap Victor Kershaw (Tony Shalhoub), a regular at the gym and a rich spoiled business man, and extort him by means of torture. With the help of recently released criminal Paul Doyle (Dwayne Johnson), the 'Sun Gym Gang' successfully gets Kershaw to sign over all his finances, but when Kershaw survives an attempted murder from the gang, he hires Detective Ed Du Bois (Ed Harris) to catch the criminals after the Miami Police Department fails to do so.
Production.
The film was first announced by Bay after the release of ' in which Bay stated he wanted to do the film between the second and third Transformers movies. However, the project was put on hold when Paramount gave the third film, ' a 2011 release date. 
On February 13, 2012, it was confirmed that the budget for the film would be funded by Paramount Pictures as part of a two-picture deal with Michael Bay and the budget would be $25 million (making it the cheapest Michael Bay film since his first feature "Bad Boys") thanks in part to Bay, Johnson and Wahlberg not taking salaries they are instead signing on in exchange for back ends on the film's profits. Bay later confirmed that production would begin in Miami the following April stating "I'm extremely excited to simplify my film career this spring with a great character piece". On February 17, 2012, reports surfaced that Ed Harris had officially joined the cast and that Rob Corddry was rumored to play John Mese, a former competitive bodybuilder who now owns the gym where Wahlberg's character works as a personal trainer. On February 23, 2012, it was confirmed that Anthony Mackie had joined the cast as "a bodybuilder and workout partner of Wahlberg's character Adrian Doorbal, who has little to show for his time in the gym and decides to get involved with the twisted plan".
On February 28, 2012, it was reported that Israeli supermodel Bar Paly and Lebanese-American actor Tony Shalhoub had joined the cast. Paly is cast as "an illegal immigrant and former beauty queen who dreams of becoming the next Marilyn Monroe. Wahlberg's character promises to make her a star, and she in turn agrees to do whatever he asks in the service of her new country". Shalhoub's role in the film is that of "Marc Schiller, the target of the kidnapping scheme". On March 5, 2012, it was reported that Scott Rosenberg was brought on to punch up the script. Rosenberg had worked with Bay previously on "Armageddon." In a statement on March 7, 2012, Bay reported the budget to be $22 million and that he was taking director's scale for the film.
On March 27, 2012, Rebel Wilson joined the cast as Ramona Eldridge. and principal photography began in Miami on March 31, 2012. On April 4, 2012, Dutch actress Yolanthe Sneijder-Cabau joined the cast for as the girlfriend of Wahlberg's character. On April 5, 2012, Ken Jeong joined the cast as a character named Johnny Wu. The official trailer for the film was released on December 19, 2012.
External links.
The original "Miami New Times" articles by Pete Collins
