Emilio Diogenes Estevez (; born May 12, 1962) is an American actor, film director, and writer. He started his career as an actor and is well known for being a member of the acting Brat Pack of the 1980s, starring in "The Breakfast Club" and "St. Elmo's Fire". He is also known for "Repo Man", "The Mighty Ducks" and its sequels, "Maximum Overdrive", "Bobby" (which he also wrote and directed), and his performances in Western films such as "Young Guns" and its sequel.
Early life.
Emilio Estevez was born in Staten Island, New York, the oldest child of actor Martin Sheen (born Ramón Estévez) and artist Janet Templeton. His siblings are Ramon Estevez, Charlie Sheen (born Carlos Estevez), and Renée Estevez. Estevez initially attended school in the New York public school system but transferred to a prestigious private academy once his father's career took off. He lived on Manhattan's Upper West Side until his family moved West in 1968 when Sheen was cast in "Catch-22". Growing up in Malibu, California, he rejected the local private school (it was "for parents who have everything except a relationship with their children") in favor of Santa Monica High School. When Estevez was 11 years old, his father bought the family a portable movie camera. Estevez, his brother Charlie, and their high school friends, Sean Penn, Chris Penn, Chad Lowe and Rob Lowe used the camera to make short films, which Estevez would often write. Estevez also appeared in a short anti-nuclear power film produced at his high school, entitled "Meet Mr. Bomb." Emilio was 14 when he accompanied his father to the Philippines, where Sheen was shooting "Apocalypse Now". Estevez appeared as an extra in "Apocalypse Now", but the scenes were deleted. When they returned to Los Angeles, Estevez co-wrote and starred in a high-school play about Vietnam veterans called "Echoes of an Era" and invited his parents to watch it. Sheen recalls being astonished by his son's performance, and "began to realise: my God, he’s one of us." After graduating Santa Monica High in 1980, he refused to go to college and instead went into acting. Unlike his brother Charlie, Emilio and his other siblings did not adopt their father's stage name. Emilio reportedly liked the alliteration of the double ‘E’ initials, and "didn't want to ride into the business as 'Martin Sheen's son'."
Career.
Brat Pack years.
His first role was in a drama produced by the Catholic Paulist order. Soon after, he made his stage debut with his father in "Mister Roberts" at Burt Reynolds' Dinner theater in Jupiter, Florida (this was the only job his father ever placed him in). Since then, father and son worked together in the 1982 ABC-TV film about juveniles in jail, "In the Custody of Strangers", in which Emilio did the casting.
Estevez received great attention during the 1980s for being a member of the Brat Pack and was credited as the leader of the group of young actors. Estevez and Rob Lowe established the Brat Pack when cast as supporting "Greasers" in an early Brat Pack movie, "The Outsiders" based on the novel. Lowe was cast as C. Thomas Howell's older brother Sodapop and Estévez as the drunken Two-Bit Matthews. During production, he also approached his character as a laid-back guy and thought up Two-Bit's interest in Mickey Mouse, shown by his uniform of Mickey Mouse T-shirts and watching of cartoons.
Besides his roles in "In the Custody of Strangers" and "The Outsiders", his credits include NBC-TV's thrillers "Nightmares" and "Tex", the 1982 film version of another S.E. Hinton story. He bought the movie rights to a third Hinton book, "That Was Then, This Is Now", and wrote the screenplay. His father predicted he'd have to direct to feel the full extent of his talents, describing him as "an officer, not a soldier."
After "The Outsiders", Estevez appeared as the punk-rocker turned car-repossessor Otto Maddox in the cult film "Repo Man" before co-starring in "The Breakfast Club" and "St. Elmo's Fire". Following the success of these back-to-back Brat Pack films, he starred in "That Was Then, This Is Now" (which he co-wrote), the horror film "Maximum Overdrive" (for which he was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award), and the crime drama "Wisdom" (with fellow Brat Packer Demi Moore). Estevez was originally cast in "Platoon" to be private Chris Taylor but was forced to drop out after production was delayed for two years; the role eventually went to his younger brother Charlie Sheen. He went on to lead roles in the comedy/action film "Stakeout" and the westerns "Young Guns" and "Young Guns II".
Late career.
In the early 1990s, Estevez directed, wrote, and starred with his brother Charlie in a comedy about garbagemen, "Men at Work". Estevez later stated, "People come up to me on the street and say, "Men at Work" is the funniest movie I ever saw in my life. But, you know, I do have to question how many movies these people have seen."
In 1992, he found the career longevity that escaped other Brat Packers by starring in "The Mighty Ducks" as Coach Gordon Bombay, a lawyer and former college hockey star and minor hockey prodigy looking to forget the past, forced into coaching a pee wee hockey team as a form of community service. The film turned out to be one of Disney’s most successful franchises. It was followed by two sequels. The following year Estevez starred in three films: the dark thriller "Judgment Night", the spoof comedy "Loaded Weapon 1", and comedy/action film "Another Stakeout", which was the sequel to his earlier film "Stakeout".
Estevez has acted alongside his father several times. He starred in (and also directed) the 1996 "The War at Home" in which he played a Vietnam War veteran dealing with posttraumatic stress disorder, while Sheen played his unsympathetic father. He also guest-starred in one episode of "The West Wing" as a younger version of his father's character (Jed Bartlet).
Estevez also appeared in an uncredited role in the Saturn Award-nominated film "". From 1998 to 1999, he appeared in three television movies: the spaghetti western flick "Dollar for the Dead" (1998), the comedy "Late Last Night" (1999), and "Rated X" (2000), which he also directed. In 2000, Estevez starred in the Moxie! Award-winning thriller "Sand", as part of an ensemble cast that also included Denis Leary, Jon Lovitz, Harry Dean Stanton, and Julie Delpy.
In 2003, he made his voice acting debut when he helped create the English dubbed version of "The 3 Wise Men" with his father. Later, Estevez starred in "The L.A. Riot Spectacular" and also voiced the English version of the film "Arthur and the Invisibles". In 2008, he guest-starred on his brother's sitcom "Two and a Half Men" as an old friend of Charlie Sheen's character. (His father Martin Sheen had also guest starred in 2005.)
In an interview a month after the 2010 Oscar tribute to John Hughes he explained his absence as publicity shyness: "I've never been a guy that went out there to get publicity on myself. I never saw the value in it."
Directing career.
Aside from acting, Estevez has also directed television shows and motion pictures. He made his directorial debut with the film "Wisdom", which made Emilio the youngest person to ever write, direct, and star in, a single major motion picture. Most recently, he has directed episodes of the television series "Cold Case", "Close to Home", "The Guardian", "" and "Numb3rs". The films he has directed include "Men at Work" and "The War at Home".
His most famous film was "Bobby", which took over six years to write. Producing the film nearly bankrupted him as the domestic box office gross was not able to cover production costs. The movie scored him some fans outside of the states, mainly in Europe. He won a Hollywood Film Award and received an unprecedented 7 minute standing ovation at the Venice Film Festival.
Estevez has stated that he will direct and star in an independent film called "The Bang Bang Club", and that he currently has six screenplays that he has written that remain unproduced. Estevez said during an interview after one of the first screenings of "Bobby" that his next film will likely be "Johnny Longshot".
Under Estevez Sheen Productions, a Warner Bros.-affiliated company, Emilio filmed his latest project, "The Way", in Spain where he directs his father in a story about a man who decides to make the Camino de Santiago after the tragic death of his son in the French Pyrénées. It was released in the United States on October 7, 2011.
Music videos.
Estevez appeared in John Parr's "St. Elmo's Fire (Man in Motion)" music video from the soundtrack of his film with the same name, where he played Kirby Keger. The music video featured all seven of the main cast members of the film, looking sadly through the foggy windows of a run-down and fire-damaged version of the St. Elmo's Bar set.
Estevez is a close friend of Jon Bon Jovi. He appeared in Bon Jovi's music video "Blaze of Glory" as Billy the Kid. In turn, Bon Jovi also made a cameo appearance in "Young Guns II". "Blaze of Glory" was in the "Young Guns II" soundtrack and was nominated for an Academy Award. In 2000, Estevez made an appearance in another Bon Jovi video, "Say It Isn't So," along with Matt LeBlanc, Claudia Schiffer, and Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Personal life.
Estevez is of Irish and Spanish descent from the Galician region, on his father's side. He is environmentally conscious and is a fan and friend of interior designer Kari Whitman. His father is a devout Catholic and his mother was raised a Southern Baptist, and he has stated that his own religion is a "work in progress".
Family and relationships.
Estevez is the older brother of Charlie Sheen and son of Martin Sheen. Estevez has two children with ex-girlfriend and Wilhelmina model Carey Salley. They had a steady relationship until eventually breaking up in 1986. They share a son, Taylor Levi Estevez (born June 22, 1984), and a daughter, Paloma Rae Estevez (born February 15, 1986). He was briefly engaged to actress Demi Moore and they remain good friends. The two starred as a feuding married couple in "Bobby", alongside Moore's real-life (then) husband Ashton Kutcher.
On April 29, 1992, Estevez married singer-choreographer Paula Abdul. They divorced in May 1994, with Abdul later stating that she wanted children and Estevez, who already had two children, did not.
In 2006, Estevez announced his engagement to Macedonian writer Sonja Magdevski. The couple live in a Spanish-style home on a one-acre lot in Malibu and have filled almost every square inch of the property with vines. Emilio, an avid gardener, was quoted as saying, “My grandfather, who was from Galicia, Spain, grew up tending a vineyard and growing potatoes and raising chickens and all of these things that are coming naturally to me now,” he said. “I was drawn to it in an unconscious way.” His vineyard, named Casa Dumetz, is where he goes to escape from the movie business as well as for inspiration for writing scripts.
Awards and nominations.
ALMA Awards
Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards
Golden Globe Awards
Hollywood Film Festival
Western Heritage Awards
Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards
Razzie Awards
Screen Actors Guild Awards
Shorty Awards
Venice Film Festival
External links.
! colspan="3" style="background: #DAA520;" | Bronze Wrangler Awards
! colspan="3" style="background: #DAA520;" | Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards
