Grades in the realm of education are standardized measurements of varying levels of comprehension within a subject area.
Grades can be assigned in letters (for example, A, B, C, D, or F), as a range (for example 4.0–1.0), as a number out of a possible total (for example out of 20 or 100), as descriptors (excellent, great, satisfactory, needs improvement), in percentages, or, as is common in some post-secondary institutions in some countries, as a Grade Point Average (GPA). GPA is calculated by taking the number of grade points a student earned in a given period of time divided by the total number of credits taken. The GPA can be used by potential employers or further post-secondary institutions to assess and compare applicants. A "Cumulative Grade Point Average" is a calculation of the average of all of a student's grades for all semesters and courses completed up to a given academic term, whereas the GPA may only refer to one term.
History of grading.
Keith Hoskin argues that the concept of grading students' work quantitatively was developed by a tutor named William Farish and first implemented by the University of Cambridge in 1792. Hoskin's assertion has been questioned by Christopher Stray, who finds the evidence for Farish as the inventor of the numerical mark to be unpersuasive. Stray's article elucidates the complex relationship between the mode of examination (testing), in this case oral or written, and the varying philosophies of education these modes imply, both to teacher and student. As a technology, grading both shapes and reflects many fundamental areas of educational theory and practice.
International grading systems.
Most nations have individual grading systems unique to their own schools. However, several international standards for grading have arisen recently.
International Baccalaureate.
There is no GPA for any International Baccalaureate Program. The IB Diploma and IB MYP are summatively graded on a 1 -7 point scale which is criterion referenced with 7 the highest score achievable. Scores are always in whole numbers only.
Grading systems by country.
Asia.
Different countries in Asia have a variety of grading scales. Grading scales for some countries in the world part are described in this article.
China.
Hong Kong.
Below are the percentage and it grade and GPA equivalents
Secondary Schools
India.
Until high school, an averaged percentage is provided. A percentage over 80 is considered excellent; between 60-80 is considered to be 'first division'; between 40-60 is considered to be 'second division', though these terminologies and classifications depend on the 'board of education'.
Universities here follow Percentage System and 10 point GPA System. The Percentage System works as : Maximum Marks:100, Minimum Marks: 0, Minimum Marks Required for Passing: 35.
1st and 2nd Semester–40% of the aggregate marks,
3rd and 4th Semester-60% of the aggregate marks,
5th and 6th Semester-80% of the aggregate marks,
7th and 8th Semester-100% of the aggregate marks.
The 10 point GPA is categorized as follows: 10-9.1 (A+)- Best, 9-8.1(A)-Excellent, 8-7.1(B+)-exceptionally good, 7-6.1(B)-very good, 6-5.1(C+)- good, 5-4.1(C)- average, 4-3.1(D+)-fair,3.1-2(D)- Pass,2-0(E+-E)-fail. A GPA of over 7 is generally considered to be an indication of a strong grasp of all subjects.
Iran.
In schools, grades are based on 20. Depending on the school and the grade of study, a good mark varies, but in most occasions 16 or higher is considered to be a good one. 
This system of grading based on 20 is also common in universities, but sometimes percent scoring is also used in higher educational systems.
Japan.
In Japan, most higher education institutions have grades from 1–100, But few universities apply the U.S. American grading system.
Kuwait.
Kuwait employs a four point grading system and percentages.
Lebanon.
In Lebanon, most schools use a 0–20 scale where the passing grade is 10 out of 20 or in some cases 12 out of 20. However there's a variety of grading systems used. Some schools that offer the IB (International Baccalaureate) or even Lebanese Bac use the 0–100 scale, 60 being the average score. Some use the American system. However in the typical school offering a Lebanese system, getting high grades is very hard, because teachers do not use the full scale. For instance the highest score one can earn in essay writing in some schools is 14 out of 20. All scores are based out of 20. Yet each subject has a weight for the overall average. This weight is determined by the credit hours. For instance math (6hours/week) x 20 (the base grade) = 120 (weight)
Example: Student's grades: (math 13.33/20, English 13.4/20, biology 8.25/20)
English: 5 credits x 13.4 = 67 out of possible 100
Math: 6 credits x 13.33 = 79.98 out of possible 120
Biology: 2 credits x 8.25 = 16.5 out of possible 40
Total points earned = 163.48 out of possible 260
Overall Average= 12.575 out of 20
U.S. Equivalence 
Scale / U.S. Grade Equiv.
14–20 / A
12–13.9 / B+
11–11.9 / B
10.5–10.9 / B−
10.1–10.4 / C+
10 / C
9–9.9 / C−
7.5–8.9 / D
0–7.5 / F
However in most universities the American grading system is used. Others use the 0–100 scale where the passing grade is 60 or 70 depending on the course. Yet French system universities use the 0–20 grading scale.
Nepal.
Pokhara University Grading System
</td>
</tr>
</table>
Calculation of SGPA(Sessional Grading Point Average)
SGPA=
CGPA(Cummulative Grading Point Average)
CGPA=
where,Federal Board of Education – Pakistan. Fbise.edu.pk. Retrieved on 28 September 2011.</ref>
Nowadays most universities of Engineering and Technology follows following grading system .
Palestine.
Schools have grades from 1–100 starting from the 4th grade on. In Universities both numerical and alphabetical grade systems can be found, it is up to the teacher.
Saudi Arabia.
Most of the universities and colleges and schools in Saudi Arabia are very similar to United States except the way the grades are said.
Singapore.
Secondary School (13–16 years old)
South Korea.
Middle School (7–9th grade)</ref>
If someone is given a "pass with distinction" in his Matura, Diploma and PhD, all curricula absolved in the regular duration time he can have a 'promotio sub auspiciis presidentis rei publicae', (literally "under the auspices of the President of the Republic", meaning that the Federal President will personally attend the graduation ceremony), which is the highest honor in Austria only done by 1 of 2500 graduates (.04%) yearly.
Albania.
In Albania, grades from 1 to 10 are used, with some schools allowing decimals (up to the hundredth digit) and some others only allowing whole numbers.
Most universities evaluate classes with two mid exams and a final. The final exam encompasses the whole course syllabus, whereas the mid exams usually review half. In some schools, if the average grade of the two mid exams is equal to or higher than 7.00, the student is able to pass the class without the need to take a final exam (since there are only two exams, some teachers also pass students who average 6.50; others weigh in the decision based on the student's performance in class). An average of less than 4.00 is failing; students who score such an average are not allowed to take the final exam.
In high schools, the year is divided into three trimesters and classes are usually yearlong. Students need an average of 6.00 or higher in the three trimestral exams to avoid having to take a final to pass the class. In the event of a student scoring less than 6.00 in the third trimester, he or she would have to take a final exam, regardless of average. This is considered controversial, since the last trimestral exam is not more important than the first two, but the rule stands to prevent students who have already reached the minimum average (e.g., two 10.00 in the first two give a student the lowest possible average of 6.33) from not making an effort during the last three months of the year.
Belgium.
In Belgian Universities a scale from 0 to 20 is used on a per subject basis, a weighted average is then computed on scale from 0 to 20, 10 being the passing grade average (satisfactory). An average of 13.5 gets you a distinction grade (cum laude), 15 means high distinction (magna cum laude) and an average of 16.5 yields the highest distinction (summa/maxima cum laude). 
Belgian secondary schools use a scale from 0 to 100 or even above for (big) exams (50 usually being the passing grade). On report cards, certain schools also give grades on a percentage scale (0 to 100) while others use a 0–10 scale. Those total scores are weighted averages of exams and tests.
In Belgian secondary schools, there are 6 years. In the first three years, students have to do exams every term. The scores are usually given in percentages. On the end of the school year, a total average score is given.
Colleges use the same scale from 0 to 20 as Belgian Universities, although homework and presence may influence up to 50% or even more of these 20 points (situation ).
Scaling varies significantly depending on the university or college.
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, grades from 5 to 1 are used in primary and secondary education, while grades from 10 to 5 are used at universities.
Bulgaria.
Grades as, e.g., "Good" (3.50), or "Excellent" (5.75), are common. Every passing grade at or above the .50 mark is prefixed with the term of the higher grade. The minimum is 2.00; grades below 3.00 are failing grades, and the maximum is 6.00. Grades like "Very Good" (5-) and "Average" (3+) are also possible - these are ignored in calculations.
Roughly, the Bulgarian grade system can be equated to the American one as the following: 6=A, 5=B, 4=C, 3=D, and 2=F. Also, in accordance with the Australian system, 6=HD, 5=D, 4=Cr, 3=P, and 2=F.
The most common formula used in Bulgarian schools is currently Grade=(6* number of correct answers)/ total number of questions.
That way if a student has answered 7 out of 10 questions correctly, their mark should be: (6*7)/10=4.20, which is graded as Good 4 or an average performance.
Croatia.
In colloquial Croatian, grades are referred to be their numerical values: "jedinica", "dvojka", "trojka", "četvorka", "petica". In the Kvarner region of Croatia "jedinica" is also known as "komad" or "kolac" and "dvojka" is also known as "duja".
Students with failing grades (1 or F) are allowed to carry those grades throughout the school year, but are required to improve them to passing grades (2 or better) in order to finish the year. Failure to pass one class results in the student being held back a year.
Czech Republic.
Plus and minus signs often follow grades in Czech Republic to further differentiate marks. E.g., "2+" corresponding to the US 'B+'. Intervals may also be used, e.g. "2–3" to refer to a grade halfway between 2 and 3.
On a university level only grades 1, 2 and 3 are "pass" grades; anything worse than 3 is automatically a failing grade. Some universities adopt six-point scale, 'A' corresponding to the former "1", 'B' to "1–2" etc.
Denmark.
The current scale, "syv-trins-skalaen" ("The 7-step-scale"), was introduced in 2007, replacing the old "13-skala" ("13-scale"). The new scale is designed to be compatible with the ECTS-scale.
"Syv-trins-skalaen" consists of seven different grades, ranging from 12 to −3, with 12 being the highest. This new scale remains an "absolute" scale, meaning that, proportions are not taken into consideration.
Finland.
Several systems are in use in different educational institutions in Finland. The "school grade" system has historically been a scale of 0 to 10, but all grades lower than 4 have been discarded. Thus, it is now divided between 4, the failing grade, and 5–10, the succeeding grades. Upper secondary school has same grades for courses and course exams as comprehensive school but matriculation examination grades are in Latin. Universities and vocational institutions use a scale of 0 (fail) and 1–5 (pass), or fail/pass. Some schools e.g. Savon Ammatti- ja Aikuisopisto, uses grading from 0 (fail) and 1-3 (pass). The professor selects which grading scheme is used; short, optional courses typically have pass/fail grades.
France.
In France, schools grades typically range from either 0 (worst) to 20 (best) or from 0 (worst) to 10 (best). A mark below the average (10 out of 20 or 5 out of 10, depending on the scale) is usually a fail.
For the French National High School Level (baccalauréat), a grade of 8–10 typically gives the right to take an additional oral exam in order to try to improve that average to 10 and pass. A grade between 10 and 12 is a simple pass (without grade) ; between 12 and 14 (more rarely 13–14) the grade is called "assez bien" (rather good) ; 14–16 is called "bien" (good) ; above 16 is "très bien" (very good). An exams jury can award the "Félicitations du Jury" for any mark, though they usually reserve it to a candidate who has achieved 18/20 or more.
Grade equivalence between France and the U.S.
Grading Scale
Scale U.S. Grade Equiv.
14-20 = A ;
12-13.9 = B+;
11-11.9 = B;
10.5-10.9 = B-;
10.1-10.4 = C+;
10 = C;
9-9.9 = C-;
8-8.9 = D;
0-7.9 = F;
Germany.
In Germany, school grades vary from 1 (very good, "sehr gut") to 6 (insufficient, "ungenügend"). In the final classes of German Gymnasium schools that prepare for university studies, a point system is used with 15 points being the best grade and 0 points the worst. The percentage causes the grade can vary from teacher to teacher. The percentages shown in the table are the ones used in the "Oberstufe" (final classes).
Hungary.
In Hungary, a five point scale is used since 1950. There is one fail grade: 1 – "elégtelen" (insufficient). In general, the lower limit of pass is 50% or 60%, or one mark (point) above. The pass grades are 2 – "elégséges" (sufficient or pass), 3 – "közepes" (mediocre or satisfactory), 4 – "jó" (good) and 5 – "jeles" (excellent).
Beyond the five point scale that is almost exclusively used at the end of the semester at several levels of education (i.e. elementary school, high school, university), during the academic year teacher may use a further detailed scale, especially in the elementary school. A comma sign (, ) after the grade lowers it (pronanciated below, "alá"); an apostrophe ( ’ ) after the grade raises (above, "fölé"); a grade half way between two grades is derived from the lower grade divided by the better grade, like 3"/"4 ("háromnegyed") that equals to 3.5, 4"/"5 that is between 4 and 5 etc. Sometimes "5*", five starred ("csillagos ötös") is used for showing outstanding performance throughout the semester.
Iceland.
In Iceland, grades from 0 to 10 are used.
and 5 is usually the lowest passing grade
but in some cases the lowest passing grade can be 3.5
If the student gets below 5 in the subject, he fails.
Ireland.
The two government regulated educational qualifications are the Junior Certificate (usually taken at 15/16) and the Leaving Cerficiate (usually taken at between the ages of 17 and 19).
Passing or failing the Junior Cert (or any exams in Irish secondary schools), has no bearing on whether or not students can graduate or continue on.
You can get 20 points for an A1 in foundation level subjects. If you get any less than a B2, which is 5 points, you will get no points.
The points system allocates all university places in Ireland for Irish applicants.
Irish universities vary in their grading systems. For example, UCD (University College Dublin) awards letter grades and corresponding GPA values similar to the United States system, but 1, 2.1, 2.2 etc. for degrees, while TCD (Trinity College Dublin) awards all grades as 1, 2.1, 2.2 etc.
Italy.
In Italy, high-school grades may vary from 10 (excellent) to 1 (impossible to assess), with the sufficiency being 6.
In many high schools (Licei) grades vary within a limited range, between 2 and 8, often with each professor applying his/her own custom, even if the total theoretical interval is always from 1 to 10.
When a professor wants to apply a more precise scale, instead of using the full 1–10 scale (which would have made their scale not comparable with that of other professors) they would often insert a plethora of symbols and decimals: the range between 5 and 6 would then be covered, in sequence, by 5+, 5++, 5½, 5/6, 6−−, 6−. Sufficiency starts at 6.
As these symbols (except ½) have no clear mathematical value, calculating end-year averages could be somewhat arbitrary; therefore, there has been a push since 2008 with the Gelmini reform to uniform the system to the 0–10 scale.
The "discipline grade", assessing a high-school pupil's behavior, used to obey different rules: it was almost always set to 9 by default, with 8 used for less disciplined pupils. 10 is less usual, though it is very much possible these days to receive it. 7 is extremely rare and used to be a failing grade.
Recently, there has been a school reform, so now the average grade of a student includes the discipline grade, which now is positive from 6 to 10 as with all subjects, though many schools are not accustomed to this grading system yet.
In universities a point system is used for exams, with 30 points being the best grade and 18 the minimum passing grade. This come from the fact that exams were traditionally performed with 3 examiners; each of them had to express his opinion in a 1-10 scale, the final grade was the sum of the singular evaluations. In a 1-10 scale the sufficiency is 6, that is why in a 1-30 scale the minimum grade to pass is 3*6 = 18. Nowadays, the way an exam is performed is up to the professor (number of examiners, whether written, oral, or both, etc.), but the traditional grading system remained.
Degrees have a similar point system, in which however the highest grade can be 110, 100 or even 70, depending on faculty regulations.
A "cum laude" notation ("e lode" in Italian) is used as an increasing level of the highest grade for both exams and degrees, in all its levels in case of outstanding performance.
Latvia.
The academic grading system in Latvia has recently been changed to a ten-point scale, where "10" () is the highest achievable grade, and "1" () is awarded for extremely poor performance. The minimal passing grade is "4" (), though some universities have a minimum passing grade of "5" ().
The absence of any kind of performance is indicated by "nv" ( 'no assessment possible'); in the past, the mark for absence of work was "0" (). Teachers in lower classes and for minor assignments in higher classes are encouraged to award one of two grades: "i" ( 'counted') for a passing grade, and "ni" ( 'not counted') for a failing grade. The grade of 10 is reserved for exceptional achievements. 9 is most commonly used for an USA equivalent of an A.
Lithuania.
In Lithuania, the grading system has been changed to a 10-point scale since 1995. Prior to that, Soviet Lithuania had a 5-point grading scale. 10 is the highest achievable grade for an excellent performance and 1 is the lowest. Usually, 1 is written when there is no work present at all (called "kuolas" in the academic jargon, meaning 'stake'), and most teachers tend to keep 2 the lowest grade and rarely mark work as 1.
The minimal grade for passing a subject in school is usually 4.
Teachers in lower classes are encouraged to write marks such as lg – labai gerai (very good), g – gerai (good), patenkinamai (sufficient to pass) or nepatenkinamai (insufficient to pass).
Some subjects (like Physical Education or Music) can be pass-fail grades, having only įsk – įskaityta (passed) or neįsk – neįskaityta (not passed).
The same system is used for evaluating students' work in universities. However, the minimal grade to pass is usually 5.
In principal, the grading system in Lithuania is the same as in the Netherlands and can also be directly converted into percentage marks.
Netherlands.
In the Netherlands, grades from 1.0 up to 10.0 are used, with 1 being worst and 10 being best. This system can correspond to a percentile system (1 means 0–5% correct and 10 means 95–100% correct) but sometimes points are deducted for number of faults on a test (typically, on vocabulary or topographical tests with more than 10 questions, each fault will nonetheless lead to a reduction in score of one. So 2 faults on a 50 question vocabulary test would constitute an 8) . The grades 9 and 10 are hardly ever given on large examinations (on average, a 9 is awarded in only 1.5%, and a 10 in 0.5% of the cases). Generally, either one or two decimal places are used, and a +/− means a quarter (rounded to either 0.8 or 0.3 if only one decimal place is used). Thus, a grade of 6.75 (or 6.8) could be written as 7−, whereas a grade of 7+ would count for 7.25 or 7.3, although the grades stylized as 7- or 7+ are hardly used.
A 5.5 constitutes a pass, whereas 5.4 and below constitute a fail. If no decimal places are used, 6 and up is a pass and 5 and below is a fail; however, in this case of grading in full numbers there exists sometimes "6-", which would officially translate to 5.75, but can be interpreted here as "barely, but just good enough". Roughly, a student scores a 5.5 (pass) when 2/3 (66.67%) of an exam is correct. If the grade would be a 5.49 and one decimal is used, the 5.49 will be a 5.5, but if no decimals are used (usually at the end of the year) the 5.49 will end up as a 5 which indicates a fail.
Depending on the specific university, some students who finish their studies with an average of 8.0 or higher, could get the nomination "cum laude" (which is comparable with "summa cum laude" as awarded in Germany and the United States).
Norway.
In primary school ("Barneskole", from age 6 to 13) no official grades are given. However, the teachers write an individual comment or analysis on tests and in the end of every term.
Lower secondary school ("Ungdomsskole"; age 13–16) and upper secondary school ("Videregående skole"; age 16–19) use a scale running from 1 through 6, with 6 being the highest and 2 the lowest passing grade. For non-final tests and mid-term evaluations the grades are often post fixed with + or − (except 6+ and 1−). It is also common to use grades such as 5/6 or 4/3 indicating borderline grades. However, the grades students get on their diploma ("Vitnemål"), are single-digit grades 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 or 6. The student's non-weighted grade point average is also given on the Vitnemål.
In higher education, according to the ECTS-system, grades for undergraduate and postgraduate examinations are awarded according to a graded scale from A (highest) to F (lowest), with E as the minimum passing grade. The ECTS system was implemented at Norway's universities and colleges in the early 2000s, with most schools having converted to ECTS by 2003.
Before 2003, the formerly most common system of grades used at university level was based on a scale running from 1.0 (highest) through 6.0 (lowest), with 4.0 being the lowest passing grade. The way the new Bologna system was introduced implies that students, who had started their studies while the old system still was in effect, will graduate with transcripts containing grades from both systems (i.e. both numbers and letters).
An academic year has two semesters, from August to December and from January to June, although exceptions occur. Courses are measured in "studiepoeng" according to the ECTS standard (European Credit Transfer System credits). A normal full-time study progression awards 60 credits (studiepoeng/stp) per year (30 per semester). Most institutions either use a 7.5, 8, 10, 12, 15 or 20 credit block system.
Poland.
Acceptable is a passing grade.
Grades (especially expressed numerically) might be suffixed with "+" (plus) or "-" (minus). On rare occasion "=" (double minus) is used, especially as "2=" to express lowest possible passing grade.
The scores corresponding to each grade vary highly from institution to institution and from course to course, but usually a score of 60 or 61% is required to obtain the lowest passing grade (3.0).
Scores "zal." and "nzal." are used when course require only attendance and/or isn't so important (e.g. sport).
Portugal.
From the 10th grade onwards, including tertiary education, a 20-point grading scale is used, with 20 being the highest grade possible and 9.5 the minimum grade for passing. This 20-point system is used both for test scores and grades.
Romania.
There is no 0, and 1 is given only for cheating.
If a student scores 86%, he will be given a grade of 8.60, which will be rounded to a 9.
Russia.
Qualifiers + and – are often used to add some degree of differentiation between the grades: e.g., 4+ is better than 4, but not quite as good as 5−. Grading varies greatly from school to school, university to university, and even teacher to teacher, even for courses that lend themselves to objective marking, such as mathematics and applied sciences. Even though the grades technically range from 1 to 5, 1 is not common and is rarely given for academic reasons—in many cases, a 1 is given as a result of failure to show up for or to complete an exam. A 2 grade usually means that the student showed no or little knowledge in a subject.
It may be worth mentioning that 1 is somewhat an exotic grade in Russian schools, but it does exist officially. The generally used grades are 2 to 5. Plus (+) and minus (–) modifiers follow the same tendency; they are rarely used in middle school and almost never in colleges or universities. Some institutions and teachers, dissatisfied with the five-point scale, work with various larger ones, but these grading systems are not recognized by the state and require conversion for official use.
A considerably more complex grading system has been implemented for the recently introduced Unified state examinations. In this system, a "primary grade" is the sum of points for completed tasks, with each of the tasks having a maximum number of points allocated to it. The maximum total primary grade varies by subject, so that one might obtain a primary grade of 23 out of 37 in mathematics and a primary grade of 43 out of 80 in French. The primary grades are then converted into final or "test grades" by means of a sophisticated statistical calculation, which takes into account the distribution of primary grades among the examinees. This system has been criticized for its lack of transparency.
In universities, the some of subjects are graded on a "Pass/No pass" (Credit/No Credit) basis (зачёт/незачёт, pronounced "zachòt/nezachòt"), and the rest are typically graded on the four-point scale. The "Pass/No Pass" grades do not have any official numeric representation. When "zachòt" – (credit- or pass-) type subjects are graded as "Pass/Not pass", this simply represents a student's good or poor knowledge of a subject. Each university implements its own understanding of the appropriate level of knowledge a student should have in order to pass studied subjects. Students in Russia must pass all of the offered subjects in order to graduate.
Since the word "zachòt" can be translated variously into English (e.g. as "credit" or "pass"), this type of grading is a source of problems for Russian students applying to Western universities. Such grades may confuse Western universities and complicate accurate calculation of students' GPAs in Western systems.
Ukraine.
Ukraine introduced a new grading system in autumn 2000, which replaced the existing Soviet grading system.
The new system provides grades that lie between 1 and 12 and are matched with the 5-point grade system that was used previously, as presented in the table below. 12 being an equivalent of honors/AP course "A+" in the US, it is usually given only for significant achievements or exceptionally creative work, hence 11 is the grade that would be called A in the United States.
Turkey.
In Turkey, grades from 0 to 5 are used.
European academic grading.
With the exception of Liechtenstein, which uses the Swiss grading system, and Moldova, which uses the Romanian grading system, the majority of European countries create their own academic grading standards. Most involve combinations of the key elements of grading, and all are used to evaluate students' performance on a scale of passing to failing (or comprehending to not comprehending material).
Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, United Kingdom
North America.
Canada.
Alberta.
There is no universal percentage grade associated with any letter grade in the Province of Alberta and such associations are made by professors or a bell curve.
Some universities in Alberta use or have used a 9 point grading scale: 9=A+, 8=A, 7=A−, 6=B+, 5=B, 4=B−, 3=C+, 2=C, 1=D, 0=F. See also the University of Alberta Office of the Registrar.
British Columbia.
In British Columbia universities: F is a failing grade. The following table is only an approximation; faculties within universities sometimes follow a different system between percentiles and corresponding letter grades.
Grade F is the sole failing mark.
Manitoba.
The University of Manitoba uses a GPA system.
GPA is Calculated taking total "points" and divided by school credit hours.
Newfoundland and Labrador.
Grade F is the sole failing mark.
Nova Scotia.
Grade F (or Grade E) is the sole failing mark.
Ontario.
Percentage and grade equivalence
The University of Ottawa uses a grade point average system with numbers ranging from 0 to 10 despite many schools using the 12 point system.
Official grading system at the University of Ottawa: Letter grade, numerical value, and percentage equivalency
Quebec, New Brunswick.
This scale is used by at least UQTR. The Université de Montréal scale is similar but goes from A+ to F. Université Laval uses a similar 4.33 scale. UQAM, Concordia University and Université de Sherbrooke uses a 4.3 scale. This scale is much alike many other scales used in Canada.
McGill University and the École polytechnique use a 4.0 scale. Université de Sherbrooke scale is from A+ to E.
The percent equivalent of each grade and the passing mark can vary. The passing mark in high school and college is 60%.
Saskatchewan.
The University of Saskatchewan and University of Regina both use a percentage grade system, universal across faculties and departments.
Mexico.
Mexican schools use a scale from 0 to 10 to measure students' scores. Since decimal scores are common, a scale from 0 to 100 is often used to remove the decimal point.
In some Universities, students who fail a subject have the option of taking an extraordinary test ("examen extraordinario", often shortened to "extra") that evaluates the contents of the entire period. Once the test is finished and the score is assessed, this score becomes the entire subject's score, thus giving failing students a chance to pass their subjects. Those who fail the extraordinary test have two more chances to take it; if the last test is failed, the subject is marked as failed and pending, and depending on the school, the student may fail the entire year.
Some private schools (particularly in higher levels of education) require a 70 to pass instead of the regular 60.
Grades are often absolute and not class-specific. It may be the case that the top of the class gets a final grade of 79. Curve-adjustment is rare. Grad-level students are usually expected to have grades of 80 or above to graduate. Students in the honor roll are usually those with an overall GPA of 90 or higher upon graduation, and some private universities will award them a "With Honors" diploma. Additionally, in some private universities, the pass scores is higher or lower depending from the kind of studies that are related with (for example, in some universities, in the case of Engineering, the minimum score is 7.3 and for Art Sciences is 8.8) and lower than this score is not acceptable.
United States.
The most popular grading system in the United States uses discrete evaluation in the form of letter grades. Many schools use a GPA (grade-point average) system in combination with letter grades. There are also many other systems in place. Some schools use a scale of 100 instead of letter grades. Others, including many Montessoris, eschew discrete evaluation in favor of pure discursive evaluation. There is no standardized system of grading in the United States. As such, those issues are left up to individual universities, schools and the regulatory authority of the individual states.
At most schools, colleges and universities in the United States, letter grades follow a five-point system, using the letters A, B, C, D and E/F, with A indicating excellent, C indicating average and E/F indicating failing. Additionally, most schools calculate a student's grade point average (GPA) by assigning each letter grade a number and averaging those numerical values. Generally, American schools equate an A with a numerical value of 4.0. Most graduate schools require a 3.0 (B) average to take a degree, with C or C- being the lowest grade for course credit. Most undergraduate schools require a 2.0, or C average to obtain a degree with a minimum of D or D – to pass a course. For most secondary schools, the minimum overall and course passes are both D or D−‍. Some districts, such as Mount Olive Township School District in New Jersey, have eliminated D as a passing grade for their students due to a high failure rate.
Whereas most American graduate schools use four-point grading (A, B, C, and E/F), several—mostly in the west, especially in California—do award D grades but still require a B average for degree qualification. Some American graduate schools use nine- or ten-point grading scales, such as the Rackham School of Graduate Studies at the University of Michigan, where 9.0 = A+, 8.0 = A, 7.0 = A−, and so on.
In a handful of states, within the United States, GPA scales can go above 4.0.
Whether a school uses E or F to indicate a failing grade typically depends on time and geography. Around the time of World War II, several states began to use E, while the majority of the country continued to use the F, which traces to the days of Pass/Fail grading (P and F). In recent years, some schools have begun using an N for failing grades, presumably to represent "No Credit". Another letter used to represent a failing grade is U, representing "unsatisfactory."
Chromatic variants ("+" and " – ") are used. In most 100-point grading systems, the letter grade without variants is centered around a value ending in five. The "plus" variant is then assigned the values near the nine digit and the "minus" variant is assigned the values near zero. Any decimal values are usually rounded. Thus, a score of 80 to 82 is a B−, a score 83 to 87 is a B and a score of 87 to 89 is a B+. The four-point GPA scale, the letter grade without variants is assigned to the integer. The "plus" and "minus" variants are then assigned to .3 above the integer and .3 below the integer, respectively. Thus, a B is equal to 3.0, a B+ is equal to 3.3, and a B – is equal to 2.7.
The A range is often treated as a special case. In most American schools, a 4.00 is regarded as perfect and the highest GPA one can achieve. Thus, an A, being the prime grade, achieves the mark of a 4.00; for the A+ mark, most schools still assign a value of 4.00, equivalent to the A mark, to prevent deviation from the standard 4.00 GPA system. However, the A+ mark, then, becomes a mark of distinction that has no impact on the student's GPA. A few schools, however, do assign grade values of 4.33 or 4.30; but the "scale" is still called "4.0", because grading scales (or "quality indices") take their numerical names from the highest "whole" number.
In many American high schools, students may also score above 4.0 if taking advanced, honors, Advanced Placement, or International Baccalaureate classes (for example, a "regular" A would be worth 4 points, but an A earned in an advanced class might be worth 4.5 or 5 points towards the GPA.).
There has been dispute over how colleges should look at grades from previous schools and high schools because one grade in one part of the country might not be the equivalent of a grade in another part of the country. In other words, an "A" might be 90–100 somewhere, and a 94–100 somewhere else. In middle and high schools that do not use a system based on academic credit, the grade point average is computed by taking the mean of all grades. In colleges and universities that use discrete evaluation, the grade point average is calculated by multiplying the quantitative values by the credit value of the correlative course, and then dividing the total by the sum of all credits.
In a standards-based grading system, a performance standard is set by a committee based on ranking anchor papers and grading rubrics, which demonstrate performance which is below, meeting, or exceeding the "standard." This standard is intended to be a high, world-class level of performance, which must be met by every student regardless of ability or class, although they are actually set by a committee with no reference to any other national standard. Levels are generally assigned numbers between zero and four. Writing papers may be graded separately on content (discussion) and conventions (spelling and grammar). Since grading is not based on a curve distribution, it is entirely possible to achieve a grading distribution in which all students pass and meet the standard. While such grading is generally used only for assessments, they have been proposed for alignment with classroom grading. However, in practice, grading can be much more severe than traditional letter grades. Even after ten years, some states, such as Washington, continue to evaluate over half of their students as "below standard" on the state mathematics assessment.
The 12 point GPA scale works as follows. Students receive 12 points for an A or A+, 11 points for an A-, 10 points for a B+, etc. for each grading period. Once a grading period is complete, the student's total grade points are divided by the total number of credits and a GPA is generated.
Oceania.
Australia.
A-90-100&: excellent
B-75-90%: good
C-40-75%: Satisfactoriness
D-25-40%: Limited
E-10-25%- Very Low
F- 10-%: Failed
Many courses also have Non-Graded Pass (NGP) and Non-Graded Fail (NGF), in which it is considered more appropriate to have qualitative than quantitative assessment. However, in some universities, an F1 category may be given a 'Pass Conceded' if the student's Weighted Average is greater than a nominated threshold. (More often than not, this is around the 53–55 range.)
At some universities, such as Macquarie University, University of Technology, Sydney, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) and Monash University, Melbourne, a GPA calculation out of 4 is calculated, whereby 4.0 = a High Distinction; 3.0 is a Distinction, 2.0 is a Credit, and 1.0 is a pass. In certain faculties, such as law, it is therefore possible to graduate with "honours" with a GPA of less than 2.5.
Whenever a course result is a Non-Graded Pass, the result will normally be disregarded in GPA calculation.
The term "course unit values" is used to distinguish between courses which have different weightings e.g. between a full year course and a single semester course.
The High School Certificate system varies from state to state. But in most states the ATAR (Australian Tertiary Admissions Rank) system determines tertiary positions. Government Supported Positions are given to students that achieve above a certain ATAR threshold. (An example of this is an ATAR of 85 for Civil Engineering at the University of New South Wales.) The value of the ATAR corresponds with their year 7 cohort, including students that did not complete year 12. An ATAR of 80.00, for example, indicates that students with that ATAR have performed in the HSC better than 80 percent of their year 7 cohort, had all these year 7 students completed year 12 and been eligible for an ATAR.
By contrast, in Queensland, graduating Year 12 students are awarded an OP of between 1 and 25, 1 being the most coveted; students are allocated their OP by means of a summation of marks from all their year 12 (and in some cases, year 11) courses, and also from the QCS (Queensland Core Skills) test, this being a series of four tests held at the end of secondary education.
New Zealand.
The New Zealand grading system is run by NZQA, the New Zealand Qualifications Association. Generally, there are 4 to 5 levels: Not Achieved (N), (Close to Achieved), Achieved (A), Merit (M), and Excellence (E). Plus or minus grades are sometimes applicable. 
In primary and intermediate schools, the grading is based more on the school than a national average.
GPA is not often used in New Zealand but when it is a 9-point scale is used. The grades equate to points as follows
South America.
Argentina.
In Argentina the GPA is calculated trimonthly, per semester or per year. Typically, grades vary between 1 and 10. The minimum grade for passing generally requires 60% which represents a grade 6, at Secondary School (some schools may require 70%).
In some universities, people over 25 years old can be admitted even if they couldn't complete high school, but they must pass an entry exam. For University the grades also vary between 1 and 10, although a 4 represents 60%, which is the grade required for approval.
Brazil.
In Brazil the GPA – known as "Coeficiente de Rendimento", or "Índice de Rendimento Acadêmico" – is calculated per semester or per year or both. The High School GPA is almost never used for college entrance evaluation in public universities (state funded and free of charge). To enter state colleges, Brazilian students must attend to entrance exams called "vestibulares". The most famous ones are "FUVEST", the entrance exam for University of São Paulo, and "ENEM", a national exam that ranks high school students to be accepted by federal funded colleges. The private colleges system also apply entrance exams, but some might use the GPA as an evaluation method.
During college, the GPA is calculated as a weighted average of grade and course hours and have a bigger importance than in the high school as it determines priority in receiving scholarships, for example.
A grade below 50% is surely a fail, although some schools have passing criteria of 60% or 70%.
Chile.
Grades are assigned with a numeric scale from 1.0 to 7.0, including at least one decimal, with 4.0 as the lowest passing grade (equivalent to 60%). Everything under a 4.0 is considered a "rojo" or "red mark," which equates to failing. For the PSU, "Prueba de Selección Universitaria" (UST, University Selection Test), the scale goes from 150 to 850 points. Depending on the university and the major, the student will need a minimum score to get accepted. The final score will depend on the points obtained in each test: Mathematics and Linguistics (both mandatory); Natural Sciences and History (only one of them mandatory) and the NEM score, "Notas de Enseñanza Media" (High School Grades) converted into the PSU Scale.
Colombia.
Although there are several grading systems in the country, the most widely used is a numeric scale from 0 to 5. 0 is the lowest and 5 the highest. When grading two decimals are commonly used. In order to approve a course, the student must obtain a grade equal or higher than 3.0, which corresponds to a 60% of the highest grade.
Since 2010 Colombian schools can choose how to grade their students.
In some universities and schools, the student must obtain a grade equal or higher than 3.5, which corresponds to a 70% of the highest grade.
Most final grades are the result of a simple average; but some private institutions can give different percentages to specific grades or grading periods.
Paraguay.
The grades vary from 1 to 5, where 5 is the maximum grade achievable and 1 the lowest. The minimum for pass is 2.
Peru.
Grades rank from 0 to 20, in an almost unique grading table. Passing grade is 11 in almost all schools and universities, while others prefer 13. In some preschool facilities, grades usually vary from F to A+, following the American system, and in a few Colleges, passing grade is 10.
Uruguay.
High grades in Uruguay are very hard to achieve. Grades vary from 1 to 12. 1 is the lowest and 12 is the highest. To pass an exam or a course requires 6 out of 12 in high school and university (if private university), and 3 out of 12 if attending a public university. The excellence grades are 10, 11 and 12. Both (6 in high school and 3 in public universities) means that 50% of the exam/course is correct. Some private universities grade their students on a percentage basis, being 70% the approval grade. In Universidad Católica del Uruguay, the grades vary from 1 to 6, where 3 is the minimum for pass.
Venezuela.
Grades in Venezuela may vary according to the education level, but normally the grading system is numerical, and ranges from 00 to 20, 00 being the lowest and 20 being the highest, and 10 being the pass mark, equivalent to a "D" in the United States. This is not required, however, and several schools in Venezuela deviate from this grading system, and follow a system similar, if not identical to, the United States, in which letters are used as grades.
GPA in Job Market.
College and post-college students often wonder how much weight their GPA carries in future employment. The employer, company and industry plays the largest factor in answering this question. According to Johnny C. Taylor, Jr., senior vice president of human resources for IAC/InterActive Corp, a company with over 33,000 employees, an applicant’s GPA is the single best indicator of future success in job employment. According to the National Association of Colleges and Employers, since 2001 there has been an increase in employers looking at, and making hiring decisions based on, a candidate's GPA. In addition, Job Outlook 2005 survey reported that 70 percent of employers looked at an applicants GPA, increasing to 75 percent in 2010. Those looking at and weighing in college GPA accounted that their cut off was a GPA of 3.0 or lower.
GPA is not the only factor that determines future employment. Many employers look for other pertinent characters such as leadership, teamwork, flexibility and attitude. They may also look at the reputation of the college attended and other work related experiences such as internships. In a 2010 student survey for recruiters, 45 percent of the students who had completed an internship had already received a job offer. Many of these jobs were within the company that they interned for.
Although GPA seems to be important in the hiring process, other variables may contribute to the likelihood of getting hired. If a student’s GPA is below a 3.0 or what the employer is looking for, it is suggested to calculate your GPA for only the classes within your major for your resume.
There are also criticism on using grades as an indicator in employment. Armstrong (2012) claimed that the relationship between grades and job performance is low and it's becoming lower in recent studies.
