Koose Muniswamy Veerappan (January 18, 1952 – October 18, 2004), commonly known as Veerappan or Sandalwood Veerappan, was an Indian dacoit active for years in a broad swath of scrub and forest land covering 6,000 km² in the states of Karnataka, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. He long defied three state governments and Indian Border security paramilitary forces, maintaining at one point a small army numbering in the hundreds. He was wanted for killing approximately 184 people, mainly police officers (about 50% of total killings) including senior police and forest officials. He was wanted by Police of three states, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and Kerala, for several decades. He was wanted for poaching about 200 elephants and smuggling ivory worth US$2,600,000 and sandalwood of about 10,000 tonnes worth US$22,000,000. Veerappan had a price of on his head but evaded arrest for 20 years until he was killed by police in 2004.
Early years.
Koose Muniswamy Veerappan, a.k.a. Veerappan, was born on January 18, 1952 in Gopinatham village located in border areas of Karnataka state to a family of cattle grazers. He was commonly known as "Molakai" in his childhood days by the locals. He belongs to the Vanniyar caste.
Criminal Activity.
Veerappan started as an assistant to Xavier Gounder or Sevi Gounder (his relative) , who was a notorious poacher and sandalwood smuggler. His father, Muniswamy and his relatives were also known to have involved in activities like poaching, smuggling forest wood and sandalwood as their village was within the forest area. He began committing illegal activities in 1970 and was arrested for the first time in 1972. He married Muthulaxmi and is said to have strangled their newborn girl child because it was the third successive girl child born. His wife Muthulaxmi reportedly appreciated his "notoriety and mustache" and that was the reason she married him. His other daughter is studying in Tamilnadu.
He started to develop as a sandalwood smuggler and ivory smuggler. He used to kill Elephants for ivory and developed the habit of killing people who opposed his illegal activities. He shot his first tusker near his home, Gopinatham, at the age of 10. He emerged as a ruthless criminal and is said to have committed his first murder at the age of 17. Most of his victims were police officers, forest officials, and informers. His first major criminal act which drew the Government's attention and made him notorious, was the kidnapping and murder of a Tamil Nadu forest officer, Chidambaram, in 1987. He trapped and brutally killed senior Indian Forest Service (IFS) officer Pandillapalli Srinivas on November 10, 1991 in the Namadalli forests of Kollegal taluk in Chamarajanagar district. He also killed Harikrishna, a senior IPS officer, Shakeel Ahmed, with others on August 14, 1992 near Meenyam of Kollegal taluk by ambushing the police party in a raid. 
Veerappan never hesitated to kill civilians for the slightest of reasons. He is known to have killed a villager named Kottinaiker of Gopinatham (his native village) just because Kottinaiker had once travelled in a police jeep. Whenever he douted that a person was police informer, he used to kill such villagers residing in his native place Gopinatham and surrounding village. Veerappan tactfully used political fragility to escape from one state to other regularly.
Palar blast.
On 9 April 1993, Veeappan killed 22 people near Palar, M M Hills and this was the largest mass killing by him, which is known as Palar Blast. Taking open challenge by Veerappan who had killed one Bandari in Govindapadi, Mettur, on the pretext that he was a police informer, IPS officer K.Gopalakrishnan along with a police team and forest officials team consisting of 41 members left Palar base in MM hills, Karnataka, in two vehicles, when Veerappan's gang exploded a land mine killing 22 members of the team. The Veerappan gang was left unhurt during the incident.
Special Task Force.
In 1990, the Karnataka government formed a Special Task Force (STF) to capture him. The Tamil Nadu Government formed a Special Task Force to nab Verappan as well. In February 1992, the Karnataka task force killed his lieutenant Gurunathan. SI Shakeel Ahmed was single-handedly responsible for Gurunathan's capture. Three months later, Veerappan attacked the Ramapura police station of Kollegal taluk in the Chamarajanagar district, killing several policemen and capturing arms and ammunition, on the pretext that they tortured a lady which resulted in her suicide. In August 1992, Veerappan laid a trap for SP Harikrishna and SI Shakeel Ahmed and killed them along with four others. The Karnataka and Tamil Nadu Special Task Forces started intensfied combing operations along the inter-state border areas of the two states and also around Gopinatham village. The combined STF checked all the vehicles passing in the area and kept vigil in the forests bordering the two states. They came to know that Veerappan's gang was reduced to only five members, one of them being a TNLA activist. STF officers from both the states held meetings with villagers of the Gopinatham village and requested them to help nab Veerappan and also offered Rs.5 crore prize money to be used for development of the village.
In 1993, the task force arrested his wife Muthulakshmi and charged with helping Veerappan in his criminal activities. 
On February 17, 1996, he ambushed a team of Tamil Nadu STF personnel from a high ground while they were on their patrol vehicle. The police were able to counterattack and call for backup. The ambush which took place in the evening claimed the life of a Police Constable named Selvaraj from Madurai and seriously injured other police officers including Police officer Tamilselvan. By the time the police backup arrived, Veerapan and his small team escaped.
Entry of Shankar Bidari, Karnataka Police officer, gave a new boost to STF. In the tenure of Bidari the man power of Veerappan reduced from 200 to just 3-5 people. Shankar Bidari divided entire STF into 3 parts attacking,investigation and intelligence. Attacking team was headed by Tiger Ashok kumar . Intelligence team by A Bava.
Dr.Rajkumar's Kidnapping.
On July 30, 2000, Veerappan kidnapped the famed Kannada Matinee Idol Dr.Rajkumar, from Gajanur, a border village of Karnataka, where the film star was attending a housewarming ceremony. Three associates of Dr. Rajkumar were kidnapped as well, one of them being a relative of the film star. There was a huge public outcry and some violent incidents in Bangalore and other parts of Karnataka. A bandh occurred on September 22 in Bangalore. This placed the Karnataka government in a political dilemma of whether or not to call in the army. Karnataka was literally shut for 3 months. Violence across the state and slogans against the government became very normal. The Chief Minister and police personnel of Karnataka sought the help of Tamil Nadu Government and visited Chennai for seeking help. Negotiations were conducted and R. Gopal, also known as "nakkeran gopalan", an editor of a Tamil magazine called "Nakkeeran" was involved in several rounds of talks with Veerappan. The "Nakkeran" Gopalan, who had earlier visited Veerappan for similar negotiations, visited the forest several times where Veerappan held Dr.Rajkumar and had discussions which were video recorded. Dr. Rajkumar was held for 109 days and was finally released without harm on November 15, 2000. There were allegations by several people that a large amount was paid to Veerappan for his safe release. A police official later suggested that 300,000,000 rupees ($6.5m) had been paid for his release.
On August 25, 2002, Veerappan abducted H. Nagappa, a former minister of Karnataka State from his village house in Chamarajanagara District. Nagappa was a minister for Agricultural Marketing in J.H.Patel's ministry. Joint Special task force of Karnataka and Tamil Nadu requested Kerala police for cooperation and help to release H.Nagappa. Police tried to release H.Nagappa in an encounter and Nagappa was found dead three months later, in Chengadi forest near his ancestral house in Karnataka. The reward offered by the Karnataka state government was increased to 5,00,00,000rupees (US$1.25 million) at that time.
Demanding Ransom.
For several years during 1990s, he was very active in kidnapping police officials and famous personalities, and would demand huge amounts of money for ransom. It is believed that ransoms were often paid unofficially for the release of hostages. On July 12, 1997, he kidnapped nine forest officials at a place called Marapala in the Burude forests of Kollegala taluk, in Chamarajanagara district. In this case, even though his ransom demands were not met, the hostages were released unharmed in the last week of August that same year. It is believed that Veerappan buried large amout of cash in various parts of the forest and in 2002, police recovered Rs.33,66,350 from the members of his gang and some of the members of the gang even did not know the value of the money they held.
Death.
On October 18, 2004, Veerappan and two of his associates were killed by the Tamil Nadu Special Task Force headed by Vijay Kumar (Tamil Nadu) and Jyotiprakash Mirji (Karnataka). The killing happened near the village of Papparapatti in Dharmapuri district, Tamil Nadu. Veerappan and his men were lured into an ambulance by an undercover policeman under the pretext of taking them to Dharmapuri for medical treatment. The Tamil Nadu Special Task Force, which had been observing his movements for several months, surrounded the ambulance, and the gangsters were killed in the ensuing gun battle. His death was described as the "death of a demon" by Guardian newspaper, UK. The villagers of Gopinatham, the native place of Veerappan, breathed a huge sigh of relief and burst crackers on the streets of the village on hearing the news of his death, as they wanted to wash out the stigma attached to their village. Since his death, the village has been promoted as a destination for ecotourism by the Karnataka State Department of Forest and Tourism.
Veerappan was buried at a village named Moolakadu, Tamil Nadu as his family members are more attached to it and most of his relatives in Gopinatham (his native place) have left long ago and one of his aides, Sethukuli Govindan was cremated there. . The police had planned for a cremation, but decided on a burial due to objections rasied by Veerappan's relatives. Thousands of people turned out for the burial, while others were kept away by heavy security.
Timeline.
Total killings.
More than 190 killings, including civilians, forest officials, police personnel and foreign research student are officially recorded.
