The tenth season of the police procedural drama "NCIS" premiered on September 25, 2012, in the same time slot as the previous seasons, Tuesdays at 8pm. The season premiere focused on the aftermath of the bombing from the season 9 finale, and culminated with the disposal of Harper Dearing. The premiere was seen by 20.48 million viewers.
On January 15, 2013, the episode "Shiva" delivered the biggest audience ever so far for an "NCIS" episode. 22.86 million people watched the episode, which surpassed the Season 8 episode "Freedom" by 10,000 viewers.
Production.
On March 14, 2012, CBS renewed "NCIS" for a tenth season which premiered on September 25, 2012. The season 10 production began in July 2012, a week after Michael Weatherly, Sean Murray and Pauley Perrette had signed their new contracts on the show. David McCallum signed his contract back in April 2012, while the rest of the cast was under contract for season 10. Also, Brian Dietzen, portraying Jimmy Palmer, was promoted to series regular for the season. Dietzen has been a recurring character on "NCIS" since late season 1.
The first part of the season consists of mostly standalone episodes, while the November two-part arc starts the "back half of the season". According to executive producer Gary Glasberg, the theme for the season is "fallen heroes". "The theme that we’ve sort of been running with is fallen heroes and that picks up with the explosion that they go through, with the post-traumatic stress that they all experienced because of that". As a part of the "theme", a two-part episode "Shell Shock" aired in November, which focused on post-traumatic stress in the Navy, while the January episodes "Shabbat Shalom" and "Shiva" included the deaths of Eli David and Jackie Vance.
Joe Spano (FBI agent Fornell) appeared in the season premiere while Diane Neal (CGIS agent Abigail Borin), Ralph Waite (Jackson Gibbs), Robert Wagner (Tony DiNozzo, Sr.) and Michael Nouri appeared later in the season.
Beginning with season 10, CBS released "phoofs" from the episodes on cbs.com some days before the episodes aired.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
