Kelly Brook (born Kelly Ann Parsons; ) is an English model, actress, entrepreneur, and television presenter.
Early life.
Brook was born and brought up in Rochester, Kent, England. She is the daughter of Sandra, a cook, and Kenneth Parsons, a scaffolder. She has a younger brother, Damian, and an older half-sister, Sasha. Kenneth died aged 57 in Rochester from lung cancer on 26 November 2007, during Brook's time on "Strictly Come Dancing".
Brook attended the Thomas Aveling School in Warren Wood, Rochester. She then studied at the Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts in London for three years before becoming a professional model.
Modelling career.
Brook's modelling career began at 16 after winning a beauty competition, in which she was entered by her mother. She later worked on a range of advertising campaigns, including for Foster's Lager, Renault Mégane, Walker's crisps, Piz Buin and Bravissimo, a company that specialises in bras and lingerie for large-breasted women. Her figure eventually caught the eye of the editorial team of the "Daily Star" tabloid, which began featuring her as a Page Three girl.
Brook's picture soon began appearing in other lads' mags such as "GQ", "Loaded" and "FHM". In April of the same year, a poll over 5,000 women for "Grazia" magazine considered her to have the best British female body. She also topped the 'FHM 100 Sexiest Women in the World' list in 2005, which was said to have polled 15 million people. Appearing in this list every year since 1998, she ranked No.34 in 2008, No.67 in 2009 and No.7 in 2010. She was the cover star of "FHM"'s World Cup 2010 special issue, and was on the cover of the magazine in April 2011.
In February 2007, it was announced that Brook had signed a contract, reported to be worth around £1m, to represent Unilever's Lynx bodyspray, known as "Axe" in the US and in continental Europe. She has appeared on billboards, in newspapers and on-line as part of their advertising campaign. She has also appeared in commercials for Sky + and T Mobile and modelled for Reebok.
In 2010, she was chosen as the "new face and body" of lingerie maker Ultimo's advertising campaign. In September 2010, Brook appeared in the American edition of "Playboy" magazine. In October 2010, Kelly Brook appeared live at Clapham Picture House to surprise cinemagoers as part of a promotion for Carlsberg and Sky 3D. In November 2010, Brook presented an award at MTV's EMA's in Madrid.
Brook produces her own line of swimwear with New Look, which she herself has modelled.
Television.
Presenter.
In 1997, aged eighteen, Brook started presenting youth television programmes on MTV, Granada Television and the Trouble TV channel.
Brook had a breakthrough into mainstream presenting in January 1999, when she was chosen to replace Denise van Outen as the female half of "The Big Breakfast" hosting team, alongside Johnny Vaughan. She left the show in July 1999.
In 2005, she hosted the reality television programme "Celebrity Love Island" for ITV.
Reality television.
In 2007, Brook participated in the celebrity dancing competition "Strictly Come Dancing" on BBC1, with dance partner was Brendan Cole. During the TV series, her father Kenneth Parsons died from cancer, and although she initially decided to continue dancing in his memory, she withdrew from the competition in week nine.
She also competed in the "Strictly Come Dancing Christmas Special 2008", dancing the Jive with Brian Fortuna, Brendan Cole having to compete with his later partner Lisa Snowdon. Brook and Fortuna were put into fourth place, but with the studio audience's vote they came second to Jill Halfpenny and Darren Bennett.
In 2008, Brook took Jennifer Ellison's place as one of the three judges on the second series of the reality TV programme "", broadcast between September and November 2008.
In January 2009, she joined the third series of "Britain's Got Talent" as a fourth judge, but was subsequently axed from the programme after less than a week on the panel, the producers having decided that the four-judge format was "too complicated". Brook was billed as a guest judge in the episode in which she appeared, taped in Manchester and aired on 16 May. In October 2009, Brook claimed that "Britain's Got Talent" hosts Ant & Dec had been the cause of her removal as the fourth judge. She claimed that she was asked to leave the show after she upset the pair.
Acting career.
In 1997, she appeared in a Pulp video "Help the Aged" with Huck Whitney of the band the Flaming Stars, in a slow dance sequence.
Brook made her full screen debut with a minor role in the film "Sorted". Shortly thereafter, she appeared in the film "Ripper". She played the girlfriend of Clark Kent/Superman's nemesis Lex Luthor in four episodes of the American science fiction drama "Smallville" during the show's first season (2001–02). She has also completed assignments as a film actress in Canada and made a short appearance as Lyle's girlfriend in the 2003 film "The Italian Job".
Her first starring role was in "School for Seduction", a 2004 film – she received positive reviews for her role, ""Seduction" offers a few twists on the rapidly degenerating format, not the least of which is the comely Brook in the lead role." In 2004, she played character Nikki Morris in the video game "Need for Speed Underground 2", alongside Brooke Burke. In 2005, she appeared in the Philippe Vidal film "House of 9", a thriller about nine seemingly unconnected strangers captured and locked in a house together. The people are forced to compete against one another, in order to survive.
Also in 2006, she starred in a "Marple" drama on ITV and appeared as herself throughout the second series of "Moving Wallpaper", also for ITV, in 2009. She acted in the science fiction thriller "Shadow Play", directed by Nick Simon.
Brook had a leading role in the horror comedy remake "Piranha 3D". The film received a worldwide theatrical release on 20 August 2010. "Piranha 3D" grossed $83,188,163 on a budget of $24,000,000.
Kelly also played as herself in the British comedy movie "". In the film she was to marry the entrepreneur Keith Lemon (portrayed by Leigh Francis) and divorce him taking all of his newly acquired riches. This doesn’t go to plan as due to an issue with a product in the film where people uncontrollably gurn, including Kelly Brook.
Theatrical work.
In December 2000, she played exotic dancer Anya in the play "Eye Contact" at the Riverside Studios in Hammersmith.
In October 2008, she returned to the west end as Jeannie, in Neil LaBute's "Fat Pig" at London's Comedy Theatre. Her performances have had mixed reviews, the "Daily Mail" said "Kelly Brook has a pencil waist and rabbit-thigh legs, but she is not a great interpreter of a role".
In November 2009, she began playing Celia in "Calendar Girls" at the Noel Coward Theatre, a role previously played by Jerry Hall.
Personal life.
Brook was in a seven-year relationship with actor Jason Statham, until 2004. Brook met American actor Billy Zane while filming thriller "Survival Island" in Greece in 2004. Brook and Zane were engaged to be married in the summer of 2008 and acquired a house in Kent, but Brook postponed the wedding upon the death of her father in November 2007. The couple split in April 2008 and briefly got back together before ending their relationship in August 2008. Brook had been dating Thom Evans since December 2010. On 16 March 2011, she announced via her Twitter account that she and Evans were expecting a baby girl. On 9 May 2011, Brook suffered a miscarriage.. On 1 February 2013, Kelly announced on her verified twitter account that she and Thom broke up "some time ago". Kelly has since began dating ex Danny Cipriani again. 
Brook is an animal lover and posed nude with her body painted in scales for the "Whose Skin Are You In?" campaign by PETA.
