Owen Cunningham Wilson (born November 18, 1968) is an American actor and screenwriter. Born in Dallas, Texas to an Irish American family from Massachusetts, he was the middle child, and has two brothers who are also actors, Andrew and Luke Wilson. He received his distinctive twice-broken nose during childhood.
Wilson's career includes comedic roles in the popular films "Zoolander" (2001), "Wedding Crashers" (2005) and "Midnight in Paris" (2011) as well as a long running relationship with Wes Anderson as co-writer of his films, such as "Bottle Rocket", "Rushmore" and "The Royal Tenenbaums". He also starred in Anderson's "The Darjeeling Limited" (2007).
Known for his laid back demeanour and easy-going nature, Wilson hit the headlines in 2007 after a supposed suicide attempt following his break-up with actress Kate Hudson. It was later acknowledged that Wilson had been suffering from depression.
Early life.
Wilson was born in Dallas, to photographer Laura (Cunningham) Wilson and Robert Andrew Wilson, an advertising executive and operator of a public television station. He has an older brother, Andrew, and a younger brother, Luke. Both brothers are also involved in filmmaking. His family, originally from Massachusetts, is of Irish descent.
Wilson attended New Mexico Military Institute and the University of Texas at Austin, where he pursued a Bachelor of Arts in English.
Career.
Wilson debuted as an actor in the role of "Dignan" in the Wes Anderson film "Bottle Rocket", which he co-wrote with Anderson. He also worked with Anderson as a creative King of the Hill collaborator on his next two directorial efforts, "Rushmore" and "The Royal Tenenbaums", for which they were nominated for an Oscar for Best Original Screenplay.
Wilson subsequently landed a role in "The Cable Guy", directed by Ben Stiller, an early admirer of "Bottle Rocket". After minor appearances in action films like "Anaconda", "Armageddon" and "The Haunting", Wilson appeared in two dramatic roles: supporting actor in "Permanent Midnight", which starred Stiller as a drug-addicted TV writer; and the lead role as a serial killer in "The Minus Man", in which future girlfriend, singer Sheryl Crow was a co-star. He also made a cameo in the Girl Skateboards video "Yeah Right!" in 2003.
Wilson got his big break with the 2000 comedy action hit "Shanghai Noon", starring opposite Hong Kong action star Jackie Chan. The film grossed nearly US$100 million worldwide. His fame continued to rise after starring alongside Ben Stiller and Will Ferrell in the 2001 film "Zoolander".
Gene Hackman took notice of Wilson's performance in "Shanghai Noon" and recommended Wilson to co-star in the 2001 action film "Behind Enemy Lines". Also in 2001, Wilson and Anderson collaborated on their third film, "The Royal Tenenbaums", which was a financial and critical success. The comedy featured an all-star cast, including Gene Hackman, Ben Stiller, Bill Murray, Anjelica Huston, Gwyneth Paltrow, Danny Glover, Seymour Cassel and brother Luke. Owen Wilson had a memorable supporting role in the film as Eli Cash, a drug-addled "bon vivant" who becomes a literary celebrity. It earned the writing team an Academy Award nomination for Best Original Screenplay.
Wilson returned to the buddy-comedy genre in 2002 with the action comedy "I Spy", co-starring Eddie Murphy. This big-screen remake of the television series flopped at the box office. He then reunited with Chan to make "Shanghai Knights" (2003), and co-starred in the film remake of the television series "Starsky & Hutch" (2004). Due to his busy schedule as an actor and an ongoing sinus condition, Wilson was unavailable to collaborate on the script for Wes Anderson's fourth feature, "The Life Aquatic with Steve Zissou". The 2004 film was ultimately co-written by filmmaker Noah Baumbach. However, Wilson did star in the film as Bill Murray's would-be son, Ned Plimpton; a role written specifically for Wilson.
In 2004 Wilson worked with his brother Luke Wilson in the 2004 film Around the World in 80 Days as the Wright brothers.
Wilson partnered with Vince Vaughn in the 2005 "Wedding Crashers" which grossed over $200 million in the US alone. Also in 2005, Owen collaborated with his brothers by appearing in "The Wendell Baker Story", written by brother Luke, directed by Luke and brother Andrew. In 2006, Wilson provided the voice of Lightning McQueen in the Disney/Pixar film "Cars", starred in "You, Me and Dupree" with Kate Hudson, and appeared with Stiller in "Night at the Museum" as Jedediah, the cowboy, an uncredited role.
Wilson has appeared in ten films with Stiller (a long-time friend) to date: "The Cable Guy" (1996), "Permanent Midnight" (1998), "Meet the Parents" (2000), "Zoolander" (2001), "The Royal Tenenbaums" (2001), "Starsky & Hutch" (2004), "Meet the Fockers" (2004), "Night at the Museum" (2006), and the sequels "" (2009) and "Little Fockers" (2010).
Wilson appeared in another Wes Anderson film, "The Darjeeling Limited", which screened at the 45th annual New York Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival and opened September 30, 2007, co-starring Jason Schwartzman and Adrien Brody. Wilson next starred in the Judd Apatow comedy, "Drillbit Taylor", released in March 2008. He appeared in a film adaptation of John Grogan's best-selling memoir, "Marley & Me" (2008), co-starring Jennifer Aniston.
"The Darjeeling Limited", starring Wilson, Adrien Brody, and Jason Schwartzman was selected for a DVD and Blu-ray release by The Criterion Collection in October 2010.
Wilson provided the voice for the Whackbat Coach Skip in Wes Anderson's version of "Fantastic Mr. Fox". He starred in the film "The Big Year", an adaptation of Mark Obmascik's book "The Big Year: A Tale of Man, Nature and Fowl Obsession". The film was released in October 2011 from 20th Century Fox and co-starred Jack Black, JoBeth Williams, Steve Martin, and Rashida Jones.
Wilson is a member of the comedic acting brotherhood colloquially known as the Frat Pack. His films have grossed more than $2.25 billion domestically (United States and Canada), with an average of $75 million per film.
Wilson made a guest appearance on the NBC comedy "Community" with fellow Frat Pack member Jack Black.
Most recently, Wilson starred as a nostalgic writer in the romantic comedy "Midnight in Paris". Written and directed by Woody Allen, the film has become Allen's highest grossing film at the box office and was also well received by critics. In March 2012, Wilson landed the leading role in the John Erick Dowdle Thriller "The Coup". In the film he is slated to play the father in an American family that moves to Southeast Asia, only to find themselves embroiled in a sweep of rebel violence that is taking over the city. Wilson's role in this upcoming thriller marks his return to the action genre for the first time since 2001's "Behind Enemy Lines".
Personal life.
The 2002 release of the album "C'mon C'mon" by former girlfriend Sheryl Crow features the song "Safe and Sound", which is dedicated to Wilson in the liner notes and is said to be an autobiographical account of Wilson and Crow's relationship.
On August 26, 2007, Wilson was taken to St. John's Health Center amid reports of a suicide attempt. He was later transferred to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles. His lawyer later confirmed that he had been undergoing treatment for depression. A few days later, Wilson withdrew from starring in "Tropic Thunder", produced by and starring his friend and frequent collaborator Ben Stiller. He dated Kate Hudson in 2006, but the pair broke up and it was widely reported that he allegedly tried to commit suicide in 2007 after the relationship with Hudson ended. In 2008, it was reported the pair were to marry. However the two would again break up and make up a number of times over 2008 and 2009. Following the suicide attempt, Wilson participated in limited publicity and promotion for his films.
On January 10, 2011, Wilson's representative announced that Wilson and his girlfriend, Jade Duell, were expecting a baby. Four days later, on January 14, it was confirmed that Duell had given birth in Hawaii to a baby boy, Robert Ford Wilson.
Wilson is a fan of several Dallas-area professional sports teams, and has been spotted at Dallas Cowboys, Dallas Mavericks and Texas Rangers games. 
Wilson's bumped nose is the result of breaking it twice, once during a high school fight, and once playing football with friends.
