Bonnie Francesca Wright (born 17 February 1991) is an English actress, fashion model, screenwriter, director and producer. She is best known for playing Ginny Weasley in the "Harry Potter" film series.
Early life and education.
Wright was born in London, England, the second child of Sheila Teague and Gary Wright, owners of the jewellery company Wright & Teague. She has an older brother, Lewis. Wright attended Prior Weston Primary School and later the King Alfred School in North London for her secondary education. During the filming of "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1" and "Part 2", Wright began attending London's University of the Arts: London College of Communication, to study as a Film and Television Production Manager. She plans to continue acting and to work behind-the-scenes after filming "Harry Potter".
Career.
Acting.
2001–2011: "Harry Potter Series".
Wright auditioned for the role of Ginny Weasley because her brother said she reminded him of the character. Wright appears in the first film, "Harry Potter and the Sorcerer's Stone", only in a small scene set at London King's Cross railway station, where her character and her mother Molly meet Harry Potter as four of her older brothers board the Hogwarts express. Her role became much more prominent in the second film, "Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets", in which her character begins studies at Hogwarts and encounters a secret diary that begins to control her actions.
She also opened the titular chamber in the same film under the influence of Tom Riddle, the main antagonist of Harry Potter series.
Wright was seen in third film, "Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban" chatting with Hermione in one background and had few dialogues. However, her character had a bonafide supporting role in the fourth film, "Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire", with dialogue sprinkled across several scenes and perhaps her most screen-time yet.
In "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" Wright played a more central role, joining Dumbledore's Army and eventually participating in the climactic battle between the DA and the Order of the Phoenix with Lord Voldemort and the Death Eaters. Wright's more emphasised role continued in "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince" where she became an important chaser of the Gryffindor Quidditch team and ultimately Harry Potter's love interest. In "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows" Parts 1 and 2, Wright again reprised her role of Ginny Weasley.
Wright has also provided the voice of Ginny Weasley in the video game versions of "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" and "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince". Wright is one of the thirteen actors who has appeared in all eight films of the Harry Potter franchise.
Wright received extremely positive reviews for her performances as Ginny Weasley. "Variety" wrote, "Bonnie Wright’s Ginny intrigues as the sort of initial plain Jane who keeps growing on you." Comingsoon.net wrote "that If someone told me eight years ago that Bonnie Wright, introduced as Ginny Weasley in the first movie, would turn into such a strong dramatic actress who could carry scenes as well as the three leads, I wouldn't have believed it," and Film School Rejects who also wrote "Ginny (Bonnie Wright) in particular shines through, building on the power she gained in the last film to become an independent young woman that proves more complex with every scene."
"Harry Potter" author J. K. Rowling gave a speech during the world premiere of the eighth and final film "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 2" on 7 July 2011 in London, England. She announced that they are seven Harry Potter's film series cast members, who she refers to as "The Big Seven", and she named Wright as one of the seven members, alongside with Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint, Emma Watson, Tom Felton, Matthew Lewis and Evanna Lynch.
2002–present: Other acting work.
Wright appeared in two TV movies that were "Stranded" (2002) as the younger version of Sarah Robinson and "" (2004), where she played the younger version of writer Agatha Christie. In 2007, she had a guest role on the Disney Channel's "The Replacements" voicing Vanessa in the second season premiere called "London Calling".
Wright signed to appear in "Sweat", a short film which is part of a project of five films called "Geography of the Hapless Heart", a feature length film about "the complexity of intimacy, shot in five international locations around the world." Wright portrays Mia and the film has a set release of 2012.
Wright confirmed to be starring in "The Philosophers", an American production which began filming July 2011 in Jakarta, Indonesia. The film also stars Rhys Wakefield and James D'Arcy and her "Harry Potter" co-star Freddie Stroma. The film is directed by John Huddles. Wright plays Georgina, one of the students.
In June 2012, Wright joined the film "Before I Sleep" starring David Warner, Chevy Chase, Eric Roberts, Tom Sizemore, James Rebhorn, Cynthia Gibb, Sasha Spielberg, and Campbell Scott.
In September 2012, Wright joined the cast of "The Sea", based on the novel of the same name by John Bansville, playing Rose the young nursemaid.
Later in 2012, Wright will start shooting her first leading role, a British nineteenth century period film "In Want of a Wife" as Lydia, opposite Emily Watson.
Modelling.
Wright has her own profile page at Next Models Agency. She was named the winner of the "Most Edgy Look Award" at the 2011 "Rodial Beautiful Awards". Also in 2011, Wright appeared in a fashion spread for "The Financial Times"' luxury lifestyle magazine "How to Spend It". The shoot, which took place at the Victoria and Albert Museum, was dedicated to capturing the languor of Dante Rossetti's paintings.
Wright has participated as a catwalk model for fashion designer Katie Eary at an autumn/winter 2011 show during London Fashion Week. Wright has been featured in various photoshoots and interviews: including in the "Entertainment Weekly", "The Times Luxx Magazine", The "Daily Mail You Magazine", "InStyle Magazine", "Nylon Magazine", "Vanity Fair", and "Dirty Glam Magazine".
Screenwriting, directing and producing.
Wright made her screenwriting and directorial debut for her graduation film "Separate We Come, Separate We Go" starring her Potter co-star David Thewlis. The film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival short film corner and screen at the BAFTA Graduate.
Wright has now graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree from London's University of the Arts: London College of Communication, and is the owner of her own production company called Bon Bon Lumiere.
Personal life.
In February 2010, Wright confirmed she was dating fellow British actor Jamie Campbell Bower, who played the younger version of Gellert Grindelwald in "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1". They confirmed their engagement in April 2011. The couple amicably called off their engagement on 30 June 2012.
