Asin Thottumkal, known mononymously as Asin, is an Indian actress. She began her acting career in the South Indian film industry, but now appears predominantly in Bollywood films. Making her acting debut in Sathyan Anthikkad's Malayalam film "Narendran Makan Jayakanthan Vaka" (2001), Asin had her first commercial success with the Telugu film "Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi" in 2003, and won a Filmfare Best Telugu Actress Award for the film.
"M. Kumaran S/O Mahalakshmi" (2004) was her debut in Tamil and a huge success. She received her Filmfare Best Tamil Actress Award for her most noted critically acclaimed performance in her third Tamil film, "Ghajini" (2005). She then played the lead female roles in success films, most notable being the dramatic thriller 'the action thriller "Pokkiri" (2007) and the blockbuster "Dasavathaaram" (2008) opposite Kamal Haasan.In late 2008, Asin made her debut in the Bollywood film "Ghajini" (2008) opposite Aamir Khan which was the first Bollywood film to have collected more than 100 crore in the domestic box office,subsequemtly collecting worldwide. Asin won the Filmfare Best Female Debut Award and many Accolades for Ghajini. 2011 marked the most successful phase of Asin's Bollywood career, as she starred in Anees Bazmee's romantic comedy, "Ready", in which she co-starred alongside Salman Khan. The film was a major hit at the box office, collecting worldwide. Later, in 2012, Asin first starred in Sajid Khan's multistarrer "Housefull 2" opposite Akshay Kumar.
Early life.
Asin was born in Cochin (now Kochi) in Kerala on 26 October 1985, to a Syro-Malabar Catholic Nasrani family. Her father, Joseph Thottumkal originally from Thodupuzha, managed several businesses. Her mother, Seline Thottumkal, who moved settlements from Kochi to Chennai to Mumbai to live with her daughter, is a surgeon. Asin's father was keen to name her as Mary, after her grandmother. He however named her Asin as the name had a beautiful meaning. Asin has quoted that her name means "pure and without blemish". She states that the 'A' in her name is from Sanskrit meaning "without", and 'sin' from English".
She attended Naval Public School from LKG through X standard. She scored over 90% in her X board exams but chose Humanities in XI standard, shocking her family who were confident she would take up science and get into the civil services. She then attended St. Teresa's School in Kochi for her Plus Two education. After that she attended St. Teresa's College in Kochi, a college affiliated with MG University, where she graduated with a Bachelors of Arts degree in English Literature. The actress can speak seven languages; being well-versed in Malayalam (her mother tongue), Tamil, Telugu, Hindi, French, English and Sanskrit. Asin also learnt basic Marathi for her movie "Khiladi 786" in which she played a typical Marathi girl.
Career.
Early work (2001–2004).
Asin's first acting assignment was television advertisement for BPL Mobile. She debuted in a Malayalam film "Narendran Makan Jayakanthan Vaka" in 2001, at the age of 15. After taking a year out to pursue her education, Asin returned with her breakthrough film as an actress, "Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi" opposite Ravi Teja, portraying a Tamil girl in her first Telugu language film, which subsequently fetched her the Telugu Filmfare Award for Best Actress. In the same year she won the Santosham Best Actress Award for her performance alongside Akkineni Nagarjuna in her second Telugu film, "Shivamani". Her following two Telugu films, "Lakshmi Narasimha" and "Gharshana", both portrayed Asin as the love interest for police officers and both were successful ventures.
Asin's first Tamil language film was "M. Kumaran S/O Mahalakshmi", in which she co-starred with Jayam Ravi. Asin reprised her role from her film "Amma Nanna O Tamila Ammayi" for the remake, which saw her portraying a Malayali girl instead of the Tamil girl in the original. The movie subsequently went on to super hits in Tamil cinema during 2004, introducing Asin to Tamil film industry. After a brief return to Telugu films, to do "Chakram", she appeared in "Ullam Ketkumae". The film, initially launched in 2002 and was supposed to be her debut as a lead heroine, is a college love story, directed by Jeeva, which was long-delayed but eventually became a successful venture at the box-office, creating wider opportunities for her and the rest of the cast.
Kollywood breakthrough & Stardom (2005–2007).
After the release of "Ullam Ketkumae", Asin was cited as a leading heroine of the Tamil film industry after starring in blockbuster films like "Ghajini", "Sivakasi", "Varalaru" and "Pokkiri" respectively. The film which provided the breakthrough for Asin was "Ghajini". The film, co-starring Surya and was directed by A. R. Murugadoss, earned her the Tamil Filmfare Award for Best Actress. Her role was that of a vivacious young model named Kalpana. Sify.com praised her portrayal as "magical", describing her character as a "lovable chatterbox", played with "sheer ability in the romantic interludes, the poignant and heartfelt scenes when she rescues minor girls from villains and her gory end are touching". The following Diwali in 2005, Asin had two releases, "Sivakasi" and "Majaa". Despite the latter becoming an average grosser, the former went on to be a successful venture at the box office.
The following year, her long-delayed venture, "Varalaru" opposite Ajith Kumar also succeeded at the box office, and The Hindu said she "looks lustrous and sails through her role smoothly". Asin appeared in Pawan Kalyan's "Annavaram", another successful venture which was a remake of Thirupaachi. In January 2007, Asin appeared opposite Ajith Kumar and Vijay in two different films, "Aalwar" and "Pokkiri", with the latter becoming a success, whilst "Aalwar" became a failure. Whilst Asin's role in "Aalwar" was criticized, her performance in "Pokkiri" was lauded by critics. Her final project of the year was opposite Surya, in Hari's "Vel", which had a Diwali 2007 release, subsequently becoming her third successful film which released during the Diwali season in three years. Asin, who portrayed a TV anchor, was appreciated for her role in the film.
Bollywood best debut (2008–2010).
Asin appeared in her first dual role in K. S. Ravikumar's "Dasavathaaram" opposite Kamal Haasan, who portrayed ten roles. The film, which was under production since September 2006, became Asin's largest film till date. Despite being overshadowed by Haasan's ten roles, Asin's portrayals in the film were praised as her "best-to-date" with one of her roles being that of a Vaishnavite in 12th century Tamil Nadu; whilst the other character was a Brahmin girl from Chidambaram for which she won her first ITFA Best Actress Award. "Dasavathaaram" subsequently went on to become one of the biggest blockbusters in South Indian film history.
Since establishing herself as the leading actress in South India, Asin opted to move into Bollywood. Her first film, "Ghajini" opposite Aamir Khan was the remake of her breakthrough film of the same name. Upon release, the film garnered positive reactions from critics and masses alike, with Asin being singled out for her "fabulous" portray. Noted critic, Taran Adarsh described her Hindi debut as "fabulous" and that "to share the screen space with an actor of the stature of Aamir Khan and yet remain in your memory even after the show has ended is no cakewalk. She looks fresh and photogenic and acts her part brilliantly", giving Asin's performance a positive outlook.
"Ghajini" became the highest grossing Bollywood film of 2008 and sixth highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time according to net collections. Asin later appeared in Vipul Shah's "London Dreams" alongside Salman Khan and Ajay Devgn, in which she played as a south Indian girl, Priya, who is emotional but strong willed and an ambitious dancer at the same time. The film received mixed reviews from critics.
Comeback in Kollywood.
Her first film of 2011 was "Kaavalan" which released on 15 January 2011. The film was a critical and commercial success. "Behindwoods" review of the film praised her performance: "Asin, in Tamil for the first time after "Dasavatharam", convinces us with her portrayal. The chemistry of the lead pair has worked out well; especially the portions w things that ultimately result in love". The Chemistry between Vijay and Asin worked out well and was appreciated like their before films Sivakasi and Pokkiri. The film also includes as the comedian along with Mithra Kurian, Roja, Rajkiran playing supporting roles.
Breakthrough & Stardom in Bollywood (2011 – present).
Her next movie with Salman Khan, "Ready" was released on 3 June 2011 to mixed reviews. Critics praised the chemistry between Salman and Asin. Upon release, Ready became the second highest weekend grossing Bollywood film, after "Dabangg" and went on to became the fifth film in Bollywood history t
In 2012, she appeared alongside Akshay Kumar in Sajid Khan's "Housefull 2". Housefull 2 became the third success for Asin after "Ghajini" and "Ready" in Bollywood, which also went on to collect </ref> During her shoot of her film "Ready" with Salman Khan she was part of the camps that were meant to help the Sri Lankan Tamil people who were affected by the wars in Sri Lanka.
In an interview during the Women’s Half Marathon, Asin was talking about the importance of health and the necessity of education and quoted, 
Personal life.
Residence.
Asin and salman affire and akashya kumar , currently resides in Lokhandwala, Mumbai. She also owns an apartment in Marine Drive, Kochi and a farmhouse in Vagamon, Kerala.
