Hayley Nichole Williams (born December 27, 1988) is an American singer, actress and songwriter. She is the lead vocalist of the American rock band Paramore.
Early life.
In 2002, at the age of 13 Hayley Williams moved from her hometown, Meridian, Mississippi, to Franklin, Tennessee after the divorce of her parents. Before Paramore, Williams was frequently bullied as a teen and was very timid growing up. She met band members Josh and Zac Farro in her new school. While still in school, she tried out for a local funk cover band The Factory, in which she met Jeremy Davis.
Music career.
Williams was discovered in 2003 by managers Dave Steunebrink and Richard Williams, who signed the 14-year-old to a 2 year production deal. At the time she was writing pop songs with songwriters in Nashville. Williams was introduced to Atlantic Records A&R Tom Storms through Richard Williams' attorneys Jim Zumwalt and Kent Marcus, and then signed to the label by Jason Flom. The label's original plan for their new artist was to make her a solo pop artist but Williams objected to this, saying that she wanted to be part of a band and play alternative rock music.
Atlantic decided to go along with her wishes, and she then formed Paramore with Josh Farro, Zac Farro, and Jeremy Davis. The music of Paramore was originally supposed to come out on Atlantic Records, but the label's marketing department decided it would be better for the image of the band to not have them attached to a huge label. They instead released their music through a "cooler" niche label, Fueled by Ramen. The debut album was released in 2005 when Hayley was only 16 years old.
In 2007, she appeared in the music video for "Kiss Me" by New Found Glory.
In the 2007 "Kerrang!" Readers' Poll she finished second to Evanescence's Amy Lee in the "Sexiest Female" category, going on to win the first place spot for "Sexiest Female" a year later in the 2008 poll, and again in the 2009, 2010, and 2012 poll. She also appears as a playable character in the video game "Guitar Hero World Tour".
Williams wrote and recorded the song "Teenagers", which was featured in the soundtrack for the feature film "Jennifer's Body". After the release of "Teenagers", Williams stated that she had no plans to establish herself as a solo artist.
In 2010, she appeared on the tracks "Airplanes" and "Airplanes (Part II)" from alternative rapper B.o.B's debut album, "". When it was released as a single, "Airplanes" peaked within the top ten in nineteen countries, including number one peak positions in the United Kingdom and New Zealand.
Paramore was founded in Franklin, Tennessee in 2004 with Williams (lead vocals/keyboards), alongside Josh Farro (lead guitar/backing vocals), Jeremy Davis (bass guitar) and Zac Farro (drums). Prior to forming Paramore, the other members of what was soon to be Paramore had been "edgy about the whole female thing" of having Williams as singer, but as they were good friends she began writing with them and eventually became a member. The band has released three studio albums, "All We Know Is Falling", "Riot!", and "Brand New Eyes" as well as two live albums and three EPs. In June 2009, the band welcomed Taylor York (rhythm guitar) as an official member, although he had already been playing as a touring member with the band since 2007.
In 2006, Paramore started touring outside of the US for the first time, which included a headline tour of the UK and supporting post-hardcore rockband The Blackout on the Give It A Name Festival in Europe.
In December 2010, two of the founding members of Paramore (Josh and Zac Farro) left the band. The news was posted by Williams on Paramore's web site, with Josh later posting a controversial blog post confirming their departure.
The band finished recording their fourth studio album, which will be self-titled Paramore, on November 1, 2012. The band informed fans from their website that the album will be released April 9, 2013. On January 4, 2013, the band communicated through their website that the first single from the album, 'Now', will be released January 22, 2013.
Personal life.
She was born in Meridian, Mississippi but she currently resides in Franklin, Tennessee, a neighborhood in Nashville. Williams is also a Christian and regularly discusses her faith in relation to her music, but has been critical of some attitudes she sees in the Christian community.
Williams is currently dating New Found Glory guitarist Chad Gilbert.
