Prabhas Raju Uppalapati (born 23 October 1979), popularly known as Prabhas, is an Indian film actor, who is referred to as "Young Rebel star" in Telugu cinema. He made his debut with "Eeshwar".
After playing the role of a lover boy in the 2004 blockbuster film "Varsham", Prabhas continued in this vein, gaining mass appeal and appeared in a Blockbuster Hit in his carrier "Chatrapathi".He continued Enthralling masses by appearing in commercial entertainers like "Munna","Ek Niranjan", "Bujjigadu", "Billa" and "Rebel" and proved his box office stamina. After gaining success, he started experimenting with youthful family entertainers like "Darling" and "Mr Perfect" which were successful at the box office.
Personal life.
Prabhas was born to U. Suryanarayana Raju and Siva Kumari. His family is from Mogalturu village in West Godavari district, Andhra Pradesh. He is the third of three children, he has elder brother called Pramod and sister Pragathi. He is the nephew of Telugu actor Krishnam Raju. He was nominated as "Brand Ambassdor of Indian sub-continent"for the international clothing brand Dolce & Gabbana..
Career.
Prabhas started his movie career with "Eeshwar" in 2001. In 2003, he was the lead in "Raghavendra". He gained popularity in 2004 with M. S. Raju's "Varsham" opposite "Trisha Krishnan". He followed this with "Adavi Raamudu" and "Chakram". In September 2005 he acted in the film "Chatrapathi" opposite Shriya Saran. Chatrapathi was a big success in Prabhas's career. "Chatrapathi" was followed by "Pournami" and "Yogi" which were both box office flops. "Munna", an action-drama film which starred Ileana D'Cruz, came out in 2007 was his third success after "Varsham" and "Chatrapathi", followed by the action-comedy "Bujjigadu" in 2008, which was his third film opposite Trisha Krishnan. Bujjigadu was a hit at box office. In 2009 his two films "Billa" and "Ek Niranjan" were successful at the box office. In "Billa" Prabhas was paired with "Anushka Shetty" for the first time, the film was box office success. 
In 2010 he had only one release, the romantic comedy "Darling". The film was a critical and commercial success. Prabhas was paired up with "Kajal Aggarwal", and their crackling chemistry was liked by the audience. Prabhas's performance was praised by critics in the film and also won CineMaa Awards Best Actor (Jury) for his role in the film. He had one release in 2011 "Mr. Perfect", another romantic comedy. This was his second film with "Kajal Aggarwal", and also starred "Taapsee Pannu". The film was praised by critics and became a box-office blockbuster. In 2012, Prabhas starred in "Rebel", an action film starring "Tamannaah Bhatia" and "Deeksha Seth" and was directed by "Raghava Lawrence". "Rebel" received mixed reviews from critics, but is running successfully at the box office. His next film will be "Mirchi" with debutante director "Koratala Shiva" with "Anushka Shetty" and "Richa Gangopadhyay". Previously this film is named as "Vaaradhi" and later changed to "Mirchi". Along with this, he will be seen in an Untitled film directed by S. S. Rajamouli along with Anushka Shetty and Rana Daggubati, and in the Multistarrer Suryudu Chandrudu along with Daggubati Venkatesh, Trisha Krishnan and Kajal Agarwal, making his first Multistarrer and Third film opposite Kajal Agarwal.
By November 11, 2012 Prabhas completed successfully a Decade in Telugu Film Industry. He started his career with "Eeshwar" which was released on November 11, 2002.
