Andrew Russell Garfield (born 20 August 1983) is an actor, of dual American and British citizenship. Born in Los Angeles and raised in Surrey, Garfield began his career in British television, appearing in the teen drama "Sugar Rush" in 2005, and gained further exposure appearing in the BBC's "Doctor Who" in 2007. His early film roles include the ensemble drama "Lions for Lambs" (2007), the indie drama "Boy A" (2007), which garnered him the 2008 BAFTA Television Award for Best Actor, and the fantasy film "The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus" (2009).
Garfield achieved critical acclaim and wider recognition in 2010 with starring roles in the dystopian science fiction "Never Let Me Go" and the ensemble drama "The Social Network", which earned him Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations. His portrayal of Peter Parker / Spider-Man in the superhero film "The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012), a reboot of the "Spider-Man" film series, was generally well received. The first of at least two sequels, "The Amazing Spider-Man 2", is scheduled for release in 2014, with Garfield set to reprise the role. 
Early life.
Garfield was born in Los Angeles, the son of a British mother from Essex and an American father from California. His family moved to Britain when he was three years old. Garfield is Jewish and was brought up in a "middle class home". His parents ran a small interior design business; his father, Richard, later became head coach of the Guildford Swimming Club, and his mother, Lynn, is a teaching assistant at a nursery school. He has an older brother who is a doctor. Garfield was brought up in Surrey, England, and was a gymnast and a swimmer during his early years. He had originally intended to study business, but became interested in acting at the age of sixteen. 
Garfield attended Priory Preparatory School in Banstead and later City of London Freemen's School in nearby Ashtead, before training at the Central School of Speech and Drama, University of London, from which he graduated in 2004.
Career.
Beginnings (2004–2009).
Garfield started taking acting classes in Guildford, Surrey, when he was twelve, and appeared in a youth theatre production of "Bugsy Malone". He also joined a small youth theatre workshop group in Epsom, and began working primarily as a stage actor. In 2004, he won an Manchester Evening News Theatre Awarder Evening News Theatre Award for Best Newcomer, for his performance in "Kes" at Manchester's Royal Exchange Theatre (where he also played Romeo the year after), and won the Outstanding Newcomer Award at the 2006 Evening Standard Theatre Awards. Garfield made his British television debut in 2005, appearing in the Channel 4 teenage drama "Sugar Rush". In the summer of 2007, he garnered public attention when he appeared in the third series of the BBC's "Doctor Who", in the episodes "Daleks in Manhattan" and "Evolution of the Daleks". Garfield commented, "The history of "Doctor Who" and the heritage and legacy of "Doctor Who" is huge. It was an honour to be a part of that show." In October 2007, he was named one of "Variety"s "10 Actors to Watch", and in November 2007, made his American screen debut, playing an American university student in the ensemble drama "Lions for Lambs", a film that co-stars Tom Cruise, Meryl Streep and Robert Redford. "I'm just lucky to be there working on the same project as them, although I don't really expect to be recognized later by audiences," Garfield told "Variety" in 2007. In a review for "The Boston Globe", Wesley Morris considered Garfield "a willing punching bag for the movie's jabs and low blows." 
His portrayal of Jake Burridge, a former child criminal trying to start a new life after imprisonment, in the Channel 4 indie drama "Boy A", released in November 2007, garnered him the 2008 British Academy Television Award for Best Actor. Amy Biancolli of the "Houston Chronicle" elaborated, "there is no doubt about the intelligence and sensitivity of portrayal." Christy DeSmith of the "Star Tribune" echoed Biancolli, citing his "detailed expressions" as an example. "The Seattle Times" writer John Hartl noted that Garfield demonstrated range in the role, and concluded, "Garfield always manages to capture his passion". "The Wall Street Journal" journalist Joe Morgenstern dubbed Garfield's acting performance "phenomenal", assessing that Garfield "makes room for the many and various pieces of Jack [Burridge's personality". In 2008, he had a minor role in the film "The Other Boleyn Girl", and was exclaimed one of the shooting stars at the Berlin International Film Festival. Garfield appeared in "Vogue"'s December 2009 issue, modelling alongside Lily Cole, in a photographed retelling of "Hansel and Gretel". In addition that year, Garfield had a supporting role in the Terry Gilliam film "The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus" and in the "Red Riding" television trilogy. The "Los Angeles Times" film critic Kenneth Turan thought that Garfield gave a stand out performance in the latter.
"Never Let Me Go" and "The Social Network" (2010).
In 2010, he co-starred in the British dystopian science fiction drama film, "Never Let Me Go", based on Kazuo Ishiguro's 2005 novel of the same name. Garfield was given the role of Tommy D., a well-meaning, rather dim young person who struggles to find a place in an environment which values imagination and creativity above all. He said of his character, "There's a sense of anxiety that runs through these kids, especially Tommy, because he's so sensory and feeling and animalistic, that's my perspective of him." Garfield was attracted to the film based on the existential questions the story expresses. He called the experience of being a part of "Never Let Me Go" a "dream to come true". Garfield enjoys an opportunity to let loose with his roles. He said the scenes in which his character—unable to contain his frustration—erupts with a wail, was "intense" for him. "I think those screams are inside all of us, I just got a chance to let mine out". He won the 2010 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of Tommy. "Cleveland Magazine"s Clint O'Connor strongly approved the acting performance of Garfield. "Entertainment Weekly" film critic Owen Gleiberman described Garfield's portrayal as "spooky, haunted innocence that gets under your skin," and Reuterss Stephen Farber felt Garfield played the role with "marvelous expressiveness." Tom Preston from "The Guardian" described Garfield's acting as solid and "at times deeply moving". In comparison of co-stars Carey Mulligan and Keira Knightley, Scott Bowles, writing for "USA Today", deemed Garfield "the real find" of "Never Let Me Go". 
The same year he starred in director David Fincher's "The Social Network", about the founders of Facebook. Garfield achieved wider recognition and critical acclaim for his role as Eduardo Saverin in the film, a role which earned him two BAFTA award nominations for Best Actor in a Supporting Role and the BAFTA Rising Star, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role nomination. "Toronto Star" Peter Howell asserted Garfield's portrayal of Saverin as "understated brilliance", and "USA Today"s Claudia Puig wrote, "Garfield is terrific, conveying Saverin's palpable sense of betrayal." Mark Kermode of the BBC expressed his surprise that Garfield had been overlooked for an Academy Award nomination, "everyone knows he's one of the very best things about the Social Network". Writing in "The Wall Street Journal", Joe Morgenstern thought the role was portrayed with "great subtlety and rueful charm" by Garfield. "Rolling Stone" said that Garfield played the role with a "vulnerability that raises the emotional stakes in a movie", and proclaimed, "Keep your eyes on Garfield — he's shatteringly good, the soul of a film that might otherwise be without one." He received similar plaudits of the "Los Angeles Times", "Entertainment Weekly", and "The New Yorker".
"The Amazing Spider-Man" (2012–present).
In March 2012, Garfield made his Broadway theatre debut as Biff Loman in the revival of "Death of a Salesman", directed by Mike Nichols at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre. For the role Garfield received a Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Play nomination. Garfield played Peter Parker / Spider-Man, opposite Emma Stone as Gwen Stacy, in director Marc Webb's "The Amazing Spider-Man", a reboot of the "Spider-Man" film series. The film began filming in December 2010 and was released on 3 July 2012. Garfield described Parker as someone he can relate to and stated that the character had been an important influence on him since he was a child. Garfield studied the movements of athletes and spiders and tried to incorporate them, did yoga and Pilates for the role in order to be as flexible as possible and drew from his life experiences as inspiration for the role. When first wearing his costume Garfield admitted to shedding tears and trying to imagine "a better actor in the suit", which he described as "uncomfortable" and admitted to wearing nothing beneath it since it is skintight. When filming Garfield explained that he had four months of training and described his physical roles on stunts as terribly challenging and exhausting. Garfield's performance received positive reviews. Dana Stevens of "Slate" felt that Garfield gave the character a "slightly sexier, darker edge" in comparison of Tobey Maguire, and "The Atlantic" reviewer Christopher Orr reflected, "He may still be an outsider, but his restless energy glows deeper and hotter, instead of burning itself off in flares of skittishness." CNN's Tom Charity summarised, "his combination of fresh-faced innocence, nervous agitation and wry humor is immediately appealing," and concluded dubbing Garfield "utterly engaging". "NPR" Bob Mondello opined that Garfield portrayed a more convincing teenager than Maguire, and Peter Bradshaw for "The Guardian" was another fan of "exactly the right hunched and passive-aggressive body language when needed." "Newsday" Rafer Gunzam dissented of the approval, characterising Garfield's portrayal as "sullen". Peter Travers for "Rolling Stone" opined that the "unnecessary" reboot pulled stellar performances from Garfield and Stone and touches the heart. The second film is slated for release in May 2014. Garfield expressed hope to reprise his role in June 2012, and in September 2012, it was confirmed that he would do so. 
Personal life.
Garfield generally avoids discussing his personal life to the media.
After Emma Stone was cast in "The Amazing Spider-Man", confirmed on 5 October 2010, the film's director Marc Webb noted that the chemistry between Stone and Garfield made her the clear choice. That chemistry inspired their off-screen romance. In April 2012, "Life & Style" reported the duo had moved in together in an apartment in New York City. In a 2012 interview with "USA Today", Garfield and Stone both elaborated. "We're not together in real life!", joked Garfield. "It's weird because of that question. We don't talk about anything personal. That's just the way it is. Right now, we're just actors. Em will soon be a producer, too. It's just something that's personal, and this is work, really. Even though this interview is a genuine connection." Stone also explained her unwillingness to discuss Garfield: "There's such a great sense of comfort in knowing that the only thing you have control over is what you say. People can say and do all they want. If it never comes out of your own mouth, you still get to keep that semblance of what is sacred to you".
