In fiction and folklore, a doppelgänger (German, literally a "double goer") () is a paranormal double of a living person. 
It also describes the sensation of having glimpsed oneself in peripheral vision, in a position where there is no chance that it could have been a reflection. 
Doppelgängers often are perceived as a sinister form of bilocation and are regarded by some to be of bad luck. In some traditions, a doppelgänger seen by a person's friends or relatives portends illness or danger, while seeing one's own doppelgänger is said to be an omen of death. 
Recent scientific experimentation has duplicated several doppelgänger effects when electrical stimulation was applied to the left temporoparietal junction of the brain of a patient. 
In the contemporary vernacular of some English speakers, the word may be found used simplistically to identify any look-alike of a person, without regard to the supernaturalness and fundamental doubling intended in the meaning of the word. 
Spelling.
The word "doppelgänger" is a loanword from German "Doppelgänger", consisting of the two substantives "Doppel" (double) and "Gänger" (walker) or (goer). The singular and plural form are the same. It was first used by Jean Paul in the novel "Siebenkäs" (1796), and his newly coined word is explained by a footnote.
As is true for all other common nouns in German, the word is written with an initial capital letter. In English, the word is conventionally uncapitalized (doppelgänger). It is also common to drop the diacritic umlaut, writing "doppelganger."
Mythological interpretations.
Although this German word is of relatively recent origin and that it first appeared in English use in 1851, the concept of alter egos and double spirits appears in the folklore, myths, religious concepts, and traditions of many cultures throughout human history. 
In Ancient Egyptian mythology, a "ka" was a tangible "spirit double" having the same memories and feelings as the person to whom the counterpart belongs. In one Egyptian myth entitled, "The Greek Princess", an Egyptian view of the Trojan War, a "ka" of Helen was used to mislead Paris of Troy, helping to stop the war. 
In Norse mythology, a "vardøger" is a ghostly double who precedes a living person and is seen performing their actions in advance. In Finnish mythology, this is called having an "etiäinen", i.e., "a firstcomer". 
In some myths, the doppelgänger is a version of the Ankou, Celtic a personification of death.
Scientific and philosophical investigations.
Left temporoparietal junction.
In September 2006, it was reported in the scientific journal, "Nature," that an effect was reproduced repeatedly that was very similar to the doppelgänger phenomenon. The effect was produced via the electromagnetic stimulation of one patient's brain. 
Focal electrical stimulation was applied to the patient's left temporoparietal junction while she lay flat on a bed. The patient immediately felt the presence of another person in her "extrapersonal space." Other than epilepsy, for which the patient was being treated, she was psychologically fit. 
The "other person" was described by the patient as young, of indeterminate sex, silent, motionless, and with a body posture identical to her own. The other person was located exactly behind her, almost touching and therefore within the bed on which the patient was lying.
A second electrical stimulation was applied with slightly more intensity, while the patient was sitting up with her arms folded. This time the patient felt the presence of a "man" who had his arms wrapped around her. She described the sensation as highly unpleasant and electrical stimulation was stopped.
Finally, with the patient seated, electrical stimulation was applied while the patient was asked to perform a language test with a set of flash cards. On this occasion the patient reported the presence of a sitting person, displaced behind her, and to the right. She said the person was attempting to interfere with the test: "He wants to take the card; he doesn’t want me to read." Again, the effect was disturbing and electrical stimulation was ceased.
Similar effects were found for different positions and postures when electrical stimulation at the left temporoparietal junction exceeded ten mA.
The paper suggested that the left temporoparietal junction of the brain evokes the sensation of self-image—body location, position, posture, etc. When the left temporoparietal junction is disturbed, the sensation of self-attribution is broken and may be replaced by the sensation of a foreign presence or a copy of oneself, displaced nearby. This copy mirrors the real person's body posture, location, and position. 
The paper also suggests that the phenomenon created is seen in certain mental illnesses, such as schizophrenia, particularly when accompanied by paranoia, delusions of persecution, and of alien control. Nevertheless, the effects reported are very similar to the doppelgänger phenomenon. Accordingly, some reports of doppelgängers may well be due to failure of the left temporoparietal junction.
Notable documented doppelgänger experiences.
John Donne.
Izaak Walton claimed that John Donne, the English metaphysical poet, saw his wife's doppelgänger in 1612 in Paris, on the same night as the stillbirth of their daughter.
Walton, Izaak. "Life of Dr. John Donne." Fourth edition, 1675.</ref> 
This account first appears in the edition of "Life of Dr. John Donne" published in 1675, and is attributed to "a Person of Honour... told with such circumstances, and such asseveration, that... I verily believe he that told it me, did himself believe it to be true. "At the time Donne was indeed extremely worried about his pregnant wife, and was going through severe illness himself. However, R. C. Bald points out that Walton's account Bald, R.C. "John Donne: a Life." Oxford University Press, 1970.</ref> In January, Donne was still at Amiens. His letters do not support the story as given. 
Percy Bysshe Shelley.
On July 8, 1822, the English poet Percy Bysshe Shelley drowned in the Bay of Spezia near Lerici in Italy. On August 15, while staying at Pisa, Percy's wife Mary Shelley, an author and editor, wrote a letter to Maria Gisborne in which she relayed Percy's claims to her that he had met his own doppelgänger. A week after Mary's nearly fatal miscarriage, in the early hours of June 23 Percy had had a nightmare about the house collapsing in a flood, and
Percy Shelley's drama "Prometheus Unbound" (1820) contains the following passage in Act I: "Ere Babylon was dust, / The Magus Zoroaster, my dead child, / Met his own image walking in the garden. / That apparition, sole of men, he saw. / For know there are two worlds of life and death: / One that which thou beholdest; but the other / Is underneath the grave, where do inhabit / The shadows of all forms that think and live / Till death unite them and they part no more..."
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe.
"The Autobiography of Wolfgang von Goethe." Translated by John Oxenford. Horizon Press, 1969.</ref> 
This is a rare example of a doppelgänger which was perceived by the observer to be both benign and reassuring.
Abraham Lincoln.
Sandburg, Carl. "Abraham Lincoln: The Prairie Years." Harcourt, Brace and Co., New York, 1926. Volume 2, Chapter 165, pp.423-4</ref>
Brooks, Noah. "Washington in Lincoln's Time." Century, New York, 1895. Reprinted as "Washington, D.C., in Lincoln's Time." Edited by Herbert Mitgang. Quadrangle Books, Chicago, 1971. University of Georgia Press, Athens, 1989. First ed., pages 220-221. Mitgang's ed., pages 198-200.</ref>
Lincoln was known to be superstitious, and old mirrors will occasionally produce double images; whether this Janus illusion can be counted as a doppelgänger is perhaps debatable, though probably no more than other such claims of doppelgängers. An alternate consideration, however, suggests that Lincoln suffered vertical strabismus in his left eye, a disorder that could induce visions of a vertically displaced image.
George Tryon.
A famous Victorian apparition was the strange appearance of Vice-Admiral Sir George Tryon. He walked through the drawing room of his family home in Eaton Square, London, looking straight ahead, without exchanging a word to anyone, in front of several guests at a party being given by his wife on 22 June 1893 whilst he was supposed to be in a ship of the Mediterranean Squadron, manoeuvering off the coast of Syria. Subsequently it was reported that he had gone down with his ship, HMS "Victoria", that very same night, after it had collided with HMS "Camperdown" following an unexplained and bizarre order to turn the ship in the direction of the other vessel.
Charles Williams.
Charles Williams included the above quote from Shelley's "Prometheus Unbound" (1820) in his book "Descent Into Hell" (1939). The lead character Pauline Anstruther has seen her own doppelganger all through her life, and spends her time terrified of any next meeting. In the end, this doppelganger turns out to be a positive force, bearing hope to a martyred ancestor of Pauline's. The terror Pauline had during her life is, in effect, the spread out terror of the burning martyr, allowing the martyr to do without terror and have only joy during his death at the stake.
Ruskin Bond.
The owner of a publishing company, Penguin India, Mr Ravi Singh, is reported to have seen the double of the author, Ruskin Bond, at Writer's Meeting Point in Savoy Hotel of Mussoorie while Bond was having his afternoon nap.
In popular culture.
Doppelgängers, as dark doubles of individual identities, appear in a variety of fictional works from Fyodor Dostoyevsky's "", to Al-Tayyib Salih's "Season of Migration to the North", to Ralph Ellison's "Invisible Man". In its simplest incarnation, mistaken identity is a classic trope used in literature, from "Twelfth Night" to "A Tale of Two Cities". In these cases, however, the characters look similar for perfectly normal reasons, such as being siblings or simple coincidence.
Some stories offer supernatural explanations for doubles. These doppelgängers typically, but not always, are evil in some way. The double often will impersonate the victim and go about ruining them, for instance through committing crimes or insulting the victim's friends. Sometimes, the double even tries to kill the original. In José Saramago's 2001 novel "The Double" (original Portuguese title "O Homem Duplicado"), both men's baser instincts come to the surface and they attempt to take advantage of each other. The torment occasionally is earned; for instance, in Edgar Allan Poe's short story "William Wilson", the protagonist of questionable morality is dogged by his doppelgänger most tenaciously when his morals fail. A similar device is employed in Fyodor Dostoyevsky's short story "".
In Philip Roth's novel "Operation Shylock", the author and protagonist travels to Israel in order to confront a doppelgänger. The faux Roth is revealed to be a surgically altered impostor bent on using the author's notoriety to advance a nefarious political agenda. Although technically not a doppelgänger, the imposture threatens Roth's self-identity and forces him to undergo a personal transformation, both themes associated with Doppelgangers in fiction.
Doppelgängers are also a common theme in cinema, most notably in Henry Selick's "Coraline", Kiyoshi Kurosawa's "Doppelganger" from 2003, Avi Nesher's 1993 film of the same name starring Drew Barrymore, and "The Abandoned", as well as in many television shows. "Primer" (2004) featured doppelgängers which were created by way of a time machine. "Solaris" (1972) and "Solaris" (2002) had "manifestations" similar to doppelgängers on a space ship. The Australian film "Lake Mungo" features a portent of death to come. In 2010, the film "Black Swan" tells a story about Nina Sayers, a dancer who lands the role as Swan Queen in Swan Lake, the film contains scenes of the character who sees a double of herself whenever she feels insecure of herself. 
In the ending scene of David Lynch's preternatural drama Twin Peaks, F.B.I. Agent Dale Cooper enters a place called "The Black Lodge", where he sees dopplegangers of all the protagonists. There, each of the dopplegangers embodies a kind of perfect and insidious antagonist of each character, evil and malicious. The image of shadow (which was used in some ancient civilisations to refer to Dopplegangers) could be used here, as they try to overpower their human double.
Doppelgängers have appeared in the science-fiction anthology series, "The Twilight Zone", in episodes such as "Mirror Image" and "Death Ship".
In the popular drama series, "The Vampire Diaries" currently airing on The CW Television Network, the character of Elena Gilbert is a doppelgänger of the vampire Katherine Pierce (original name; Katerina Petrova). Both characters are played by actress Nina Dobrev and it's said that the doppelgänger was created to make sure the bloodline was carried down and, that doppelgängers tend to unwind the lives of the ones they look like. In the comedy television series "How I Met Your Mother", doppelgängers for each of the five main characters are discovered throughout the show. The discovery of the fifth doppelgänger is a major plot point, focused on in the fifth season finale, entitled ""Doppelgangers"".
Doppelgängers occasionally played roles on "Gilligan's Island". On the episode "Will the Real Mr. Howell Please Stand Up?", a man resembling Thurston Howell III masquerades as him. On the episode "Gilligan vs. Gilligan", a secret agent has an operation in order to look exactly like the main character. On the episode "All About Eva", an unglamorous woman moves to the island and the castaways turn her into Ginger Grant's double.
In the video game "Resident Evil 6", Carla Radames becomes a doppelgänger of Ada Wong, mutating her body using the "c-virus".
The doppelganger of the fantasy roleplaying game, "Dungeons and Dragons", is a shape-shifting creature which assumes the identities of others.
