Edward Carl "Eddie" Cibrian ( ; born June 16, 1973) is an American actor. He is best known for his television role as patriarch Cole Deschanel on "Sunset Beach", which gained popularity for the actor in the 1990s. He has also appeared in multiple films and as a cast member in several other television series, filling such roles as Jesse Cardoza in "", Jimmy Doherty on "Third Watch", and Russell Varon in the "Invasion".
Early life and career.
Cibrian, an only child, was born in Burbank, California. His mother, Hortensia (née Balaguer), is an office manager, and his father, Carl Cibrian, a banker. He is of Cuban descent.
Cibrian starred in "The Young and the Restless" as Matt Clark, "Baywatch Nights" as Griff Walker, "Sunset Beach" as Cole Deschanel, "Third Watch" as womanizing New York City firefighter Jimmy Doherty, "Tilt" as rising poker star Eddie Towne, and "Invasion" as Everglades park ranger Russell Varon. He also guest-starred in "", "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch", "Criminal Minds", and "Beverly Hills, 90210". His movie credits include "Living Out Loud" (1998), "But I'm a Cheerleader" (1999), and "The Cave" (2005).
In addition to acting, he sang in the soul-pop boy band 3Deep from 1998 to 2001, along with "Young and The Restless" costar and real-life best friend Joshua Morrow and Canadian singer CJ Huyer.
In 2006, Cibrian joined the cast of the Fox series "Vanished" midway through the season. The series was canceled after nine of the thirteen episodes produced were aired (subsequent episodes aired via MySpace). The following year, he was cast as Jason Austin in the unaired pilot of "Football Wives", the ABC remake of the British drama "Footballers Wives".
Cibrian has had guest spots on "Samantha Who?", "Dirty Sexy Money", and "Ugly Betty". In 2009, he joined the cast of "" as an officer from the Hollywood division who joins Horatio's team in Miami. His contract was not picked up for the 2010-11 season.
In July 2010, Cibrian guest starred as a bounty hunter in multiple episodes of NBC's drama series "Chase".
In March 2011, Cibrian was cast as the lead in the NBC pilot for "The Playboy Club", a TV series set at the first Playboy Club in Chicago in 1963. In early October 2011, "The Playboy Club" was cancelled by NBC after three episodes due to low ratings.
Personal life.
In May 2001, Cibrian married Brandi Glanville, a former model. Cibrian and Glanville have two sons, Mason Edward (born June 8, 2003) and Jake Austin (born April 7, 2007). The couple separated in July 2009 after months of speculation that Cibrian was having an affair with his married "Northern Lights" co-star LeAnn Rimes.
"I can't change the past and I'm truly sorry that people got hurt along the way but not everything reported in the media is reality and continuing to rehash things publicly only makes it more difficult for everyone to heal. I hope for the sake of our children we can all move forward and heal privately. I wish their mother nothing but the best." 
Cibrian and Glanville's divorce was finalized on September 30, 2010. On December 27, 2010, it was announced that Rimes and Cibrian were engaged. The couple wed on April 22, 2011 at a private home in California.
Waitress and aspiring singer-actress Scheana Marie Jancan (who has also been linked to John Mayer) publicized her affair with Cibrian, alleging that he cheated on her with Rimes while he was still married to Glanville. As Scheana works as a server at restaurants owned by Glanville's friend Lisa Vanderpump, her affair with Cibrian has become a plot point in two Bravo TV reality shows in which Vanderpump stars and Scheana appears as a waitress: "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills" (episode 2.19, "Night of a Thousand Surprises", airdate January 16, 2012, and multiple episodes of season 3) and "Vanderpump Rules" (season 1).
