Robert Arthur "Rob" Kardashian (born March 17, 1987) is an American television personality and socialite. He is best known for appearing on his family's reality television shows, such as "Keeping Up with the Kardashians" and "Khloé & Lamar". Kardashian competed and placed second on the thirteenth season of "Dancing with the Stars".
Early life.
Kardashian was born in Los Angeles, California to Robert Kardashian and Kris Jenner. He is one of ten children including four step-siblings and two half-sisters. He has three older sisters, Kourtney, Kim, and Khloé Kardashian. His parents divorced, and his mother married Bruce Jenner in 1991. He has two younger half-sisters, Kendall and Kylie Jenner, and four older step-siblings, Burton, Casey, Brandon, and Brody Jenner. His father, attorney Robert Kardashian, died in 2003 from esophageal cancer.
Kardashian graduated from the University of Southern California's Marshall School of Business in 2009.
Career.
Rob was a contestant on season 13 of "Dancing with the Stars". He was paired with two-time champion Cheryl Burke and made it further than his sister, Kim, did during her appearance in the 7th season. Rob was almost eliminated in the fourth week. During the season, Rob became the most improved dancer, getting his partner Cheryl Burke to the finals, by making it her fifth time. The pair ended up in second place against J.R. Martinez and Karina Smirnoff. Rob has also taken on several business ventures working with PerfectSkin, Rival Spot, the BG5, more recently working on his own sock line and designing a mens line with Scott Disick for the Kardashian Kollection stocked in Sears. Kardashian was one of the final judges of the Miss USA 2012, along with Joe Jonas, Miss Universe 2008 winner, Dayana Mendoza, Fashion Police co-host, George Kotsiopoulos, and others. He also appeared on the dating show The Choice. He announced in August 2012 that he will once again attend the University of Southern California and study law in the fall. USC's Gould School of Law, however, denied this claim and stated via its Twitter account that Kardashian had not even applied to the school.
Personal life.
Kardashian dated actress Adrienne Bailon from 2007 until 2009. Their relationship was documented on the family reality show Keeping Up With The Kardashians. After months of speculation in October 2012, Kardashian confirmed through his Twitter account that he and Rita Ora were dating. In December, it was revealed that their relationship had ended.
