Stephen John Fry (; born 24 August 1957) is an English actor, screenwriter, author, playwright, journalist, poet, comedian, television presenter, film director and board member of Norwich City Football Club.
After a troubled childhood and adolescence, during which he was expelled from two schools and spent three months in prison for credit card fraud, he secured a place at Queens' College, Cambridge, where he studied English Literature. While at university, Fry became involved with the Cambridge Footlights, where he met his long-time collaborator Hugh Laurie. As half of the comic double act Fry and Laurie, he co-wrote and co-starred in "A Bit of Fry & Laurie", and took the role of Jeeves (with Laurie playing Wooster) in "Jeeves and Wooster".
Fry's acting roles include the lead in the film "Wilde", Melchett in the BBC television series "Blackadder", the titular character in the television series "Kingdom", a recurring guest role as Dr. Gordon Wyatt on the crime series "Bones", and as Gordon Deitrich in the dystopian thriller "V for Vendetta". He has also written and presented several documentary series, including the Emmy Award-winning "", which saw him explore his mental illness. He is also the long-time host of the BBC television quiz show "QI".
As well as his work in television, Fry has contributed columns and articles for newspapers and magazines, and has written four novels and two volumes of autobiography, "Moab Is My Washpot" and "". He also appears frequently on BBC Radio 4, starring in the comedy series "Absolute Power", being a frequent guest on panel games such as "Just a Minute", and acting as chairman for "I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue", where he was one of a trio of hosts who succeeded the late Humphrey Lyttelton. Fry is also known for his voice-overs, reading all seven of the "Harry Potter" novels for the UK audiobook recordings, and as the narrator in the "LittleBigPlanet" series of video games.
Early life.
Fry was born in Hampstead, London, on 24 August 1957, the son of Marianne Eve Fry (née Newman) and Alan John Fry, who was an English physicist and inventor. Fry was raised in no religious faith. His maternal grandparents, Martin and Rosa Neumann, were Hungarian Jewish immigrants from Šurany, which is now in Slovakia. His mother's aunt and cousins died in Auschwitz. Fry grew up in the village of Booton near Reepham, Norfolk, having moved from Chesham, Buckinghamshire, at an early age.
Fry briefly attended Cawston Primary School, Cawston, Norfolk, before going on to Stouts Hill Preparatory School, in Uley, Gloucestershire, at the age of seven, and then to Uppingham School, Rutland, where he joined Fircroft house, and was described as a "near-asthmatic genius". He was expelled from Uppingham when he was 15, and subsequently from the Paston School.
At 17, after leaving Norfolk College of Arts and Technology, Fry absconded with a credit card stolen from a family friend, was arrested in Swindon, and, as a result, spent three months in Pucklechurch Prison on remand.
Following his release, he resumed his education at City College Norwich, promising administrators that he would study rigorously to sit the Cambridge entrance exams. He scored well enough to gain a scholarship to Queens' College, Cambridge. At Cambridge, Fry joined the Cambridge Footlights, appeared on "University Challenge", and gained a degree in English literature. At the Footlights Fry met his future comedy collaborator Hugh Laurie.
Career.
Television.
Comedy.
Fry's career in television began with the 1982 broadcasting of "The Cellar Tapes", the 1981 Cambridge Footlights Revue which was written by Fry, Hugh Laurie, Emma Thompson and Tony Slattery. The revue caught the attention of Granada Television, who, keen to replicate the success of the BBC's "Not the Nine O'Clock News", hired Fry, Laurie and Thompson to star alongside Ben Elton in "There's Nothing to Worry About!." A second series, re-titled "Alfresco", was broadcast in 1983, and a third in 1984; it established Fry and Laurie's reputation as a comedy double act. In 1983, the BBC offered Fry, Laurie and Thompson their own show, which became "The Crystal Cube", a mixture of science fiction and mockumentary that was cancelled after the first episode. Undeterred, Fry and Laurie appeared in an episode of "The Young Ones" in 1984, and Fry also appeared in Ben Elton's 1985 series, "Happy Families". In 1986 and 1987 Fry and Laurie performed sketches on the LWT/Channel 4 show "Saturday Live".
Forgiving Fry and Laurie for "The Crystal Cube", the BBC commissioned, in 1986, a sketch show that was to become "A Bit of Fry & Laurie". The programme ran for 26 episodes spanning four series between 1986 and 1995, and was very successful. During this time, Fry starred in "Blackadder II" as Lord Melchett, made a guest appearance in "" as the Duke of Wellington, then returned to a starring role in "Blackadder Goes Forth", as General Melchett. In the 1988 television special Blackadder's Christmas Carol, he played the roles of Lord Melchett and Lord Frondo.
Between 1990 and 1993, Fry starred as Jeeves (alongside Hugh Laurie's Bertie Wooster) in "Jeeves and Wooster", 23 hour-long adaptations of P.G. Wodehouse's novels and short stories.
Towards the end of 2003, Fry starred alongside John Bird in the television adaptation of "Absolute Power", previously a radio series on BBC Radio 4.
In 2010, Fry took part in a Christmas series of short films called 'Little Crackers'. His short was based on a story from his childhood at school. He appeared as the Christian God in 2011's "Holy Flying Circus".
Drama.
Fry has appeared in a number of BBC adaptations of plays and books, including a 1992 adaptation of the Simon Gray play "The Common Pursuit" (he had previously appeared in the West End stage production); a 1998 Malcolm Bradbury adaptation of the Mark Tavener novel "In the Red", taking the part of the Controller of BBC Radio 2; and in 2000 in the role of Professor Bellgrove in the BBC serial "Gormenghast", which was adapted from the first two novels of Mervyn Peake's "Gormenghast" series. In 2011, Fry portrayed Professor Mildeye in the BBC adaption of Mary Norton's 1952 novel "The Borrowers".
Fry narrates the English-language version of the Spanish children's animated series "Pocoyo".
From 2007 to 2009, Fry played the lead role in (and was executive producer for) the legal drama "Kingdom", which ran for three series on ITV1. He has also taken up a recurring guest role as psychiatrist Dr. Gordon Wyatt in the popular American drama "Bones".
In 2010, having learned some Irish for the role, he filmed a cameo role in "Ros na Rún", an Irish-language soap opera broadcast in Ireland, Scotland and the United States.
Documentaries and other factual programmes.
Fry's first documentary was the Emmy Award-winning "" in 2006. The same year, he appeared in the genealogy series "Who Do You Think You Are?", tracing his maternal family tree to investigate his Jewish ancestry. Fry narrated "The Story of Light Entertainment", which was shown from July–September 2006. In 2007, he presented a documentary on the subject of HIV and AIDS, "HIV and Me".
On 7 May 2008, Fry gave a speech as part of a series of BBC lectures on the future of public service broadcasting in the United Kingdom, which he later recorded for a podcast.
His six-part travel series "Stephen Fry in America" began on BBC One in October 2008, and saw him travel to each of the 50 US states. In the same year, he narrated the nature documentaries "Spectacled Bears: Shadow of the Forest" for the BBC "Natural World" series.
In the 2009 television series "Last Chance to See", Fry and zoologist Mark Carwardine sought out endangered species, some of which had been featured in Douglas Adams' and Carwardine's 1990 book and radio series of the same name. Also in 2009, Fry briefly hosted the CBBC series "Horrible Histories", an educational TV show for school children.
In August 2011, "Stephen Fry's 100 Greatest Gadgets" was shown on Channel 4 as one of the "100 Greatest" strand. His choice for the greatest gadget was the cigarette lighter, which he described as "fire with a flick of the fingers". In the same month, the nature documentary series "Ocean Giants", narrated by Fry, premièred.
In September 2011 "Fry's Planet Word", a five-part documentary about language, aired on BBC HD and BBC Two.
In November 2011, an episode of "Living The Life" featured Fry in an intimate conversation discussing his life and career with Rolling Stones bass player Bill Wyman.
At the 2012 Pride of Britain Awards, broadcast on ITV on 30 October, Fry, along with Michael Caine, Elton John, Richard Branson and Simon Cowell, recited Rudyard Kipling's poem "If—", in tribute to the 2012 British Olympic and Paralympic heroes.
"QI".
In 2003, Fry began hosting "QI" (Quite Interesting), a comedy panel game television quiz show. "QI" was created and co-produced by John Lloyd, and features permanent panellist Alan Davies. "QI" has the highest viewing figures for any show on BBC Four and Dave (formerly UKTV G2). In 2006, Fry won the Rose d'Or award for "Best Game Show Host" for his work on the series.
Film.
Having made his film début in the 1985 film "The Good Father", Fry had a brief appearance in "A Fish Called Wanda" (in which he is knocked out by Kevin Kline, who is posing as an airport security man), and then appeared in the lead role for Kenneth Branagh's "Peter's Friends" in 1992. In the 1994 romantic comedy film "I.Q.", he played the role of James Moreland. Portraying Oscar Wilde (of whom he had been an ardent admirer since the age of 13) in the 1997 film "Wilde", he fulfilled to critical acclaim a role that he has said he was "born to play". It also earned him a nomination for Best Actor – Drama in the 1998 Golden Globe Award. A year later, Fry starred in David Yates' small independent film "The Tichborne Claimant", and in 2001 he played the detective in Robert Altman's period costume drama, "Gosford Park". In the same year, he also appeared in the Dutch film "The Discovery of Heaven", directed by Jeroen Krabbé and based on the novel by Harry Mulisch.
In 2003, Fry made his directorial début with "Bright Young Things", adapted by him from Evelyn Waugh's "Vile Bodies". In 2001, he began hosting the BAFTA Film Awards, a role from which he stepped down in 2006. Later that same year, he wrote the English libretto and dialogue for Kenneth Branagh's film adaptation of "The Magic Flute".
Fry continues to make regular film appearances, notably in treatments of literary cult classics. He portrayed Maurice Woodruff in "The Life and Death of Peter Sellers", served as narrator in the 2005 film version of "The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy", and in 2005 appeared in both "A Cock and Bull Story", based on "Tristram Shandy", and "V for Vendetta", as a non-conforming TV presenter who challenges the fascist state. In 2006, he played the role of gadget-master Smithers in "Stormbreaker", and in 2007 he appeared as himself hosting a quiz in "St Trinian's". In 2007, Fry wrote, for director Peter Jackson, a script for a remake of "The Dam Busters".
Fry was offered a role in "Valkyrie", but was unable to participate. Fry starred in the Tim Burton version of "Alice in Wonderland", as the voice of the Cheshire Cat. He played Mycroft Holmes in to "Sherlock Holmes", directed by Guy Ritchie. In 2010, Fry provided the voice of Socrates the Lion in the environmental animated film "Animals United". He is to portray the Master of Lake-town in the second part of the film adaptation of J. R. R. Tolkien's "The Hobbit".
Radio.
Fry came to the attention of radio listeners with the 1986 creation of his alter-ego, Donald Trefusis, whose "wireless essays" were broadcast on the BBC Radio 4 programme "Loose Ends". In the 1980s, he starred as David Lander in four series of the BBC Radio 4 show "Delve Special", written by Tony Sarchet, which then became the six-part Channel 4 series "This is David Lander" in 1988. In 1988, Fry wrote and presented a six-part comedy series entitled "Saturday Night Fry". Frequent radio appearances have ensued, notably on panel games "Just a Minute" and "I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue". In 2000, he began starring as Charles Prentiss in the Radio 4 comedy "Absolute Power", reprising the role for three further series on radio, and two on television. In 2002, Fry was one of the narrators of A.A. Milne's "Winnie-the-Pooh" and "The House at Pooh Corner", in which he voiced Winnie-the-Pooh. He presented a 20-part, two-hour series, "The Incomplete and Utter History of Classical Music", a "witty guide" to the genre over the past 1,000 years, on Classic FM.
In 2007, he hosted "Current Puns", an exploration of wordplay, and "Radio 4: This Is Your Life", to celebrate the radio station's 40th anniversary. He also interviewed Tony Blair as part of a series of podcasts released by 10 Downing Street.
In February 2008, Fry began presenting podcasts entitled "Stephen Fry's Podgrams", in which he recounts his life and recent experiences. In July 2008, he appeared as himself in "I Love Stephen Fry", an "Afternoon Play" for Radio 4 written by former "Fry and Laurie" script editor Jon Canter.
Since August 2008, he has presented "Fry's English Delight", a series on BBC Radio 4 about the English language. As of 2011, it has been running for five series and 17 episodes.
In the summer 2009 series of "I'm Sorry I Haven't a Clue", Fry was one of a trio of hosts replacing Humphrey Lyttelton (the others being Jack Dee and Rob Brydon).
In 2012, he appeared as a guest panellist in the BBC Radio 4 comedy panel show "Wordaholics".
In September 2012, he guest-starred as himself in the audio comedy drama "We Are The BBC", produced by the Wireless Theatre Company, written by Susan Casanove.
Theatre.
Fry wrote the play "Latin! or Tobacco and Boys" for the 1980 Edinburgh Festival, where it won the Fringe first prize. It had a revival in 2009 at London's Cock Tavern Theatre, directed by Adam Spreadbury-Maher. "The Cellar Tapes", the Footlights Revue of 1981, won the Perrier Comedy Award. In 1984, Fry adapted the hugely successful 1930s musical "Me and My Girl" for the West End, where it ran for eight years.
He was also cast in a lead role in Simon Gray's 1995 play "Cell Mates", which he left three days into the West End run, pleading stage fright. He later recalled the incident as a hypomanic episode in his documentary about bipolar disorder, The Secret Life of the Manic Depressive. In 2007, Fry wrote a Christmas pantomime, "Cinderella", which ran at London's Old Vic Theatre.
Fry is a long-standing fan of the anarchic 1960s British musical comedy group the "Bonzo Dog Band", and particularly of its eccentric front man, the late Vivian Stanshall. Fry helped to fund a 1988 London re-staging of Stanshall's "Stinkfoot, a Comic Opera", written by Vivian and Ki Longfellow-Stanshall for the Bristol-based Old Profanity Showboat. Fry performed several of Stanshall's numbers as part of the Bonzos' 2006 reunion concert at the London Astoria. He also appears as a shiny New Millennium Bonzo on their post-reunion album, "Pour l'Amour des Chiens", on which he recites a recipe for "Salmon Proust", plays a butler in "Hawkeye the Gnu", and voices ads for the fictitious "Fiasco" stores.
Following three one-man shows in Australia, Fry announced a "sort of stand-up" performance at The Royal Albert Hall in London for September 2010.
In September 2012, Fry made a return to the stage at Shakespeare's Globe, appearing as Malvolio in a production of William Shakespeare's Twelfth Night, which transferred to the West End in November 2012. He received excellent reviews.
Audio books.
Fry has been the reader for the British versions of all of J. K. Rowling's "Harry Potter" series of audio books. He discussed this project in an interview with J. K. Rowling in 2005.
He has also been the reader for Douglas Adams's "The Hitchhiker's Guide To The Galaxy" film tie-in edition, and has made recordings of his own books, such as "The Stars' Tennis Balls" and "Moab Is My Washpot", and of works by Roald Dahl, Michael Bond, A. A. Milne and Anthony Buckeridge.
Video games.
Fry's distinctive voice has been featured in a number of video games, including an appearance as Reaver, an amoral supporting character in Lionhead Studios games "Fable II" and "Fable III", and as the narrator of Sackboy's story in the crossover fighting game "PlayStation All-Stars Battle Royale".
He also narrated "LittleBigPlanet", LittleBigPlanet 2, LittleBigPlanet PS Vita and LittleBigPlanet Karting, and the first four "Harry Potter" games: ("Philosopher's Stone", "Chamber of Secrets", "Prisoner of Azkaban", and "Goblet of Fire").
Advertising.
Fry has lent himself and his voice to many advertisements, starting with an appearance as "Count Ivan Skavinsky Skavar" in a 1982 advert for Whitbread Best Bitter. Fry has said, in his memoirs, that after receiving his payment for this work – £25,000 – he has never subsequently experienced "what one could call serious money troubles". He has since appeared in adverts for products and companies such as Marks and Spencer, Twinings, Kenco, Vauxhall, Honda, Direct Line, Calpol, Heineken, Alliance & Leicester, After Eights, Trebor, Panama cigars, Virgin Media and Orange Mobile.
Literature.
Since the publication of his first novel, "The Liar" (1991), Fry has written three further novels, several non-fiction works and two volumes of autobiography. "Making History" (1997) is partly set in an alternative universe in which Adolf Hitler's father is made infertile and his replacement proves a rather more effective Führer. The book won the Sidewise Award for Alternate History. "The Hippopotamus" (1994) is about Edward (Ted/Tedward) Wallace and his stay at his old friend Lord Logan's country manor in Norfolk. "The Stars' Tennis Balls" (2000) is a modern retelling of "The Count of Monte Cristo". Fry's book "" is a guide to writing poetry.
When writing a book review for "Tatler", Fry wrote under a "nom de plume", Williver Hendry, editor of "A Most Peculiar Friendship: The Correspondence of Lord Alfred Douglas and Jack Dempsey", a field close to his heart as an Oscar Wilde enthusiast. Once a columnist in "The Listener" and "The Daily Telegraph", he now writes a weekly technology column in the Saturday edition of "The Guardian". His blog attracted more than 300,000 visitors in its first two weeks.
In May 2009, Fry unveiled "The Dongle of Donald Trefusis", an audiobook series following Donald Trefusis (a fictional character from Fry's novel "The Liar" and from the BBC Radio 4 series "Loose Ends"), set over 12 episodes. After its release, it reached No. 1 on the UK Album Chart list.
Fry's use of the word "" (spelled "lovie" by Fry) in "The Guardian" on 2 April 1988 is given by the "Oxford English Dictionary" as the earliest recorded use of the word as a humorous synonym for "actor".
Football.
In August 2010, Fry joined the Board of Directors at Norwich City Football Club. A lifelong fan of "the Canaries" and a regular visitor to Carrow Road, he said, on being appointed, "Truly this is one of the most exciting days of my life, and I am as proud and pleased as I could be."
Twitter.
In October 2008, Fry began posting to the social networking site Twitter, which he regularly updates. On 16 May 2009, he celebrated the 500,000-follower mark: "Bless my soul 500k followers. And I love you all. Well, all except that silly one. And that's not you."
Fry wields a considerable amount of influence through his use of Twitter. He is frequently asked to promote various charities and causes, often inadvertently causing their websites to crash because of the volume of traffic generated by his large number of followers; as Fry notes on his website: "Four thousand hits a second all diving down the pipeline at the same time for minutes on end." He uses his influence to recommend underexposed musicians and authors (who often see large increases in web hits and sales) and to raise awareness of contemporary issues in the world of media and politics, notably the dropping of an injunction against "The Guardian" and the lambasting of "Daily Mail" columnist Jan Moir over her article on the death of Boyzone member Stephen Gately.
In October 2009, Fry again sparked debate amongst users, when he announced his intention to leave the social networking site after criticism from another user on Twitter. However, he retracted the announcement the following day. In October 2010, Fry left Twitter for a few days, with a farewell message of "Bye bye", following press criticism of a quote taken from an interview he had given. After returning, he explained that he had left Twitter to "avoid being sympathised with or told about an article" he "would otherwise never have got wind of". In some quarters, the general methods Fry uses on Twitter have been criticised.
In November 2009, Fry's Twitter account reached one million followers. He commemorated the million-followers milestone with a humorous video blog in which a 'Step Hen Fry' clone speaks from the year 2034, where MySpace, Facebook and Twitter have combined to form 'Twit on MyFace'. In November 2010, he welcomed his two-millionth follower with a blog entry detailing his opinions and experiences of Twitter. On 11 March 2012, Fry noted his passing of the four-million-followers mark with a tweet: "Lordy I've breasted the 4 million followers tape. Love you all. Yes even YOU. But let's dedicate today to Douglas Adams's diamond jubilee".
Acclaim.
In 1995, Fry was presented with an honorary doctorate from the University of Dundee, which named their main Students' Association bar after his novel "The Liar". Fry is a patron of its Lip Theatre Company. He also served two consecutive terms – 1992 to 1995 and 1995 to 1998 – as the student-elected Rector of the University of Dundee. Such was his popularity, he was unopposed when he sought re-election to office in 1995, and by the time he completed his second term in office, he had won the widespread admiration of the University's staff and students. He was awarded the AoC Gold Award in 2004, and was entered into their Hall of Fame. Fry was also awarded an honorary degree from Anglia Ruskin University in 2005. He was made honorary president of the Cambridge University Quiz Society and honorary fellow of his "alma mater" Queens' College, Cambridge. On 13 July 2010, he was made an honorary fellow of Cardiff University, and on 28 January 2011, he was awarded an honorary doctorate at the University of Sussex, for his work campaigning for people suffering from mental health problems, bipolar disorder and HIV.
He is a Patron of the Norwich Playhouse theatre and a Vice President of The Noël Coward Society. Fry was the last person to be named Pipe Smoker of the Year before the award was discontinued.
In December 2006, he was ranked sixth for the BBC's Top Living Icon Award, was featured on "The Culture Show", and was voted "Most Intelligent Man on Television" by readers of "Radio Times". The "Independent on Sunday" Pink List named Fry the second most influential gay person in Britain in May 2007; he had taken the twenty-third position on the list the previous year. Later the same month, he was announced as the 2007 "Mind Champion of the Year", in recognition of the success of his documentary "The Secret Life of a Manic Depressive" in raising awareness of bipolar disorder. He was also nominated in "Best Entertainment Performance" for "QI" and "Best Factual Series" for "Secret Life of the Manic Depressive" at the 2007 British Academy Television Awards. That same year, "Broadcast" magazine listed Fry at number four in its "Hot 100" list of influential on-screen performers, describing him as a polymath and a "national treasure". He was also granted a lifetime achievement award at the British Comedy Awards on 5 December 2007, and the Special Recognition Award at the National Television Awards on 20 January 2010.
BBC Four dedicated two nights of programming to Fry on 17 and 18 August 2007, in celebration of his 50th birthday. The first night, comprising programs featuring Fry, began with a sixty-minute documentary entitled "". The second night was composed of programmes selected by Fry, as well as a 60-minute interview with Mark Lawson and a half-hour special, "Stephen Fry: Guilty". The weekend programming proved such a ratings hit for BBC Four that it was repeated on BBC Two on 16 and 17 September 2007.
In 2011, he was the subject of Molly Lewis's song "An Open Letter to Stephen Fry", in which the singer jokingly offers herself as a surrogate mother for his child. In February 2011, Fry was awarded the Outstanding Lifetime Achievement Award in Cultural Humanism by the Humanist Chaplaincy at Harvard University, the Harvard Secular Society and the American Humanist Association.
In 2012, Fry wrote the foreword to the Union of UEA Students report on the student experience for LGBT+ members. As recognition of his public support for LGBT+ rights and for the Union's report, the Union of UEA Students awarded him, on the 18th of October 2012, Honorary Life Membership of the Union.
Personal life.
Fry struggled to keep his homosexuality secret during his teenage years at public school, and has claimed not to have engaged in sexual activity for 16 years from 1979 until 1995. When asked when he first acknowledged his sexuality, Fry quipped: "I suppose it all began when I came out of the womb. I looked back up at my mother and thought to myself, 'That's the last time I'm going up one of those.'" Fry was in a 14-year relationship with Daniel Cohen, which ended in 2010. Fry has stated that he is 90% homosexual, but has been attracted to women on occasion. Fry has a home in London and another in Hollywood. He also has a home near King's Lynn, Norfolk. When in London, he drives a dark green TX4 London cab.
Fry was an active supporter of the Labour Party for many years, and appeared in a party political broadcast on its behalf with Hugh Laurie and Michelle Collins in November 1993. He did not vote in the 2005 General Election because of the stance of both the Labour and Conservative parties with regard to the Iraq War. Despite his praise of the Blair/Brown government's work on social reform, Fry has been critical of the Labour Party's "Third Way" concept. Fry appeared in literature to support changing the British electoral system from first-past-the-post to alternative vote for electing Members of Parliament to the House of Commons in the Alternative Vote referendum in 2011.
He is on cordial terms with Prince Charles (despite a mild parody Fry performed in his role of King Charles I in the comedy programme ""), through his work with the Prince's Trust. He attended the Prince of Wales' and Camilla Parker Bowles' wedding in 2005. Fry is a friend of comedian and actor (and "Blackadder" co-star) Rowan Atkinson and was best man at Atkinson's wedding to Sunetra Sastry at the Russian Tea Room in New York City. Fry was a friend of British actor John Mills. His best friend is Hugh Laurie, whom he met while both were at Cambridge and with whom he has collaborated many times over the years. He was best man at Laurie's wedding and is godfather to all three of his children.
A fan of cricket, Fry has claimed to be related to former England cricketer C.B. Fry, and was interviewed for the "Ashes Fever" DVD, reporting on England's victory over Australia in the 2005 Ashes series. Regarding football, he is a supporter of Norwich City, and is a regular visitor to Carrow Road. He has been described as "deeply dippy for all things digital", claims to have bought the third Macintosh computer sold in the UK (his friend Douglas Adams bought the first two) and jokes that he has never encountered a smartphone that he has not bought. He counts Wikipedia among his favourite websites "because I like to find out that I died, and that I'm currently in a ballet in China, and all the other very accurate and important things that Wikipedia brings us all."
Fry has a long-standing interest in Internet production, including having his own website since 1997. His current site, "The New Adventures of Mr Stephen Fry", has existed since 2002 and has attracted many visitors following his first blog in September 2007, which comprised a 6,500 word "blessay" on smartphones. In February 2008, Fry launched his private podcast series, "Stephen Fry's Podgrams", and a forum, including discussions on depression and activities in which Fry is involved. The website content is created by Stephen Fry and produced by Andrew Sampson. Stephen Fry's weekly gadget column "Dork Talk" appeared in "The Guardian" from November 2007 to October 2008. Fry is also a supporter of GNU and the Free Software Foundation. For the 25th anniversary of the GNU operating system, Fry appeared in a video explaining some of the philosophy behind GNU by likening it to the sharing found in science.
On 30 April 2008, Fry signed an open letter, published in "The Guardian" newspaper by some well known Jewish personalities, stating their opposition to celebrating the 60th anniversary of the founding of the State of Israel. Furthermore, he is a signatory member of the British Jews for Justice for Palestinians organisation, which campaigns for Palestinian rights. Fry was among over 100 signatories to a statement published by Sense About Science on 4 June 2009, condemning British libel laws and their use to "severely curtail the right to free speech on a matter of public interest."
Health.
Fry has been diagnosed with bipolar disorder, specifically stating he suffers from cyclothymia, referring to it as "bipolar lite". He suffered a nervous breakdown in 1995 while appearing in a West End play called "Cell Mates" and subsequently walked out of the production, prompting its early closure and incurring the displeasure of co-star Rik Mayall and playwright Simon Gray. Mayall's comedy partner, Adrian Edmondson, made light of the subject in his and Mayall's second "Bottom" live show. After walking out of the production, Fry went missing for several days while contemplating suicide. He abandoned the idea and left the United Kingdom by ferry, eventually resurfacing in Belgium.
Fry has spoken publicly about his experience with bipolar disorder, which was also depicted in the documentary "". In the programme, he interviewed other sufferers of the illness including Carrie Fisher, Richard Dreyfuss and Tony Slattery. Also featured were chef Rick Stein, whose father committed suicide, Robbie Williams, who talks of his experience with major depression, and comedienne and former mental health nurse Jo Brand. He is also involved with the mental health charity Stand to Reason.
In 2009, Fry lent his support to a campaign led by the human rights organisation Reprieve to prevent the execution of heroin trafficker Akmal Shaikh, a British citizen originally from Pakistan. Some of Shaikh's supporters have said he suffered from undiagnosed bipolar disorder. Despite calls for clemency, Shaikh was executed in the People's Republic of China for drug trafficking.
In January 2008, he broke his arm while filming "Last Chance to See" in Brazil. He later explained in a podcast how the accident happened: while climbing aboard a boat, he slipped between it and the dock, and, while stopping himself from falling into the water, his body weight caused his right humerus to snap. The damage was more severe than first thought: the resulting vulnerability to his radial nerve – he was at risk of losing the use of his arm – was not diagnosed until he saw a consultant in the UK. As the host of "QI", Fry has stated that he is allergic to both champagne and bumble bee stings.
Appearing on "Top Gear" in 2009, Fry had lost a significant amount of weight, prompting host Jeremy Clarkson to ask jokingly, "Where's the rest of you?" Fry explained that he had shed a total of , attributing the weight loss to doing a lot of walking while listening to downloaded Audiobooks. Fry is between and in height.
Views on religion.
Fry has repeatedly expressed opposition to organised religion, and has identified himself as an atheist and humanist, while declaring some sympathy for the ancient Greek belief in capricious gods. In his first autobiography he wrote, "I knew I couldn't believe in God, because I was fundamentally Hellenic in my outlook." He has accepted that religion can have positive effects, "Sometimes belief means credulity, sometimes an expression of faith and hope which even the most sceptical atheist such as myself cannot but find inspiring."
In 2009, "The Guardian" published a letter from Fry addressing his younger self, explaining how his future is soon to unfold, reflecting on the positive progression towards gay acceptance and openness around him, and yet not everywhere, while warning on how "the cruel, hypocritical and loveless hand of religion and absolutism has fallen on the world once more". Later that year, he and Christopher Hitchens participated in an "Intelligence Squared" debate in which they argued against Ann Widdecombe and Archbishop John Onaiyekan, who supported the view that the Catholic Church was a force for good. Fry and Hitchens argued that the church did more harm than good. Fry attacked the Catholic Church's teachings on sexuality and denounced its wealth.
In 2010 he was made a Distinguished Supporter of the British Humanist Association, stating: "it is essential to nail one’s colours to the mast as a humanist." Later that year, Fry, along with 54 other public figures, signed an open letter published in "The Guardian", stating their opposition to Pope Benedict XVI's visit to the United Kingdom being a state visit. On 22 February 2011, Fry was presented with the Lifetime Achievement Award in Cultural Humanism by the Humanist Chaplaincy at Harvard University, joining a list of previous honorees including novelist Salman Rushdie, screenwriter Joss Whedon, and Mythbusters Adam Savage and Jamie Hyneman.
Business.
In 2008, Fry formed SamFry Ltd, with long-term collaborator Andrew Sampson, to produce and fund new material, as well as manage his official website.
