"Silent Hill" is set in a multiverse consisting of reality and an alternate dimension whose form is based on the series' eponymous fictitious American town. The series is heavily influenced by the literary genre of psychological horror, with its player characters being mostly "everymen." By contrast, other horror-themed games use a stronger protagonist through character backstory or direct game mechanics (more weapons, heavier emphasis on combat) such as Dead Space or Resident Evil, which is widely regarded as "Silent Hill"s strongest "rival".
The Silent Hill franchise has expanded to include various print pieces, two feature films, and spin-off video games.
Installment overview.
</ref> "Silent Hill" follows Harry Mason as he searches for his missing adopted daughter in the series' multiverse; stumbling upon a cult conducting a ritual to revive a deity it worships, he discovers her true origin. Five game endings are possible, depending on in-game actions taken by the player, including one joke ending.
"Silent Hill 2".
"Silent Hill 2" is the second installment in the series and was released in September 2001 for the PlayStation 2. An extended version of the game was released for the Xbox in December of the same year as "Silent Hill 2: Restless Dreams" in North America and "Silent Hill 2: Inner Fears" in Europe, and for the PlayStation 2 in 2002 as "Silent Hill 2: Director's Cut", with a port of "Director's Cut" to Microsoft Windows released in December 2002. A high-definition re-release of "Silent Hill 2" was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 on March 20, 2012 as part of "Silent Hill HD Collection". "Silent Hill 2" follows James Sunderland as he searches for his deceased wife in the series' multiverse after having received a letter from her informing him that she is waiting for him in Silent Hill, ultimately realizing her death's true cause.
"Silent Hill 3".
"Silent Hill 3" is the third "installment" in the series and was released in May 2003 for the PlayStation 2, with a port to "Microsoft Windows" released in October of the same year. A direct sequel to the first installment in the series, A high-definition re-release of "Silent Hill 3" was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 on March 20, 2012 as part of "Silent Hill HD Collection". "Silent Hill 3" follows a teenage girl named Heather as she navigates the series' multiverse, trapped in it, becoming caught in a conflict within Silent Hill's cult and ultimately discovering her life's true origin.
"Silent Hill 4: The Room".
"Silent Hill 4: The Room" is the fourth installment and was released in 2004 for the PS2, the Xbox and Microsoft Windows. The game follows Henry Townshend, who finds himself locked in his apartment and discovers in it a portal to the series multiverse's alternate dimension.
"Silent Hill: Origins".
The fifth installment, "Silent Hill: Origins", known as "Silent Hill Zero" in Japan, was developed by Climax Studios and released in 2007 for the PSP, with a port for the PS2 released in 2008. It is a prequel with a plot that features Travis Grady, who becomes trapped in Silent Hill after rescuing a girl from a burning house. During his quest to find the fate of the burned girl, he encounters characters from the first game and some new ones from his own subconscious.
"Silent Hill Homecoming".
The sixth installment, "Silent Hill Homecoming", was developed by Double Helix Games and released in 2008 for the PS3 and the Xbox 360 and in 2009 for Microsoft Windows. The plot follows Alex Shepherd, a soldier who has returned from a war overseas. Alex discovers upon his arrival that his father has gone missing, his mother has become catatonic, and no one can provide the whereabouts of his younger brother, Joshua. The game chronicles Alex's search to find his missing brother.
"Silent Hill: Shattered Memories".
The seventh installment, "Silent Hill: Shattered Memories", was developed by Climax Studios and published by Konami Digital Entertainment for the Wii in December 2009, with ports for the PlayStation 2 and the PlayStation Portable released in January 2010. The game is a reimagining of the first installment. "Shattered Memories" retains the premise of the original game—Harry Mason's quest to find his missing daughter in the American town of Silent Hill—but is set in a different fictional universe, following a different plot, with characters from the first game appearing altered alongside new ones. Gameplay takes place in two parts: a framing, first-person psychotherapy session with an unseen patient and an over-the-shoulder perspective of Harry's journey through Silent Hill, periodically interrupted by the occurrence of a shift to an alternate dimension where he is pursued by monsters. Five endings are available, their achievement being based on in-game actions taken by the player, including a joke ending: all reveal Harry and his quest to be a fantasy of his daughter who is the adult session patient, caused by her denial of his death which occurred years ago; depending on the ending achieved, she either accepts his death and dismisses the fantasy or clings to the latter; afterwards, character traits of Harry and his family, which are subject to change in each playthrough of the game according to player in-game actions, from a period when he was alive, are depicted in a video clip.
"Shattered Memories" gameplay focuses on completion of psychological tests which alter in-game elements, while in the first setting, and exploration, puzzle solving, and monster evasion, when in the second setting. The game's developers avoided integrating combat into the second setting's gameplay, centering instead on a weaponless player character attempting to rescue themselves from powerful opponents, as they considered this to be more fear-inducing. The game received generally positive reviews, with its graphics, storyline, voice acting, soundtrack, and use of the Wii Remote as the Wii version's controller praised by reviewers; "Shattered Memories" chase sequences and duration, though, were criticized by certain reviewers, because they deemed them potentially frustrating and short, respectively.
"Silent Hill: Downpour".
The eighth installment in the series, titled "Silent Hill: Downpour", was announced in April 2010 and released by Vatra Games for the PS3 and Xbox 360 on March 13, 2012. The plot follows player character Murphy Pendleton, a prisoner who is stranded in Silent Hill after the prison transport vehicle he is being transported with careens off a road. It is the first game in the series to feature 3D (stereoscopic) graphics.
"Silent Hill: HD Collection".
Silent Hill HD Collection is an HD Re Release of Silent Hill 2 and Silent Hill 3 for the Playstation 3 and Xbox 360. Featuring High Res visuals, new sounds, new voices and Trophies/Achievements for both games. Silent Hill 2 features the exclusive option to use both the old and new voices, however, Silent Hill 3 features only a new voice track, with the old voices unavailable due to legal reasons. Silent Hill 2 features both the main scenario and the sub scenario for Maria seen in later re releases, namely Directors Cut. This pack is also the first time Silent hill 3 is playable on an Xbox brand console, as while Silent Hill 2 and 4 were released on Xbox, Silent Hill 3 was cancelled on the platform. The collection got mixed to negative reviews due to severe issues with both games, such as severe framerate problems, lockups and more. While the PS3 version was patched, the Xbox 360 patch was cancelled, and Konami offered refunds to all Xbox 360 owners of the game. 
"Silent Hill: Book of Memories".
The ninth installment, titled "Silent Hill: Book of Memories", was released in October 2012 for the PlayStation Vita. The game, which is not canonical to the series, as well as a spin-off, was developed by WayForward Technologies. "Book of Memories" utilizes an overhead isometric view, follows a new storyline and features returning creatures from the series' fictional universe, as well as cooperative gameplay; the game is the first installment in the series to feature multiplayer gameplay. According to series producer Tomm Hulett, "Book of Memories" gameplay "will be largely different from the one established in previous installments in the series, focusing on cooperative multiplayer action rather than traditional psychological horror."
Canceled games.
Silicon Knights, a video game developer struggling financially after a legal battle with Epic Games, recently announced the titles in development when the company stopped development. One of these games was called Silent Hill: The Box, but later became known simply as 'The Box,' which could have been the codename for the title after a publishing deal fell through given the companies financial status. A screenshot from the game was released via ComputerAndVideoGames.com on the December 12.
Recurring elements.
Plot traits and symbolism.
All the plots of the installments in the "Silent Hill" series, except "Shattered Memories", share a common setting. "Silent Hill", "Silent Hill 2", "3", "4", "Origins", "Homecoming", and "Downpour"s plots are set in the foggy rural American town of Silent Hill, which is a fictitious location, and a dark alternate dimension called the "Otherworld"; both the town and the dimension exist in a multiverse consisting of reality and the Otherworld. The series' player characters experience occasional shifts between the real world and the Otherworld. In the latter, lack of application of physical laws can occur, with the dimension having a varying form but most frequently assuming one whose physical appearance is based on that of Silent Hill, and the series' characters experiencing delusions and encountering tangible symbols of elements from their unconscious minds, mental states, and innermost thoughts when present in it, as well as when they are in the real world. The origin of these manifestations is a maleficent power native to Silent Hill, which materializes human thoughts; this force was formerly non-evil, but was corrupted by the occurrence of certain events in the area. "Silent Hill: Shattered Memories" plot is set in an alternate fictional universe, which features the town of Silent Hill and another alternate dimension, which is icy, known as "Nightmare".
Another recurring plot trait in the "Silent Hill" series is a fictitious religious secret society officially named "Silent Hill Smile Support Society", but known as "the Order" by the town's population. The organization has certain members who act as antagonists in most of the series' installments and maintains a false public image as a charity organization which operates an orphanage. The religion followed by the Order is heathen, focusing on the worship of a chief deity, who is named Samael. The group's dogma is derived from a myth: the deity set out to create paradise, but ran out of power during the process; she will someday be resurrected, thus becoming able to finally create paradise and save mankind. The Order repeatedly participates in illegal acts: ritual human sacrifices whose purpose is the deity's resurrection, illegal drug trade, and kidnapping and confinement of children in a facility to teach them its dogma through brainwashing, while presenting the facility as an orphanage. Also repeatedly featured are various religious items with magical properties, appearing widely in the games of the series.
Two thematic elements consistently drive the narratives of Silent Hill games: the theme of a main protagonist who is depicted as an "everyman", and the everyman's search for a missing loved one. Multiple endings are also a staple in the series, with all installments featuring some (the achievement of which depends on in-game actions performed by the player). In all of the series' games, except "Silent Hill 4: The Room", certain of these endings are joke endings in which the main protagonist comes in contact with unidentified flying objects.
The installments in the "Silent Hill" series contain various symbolisms. The symbols are images, sounds, objects, creatures, or situations, and represent concepts and facts, as well as feelings, emotions, and mental states of the characters.
Gameplay.
The installments in the "Silent Hill" series utilize a third-person view, with occasional fixed camera angles. While visibility is low due to the alternating fog and darkness, all of the series' player characters, except Henry Townshend of "", are equipped with a flashlight and a device (a portable radio in "Silent Hill", "Silent Hill 2", "3" and "Origins", a mobile phone in "Shattered Memories", and a walkie-talkie in "Homecoming" and "Downpour") which warns the player of nearby monsters by emitting static. The player characters of "Silent Hill", "Silent Hill 2", "3", "4", "Origins", "Homecoming", and "Downpour" have access to a variety of melee weapons and firearms, but "Shattered Memories" lacks combat and emphasizes evasion of the creatures. Another key feature of the series' gameplay is puzzle-solving, which often results in the acquisition of an item essential to advance in the games.
Development.
Concept and influences.
Development of the "Silent Hill" series started in September 1996 with the beginning of the development of its first installment, "Silent Hill". The game was created by Team Silent, a group of staff members within the Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo studio. The new owners of its parent company Konami sought to produce a game that would be successful in the United States. For this reason, a Hollywood-like atmosphere was proposed for it. Despite the profit-oriented approach of the parent company, however, the developers of "Silent Hill" had much artistic freedom because the game was still produced as in the era of lower-budget 2D titles. Eventually, the development staff decided to ignore the limits of Konami's initial plan, and to make "Silent Hill" a game that would appeal to the emotions of players instead.
The first installment's scenario was created by director Keiichiro Toyama. The story of the second installment, "Silent Hill 2", was conceived by CGI director Takayoshi Sato who based it on the novel "Crime and Punishment", with individual members of the team collaborating on the game's actual scenario; the main writing was done by Hiroyuki Owaku and Sato.
The first game, "Silent Hill", utilizes real-time 3D environments. To mitigate limitations of the hardware, developers liberally used fog and darkness to muddle the graphics.
Sato estimated the budget of the first installment at US$3–5 million and "Silent Hill 2"s at US$7–10 million. He said that the development team intended to make "Silent Hill" a masterpiece rather than a traditional sales-oriented game, and that they opted for an engaging story, which would persist over time – similar to successful literature.
The games' developers have acknowledged that they are fans of the horror film "Jacob's Ladder" and its technique of inducing fear through a more psychological level of perception. The films of American filmmaker David Lynch are also acknowledged to have influenced the development team on the development of the series, especially on the creation of "Silent Hill 2". Another major influence is Japanese horror, with comparisons made to classical Japanese Noh theatre and early 20th-century fiction writers such as the Japanese Edogawa Rampo. The town of Silent Hill is an interpretation of a small American community as imagined by the Japanese team. It was based on Western literature and films, as well as on depictions of American towns in European and Russian culture. The Order's religion is based on various characteristics of different religions, such as the origins of Christianity, Aztec rituals, Shinto shrines, as well as Japanese folklore; the names of gods in the organization's religion were conceived by Hiroyuki Owaku, but they have Aztec and Mayan motifs, as Owaku used pronunciations from these civilizations as a reference. Certain religious items appearing in the series were conceived by the team and for some others various religions were used as a basis: the evil spirit-dispelling substance Aglaophotis, which appears in the first installment and "Silent Hill 3", is based on a herb of similar name and nature in the Kabbalah (Jewish mysticism); the name of the "Seal of Metatron" references the angel Metatron.
Audio.
The installments in the "Silent Hill" series feature various sound effects, some of them being ambient, as well as silence; the sound effects have been added with the intent of inducing certain emotions and feelings in the player, such as urgency, displeasure, or a sense of disturbance of their psyche. According to the series' former sound director Akira Yamaoka, atmosphere is an emphasized element of the series which if it had not been given importance, the series' production would be impossible. The games also feature soundtracks scored by Yamaoka. The genres of the musical pieces range from industrial to rock and some pieces include vocals by voice actress Mary Elizabeth McGlynn. "Downpour" and "Book of Memories" will be featuring soundtracks scored by composer Daniel Licht; "Downpour" includes music belonging to the industrial genre and vocals by McGlynn and band Korn.
Media.
Print media of the "Silent Hill" series include a series of comic book adaptations; the light novels "Silent Hill" and "Silent Hill 2" by Sadamu Yamashita, which are novelizations of their eponymous video games; the guide book "Lost Memories"; and the art book "Drawing Block: Silent Hill 3 Program".
A film adaptation of the original game in the series, "Silent Hill", was released in 2006 under the same name with the game. A second film adaptation, titled "" and based on "Silent Hill 3", was released in 2012.
Spin-off video games based on the series include the visual novel "Play Novel: Silent Hill" for the Game Boy Advance, the arcade game ', and the mobile games ' and "".
Reception.
The "Silent Hill" series has been universally praised for its graphics, atmosphere, and story. While the first three installments received critical acclaim, later games were less well received.
The first installment in the series, "Silent Hill", received positive reviews from critics on its release and was commercially successful. It is considered a defining title in the survival horror genre, moving away from B movie horror elements, toward a psychological style of horror emphasizing atmosphere.
"Silent Hill 2" was risen by critical acclaim. It was named the twentieth best game of the PS2 by IGN, saying "It preserved most of the original game's what-might-be-out-there fear, but with major advances to the graphics and sound, the game was able to deliver a far more immersive, frightful and compelling storyline."
"Silent Hill 3" was mostly well received by critics, especially in its presentation, including its environments, graphics and audio, as well as the overall horror elements and themes that are continued from past installments. The game received praise for its story, which was a continuation of the first game's story.
Beginning with "Silent Hill 4: The Room", the games have been slightly less well received; many reviewers criticized the increased emphasis on combat, compromising the horror aspect of gameplay. 1UP.com said that Konami went "backwards" with this game, though reviewers such as GameSpot still praised the game's atmosphere.
"Origins" received positive reviews despite some criticism. It was praised for going back to the old gameplay formula—according to IGN, ""Origins" does justice to the series as a whole." However, some criticized the series' increasing predictability. GameSpot stated that "This old fog needs to learn some new tricks."
"Homecoming" received favorable reviews. It was praised for its graphics and audio, but the horror and gameplay have been met with mixed reactions. Some critics, such as GameSpot, felt that it lost "the psychological horror factor that the series is so well-known for." Some critics were harsher; IGN called the game a "letdown."
"Shattered Memories" received more positive reviews. GameSpot praised the game's effort at reinventing the first game's plot, rather than being a simple remake.
"Downpour" received mixed reviews. While certain critics praised the soundtrack and story elements, it has been let down by "sluggish combat" and "occasional freezes".
"Book of Memories" has also received mixed reviews, but it has been the least well received game in the series, with most criticism regarding the game's shift in genre. 
