Simon Phillip Cowell (born 7 October 1959) is an English A&R executive, television producer, entrepreneur, and television personality. He is known in the United Kingdom and United States for his role as a talent judge on TV shows such as "Pop Idol", "The X Factor", "Britain's Got Talent" and "American Idol". He is also the owner of the television production and music publishing house Syco.
As a judge, Cowell is known for his blunt and often controversial criticisms, insults and wisecracks about contestants and their abilities. He is also known for combining activities in both the television and music industries, having promoted singles and records for various artists, including television personalities. He was most recently featured on the sixth series of "Britain's Got Talent" and the second season of "The X Factor USA".
In 2010, the British magazine "New Statesman" listed Cowell at number 41 in a list of "The World's 50 Most Influential Figures 2010".
Early life.
Cowell was born in Lambeth, London and brought up in Elstree, Hertfordshire. His mother, Julie Brett (née Josie Dalglish), is a former ballet dancer and socialite, and his father, Eric Selig Phillip Cowell (1918–1999), was an estate agent developer and music industry executive. Cowell's father was from a mostly Jewish family, though he did not discuss his background with his children (Cowell's paternal grandmother had immigrated from Poland). Cowell's mother was from a Christian background, and is of part Scottish descent. He has one brother and three half-brothers and a half sister; younger brother Nicholas Cowell, half-brother John Cowell, half-brother Tony Cowell, half-brother Michael Cowell and half sister June Cowell. The surname Cowell is an anglicization of the Irish Gaelic patronymic name MacCathmhaoil meaning "son of the Battle Chief". 
Cowell attended Radlett Preparatory School and the independent Dover College as did his brother, but left after taking GCE O levels. He passed in English Language and Literature and then attended Windsor Technical College where he gained another GCE in Sociology. At the age of 17, he dated model Paula Hamilton. Cowell took a few menial jobs—including, according to Tony, working as a runner on Stanley Kubrick's "The Shining"—but did not get along well with colleagues and bosses, until his father, who was an executive at the recording giant EMI Music Publishing, managed to get him a job in the mail room.
"Idol" franchise and "Il Divo".
Cowell was given the role of judge on the first series of "Pop Idol" in the UK by then ITV Controller of Entertainment Claudia Rosencrantz in 2001, he was then judge on the first season of "American Idol" in 2002. With his notoriously critical reputation, Cowell is likened to TV personalities such as Judith Sheindlin and Anne Robinson. Though comparable to Robinson, Cowell has expressed his dislike for her and has commented in an interview, "I hate her and I hate her show because it's just an act". Cowell's prominence grew, fed by his signature phrase, "I don't mean to be rude, but ...", inevitably followed by an unsparingly blunt appraisal of the contestant's talents, personality, or even physical appearance. A lot of these one-liners were the product of coaching that Cowell received from noted publicist Max Clifford. Cowell also appeared on the one-off "World Idol" programme in 2003, where it became clear that each country's version of the "Idol" had attempted to come up with its own "Simon Cowell" type personality. In 2003, Cowell placed No 33 on Channel 4's list of the all-time 100 Worst Britons. Cowell's S Records signed the top two finishers of the first season of "Pop Idol", Will Young and Gareth Gates, both of whom went on to have No 1 UK hits. Efforts begun in 2001 materialised in 2004, when Cowell returned to his group manufacturing roots with his latest brainchild, the internationally successful operatic pop group Il Divo, consisting of three opera singers and one pop singer of four different nationalities. Inspired by the success of Il Divo, Simon created a child version, Angelis, beating competition from many similar groups emerging at Christmas 2006.
On 11 January 2010, Cowell's exit from "American Idol" was made official. The 2010 season was Cowell's last on the show. It was also announced that FOX had acquired the rights to "The X Factor USA", an American version of Cowell's popular British show, "The X Factor", which began in September 2011.
"The X Factor".
In 2004, with Sharon Osbourne and Louis Walsh, Cowell was a judge on the first series of the British television music competition "The X Factor", which he created using his production company, Syco. "The X Factor" was an instant success with the viewers and began its eighth series in 2011.
Leona Lewis, the winner of the third series of "The X Factor", was signed to Cowell's label Syco and has had number one singles and album sales around the world. Cowell returned for a fourth series on 18 August 2007 alongside Osbourne, Walsh and new judge, Dannii Minogue. Walsh had previously been sacked from the judging panel by Cowell for the fourth series, and was subsequently replaced by Brian Friedman, who was a judge on "Grease Is the Word". Walsh was later brought back a week into the auditions by Cowell when he and Osbourne realised that they missed Walsh and that without him, there was no chemistry between the judges. Cowell returned for the fifth series in 2008, with Walsh, Minogue and new judge Cheryl Cole, as Osbourne decided to quit before the show began. Cowell returned for series 6 and 7 as well, although series 7 was to be his last, as he left in 2011 in order to launch "The X Factor" in America. After placing third in the seventh series of "The X Factor" in the UK, boyband One Direction signed to Cowell's label in 2011, and the group have gone on to top singles and album charts worldwide.
"The X Factor Australia" launched in 2005, but was cancelled due to poor ratings. It returned to Australian television for its second season on 30 August 2010, with Kyle Sandilands, Ronan Keating, Guy Sebastian and Natalie Imbruglia as judges. Season 3 began on 29 August 2010 and ended on 22 November. It featured Ronan Keating, Mel B, Guy Sebastian and Natalie Bassingthwaighte as judges.
Cowell also launched "The X Factor USA" in September 2011 on American broadcaster Fox. It was originally announced that he would be a judge both on the UK and U.S. editions of the show, which air at similar times of the year, but MTV officially reported on 17 April 2011 that this was not true; Cowell is no longer a judge in the UK version, but instead will be an enormous presence backstage. He currently is a judge on "The X Factor USA" . For season 1, he was joined by Paula Abdul, L.A. Reid, Nicole Scherzinger and formerly Cheryl Cole. After Abdul and Scherzinger left the show they were replaced by Demi Lovato and Britney Spears, who both serve as current judges along Cowell and Reid.
In October 2010, Cowell signed new three-year deals with ITV for both "Britain's Got Talent" and "The X Factor", renewing both shows until 2013.
"Got Talent" franchise.
Following the success of the "Idol" and "X Factor" franchises, Cowell, his company Syco, and its business partners developed a talent show format open to performers of any kind, not only singers, but also dancers, instrumentalists, magicians, comedians, novelty acts, and so on. The origins of the "Got Talent" format can be traced to the British show "Opportunity Knocks", which began as a radio programme in the 1940s and later transferred to television, where it was an ITV staple for several decades. Looking further back, "Opportunity Knocks" had its roots in the variety show traditions of British music hall and American vaudeville.
Cowell is the executive producer of "America's Got Talent", which debuted in June 2006, along with Fremantle producers of the "Idol" series, but he does not appear on the show due to the terms of his contract with FOX. The show was a huge success for NBC, drawing around 12 million viewers a week, and beating "So You Think You Can Dance" on FOX (produced by rival and "Idol" creator Simon Fuller).
"Britain's Got Talent" debuted on ITV in June 2007. Cowell appears as a judge alongside Amanda Holden and Piers Morgan. The show was a ratings success and second and third seasons followed in 2008 and 2009. The third series featured a publicity coup when Susan Boyle made a global media impact with her regional audition performance comparable to that of any previous talent show series winner.
Other shows.
On 16 March 2006, Simon Cowell's next competition show, "American Inventor", debuted on ABC. Fledgling entrepreneurs from across the United States competed to see who could come up with the best new product concept. The 2006 winner, Janusz Liberkowski, received $1 million and the opportunity to develop his idea into a business. The show returned one more time in 2007 for a second season.
In 2006, Cowell executive-produced "Celebrity Duets", which was described as "an Idol show for Hollywood superstars." The show was hosted by Wayne Brady, and its judges were Marie Osmond, Little Richard and David Foster.
Cowell was also the executive producer of "Grease Is the Word" for ITV. This show set out to find performers to play Danny and Sandy in the 2007 West End revival of Grease. It was hosted by Zoë Ball and judged by Britons David Ian and Sinitta and Americans David Gest and Brian Friedman. The musical theatre casting concept had already been introduced by the BBC with the ratings hit "How Do You Solve A Problem Like Maria?", but Cowell's show was not the hoped for success. He himself said, "It has been slaughtered by the critics – and rightly so. It is far too similar to our other formats."
Cowell collaborated with UK production company Shed Media to produce 2008 ITV drama series "Rock Rivals", which is based on an "X Factor" type show.
In 2011, Cowell also created his first game show, titled "Red or Black?" and hosted by Ant & Dec, for ITV. Series 1 was broadcast over seven nights in one week (excluding Tuesday), from 3 to 10 September. The show has been recomissioned by ITV for a second series in 2012, which will be aired weekly.
Other activities.
Cowell has been involved in charity work for many years. He supports children from The Association Of Children's Hospices and invites them backstage to the screenings of "The X Factor". When he can, he stops by some of the hospices to visit the children. He also supports animal rights and has appeared in a video for PETA in which he reminds drivers of the cruelty to animals that can occur when their pets are locked in cars in the summer. In view of his charitable works, particularly the production of the charity single "Everybody Hurts" in aid of victims of the 2010 Haiti earthquake, as well as his services to the music industry, there was considerable media speculation as to whether Cowell would receive a knighthood in the Queen's 2010 Birthday Honours, a proposal allegedly put forward by former Prime Minister, Gordon Brown. Cowell stated that he believed his chances of receiving the honour were "zero" following what he described as being a "royal row"; ultimately Cowell did not receive an honour in the list.
In December 2003, Cowell published his autobiography titled "I Don't Mean to be Rude, but...". In it, he told the whole story of his childhood, his years working in music and experiences on "Pop Idol", "Pop Stars Rivals", and "American Idol", and finally, his tips for being successful as a pop star.
Cowell has appeared as a guest voice in an episode of "The Simpsons" ("Smart and Smarter"), in which he gets beaten up by Homer Simpson (while criticising Homer's punches). His voice was also heard on an episode of "Family Guy" ("Lois Kills Stewie"), in which he told Stewie that his singing was so awful that he should be dead. He made an MTV Movie Award-winning cameo appearance as himself in "Scary Movie 3", where he sits in judgment during a battle rap (and subsequently gets killed by gunfire for criticising the rappers). He also appears in the DVD version of "Shrek 2" as a judge in "Far Far Away Idol", and also provided the voice.
He appeared on an episode of "Who Wants to be a Millionaire?" (the original British version) and "Saturday Night Live" in 2004. Cowell has also guest-starred (filling in for Regis Philbin) in the popular talk show "Live with Regis and Kelly" during "American Idol"'s finalist week in early 2006. Cowell was once the fastest "Star in a Reasonably Priced Car" on BBC's motoring show "Top Gear", driving a Suzuki Liana around the show's test track in a time of 1:47.1. When "Top Gear" retired the Liana along with its rankings after the eighth series, Cowell was the eighth fastest overall and the third fastest non-professional driver. On 11 November 2007 Cowell yet again appeared on Top Gear, achieving a time of 1:45.9 thus putting him ahead of Gordon Ramsay and back at the top of the table. Cowell introduced entertainer Dick Clark at the 2006 Primetime Emmy Awards. He was seen on "Comic Relief Does The Apprentice" where he donated £25,000 for a fun fair ticket. Cowell has also appeared on the MTV shows Cribs and Punk'd. On Punk'd, Ryan Seacrest and Randy Jackson set him up to believe his $400,000 Rolls Royce was stolen and had caused an accident by using a nearly identical car.
Cowell was chosen as the first subject of the re-launched "This Is Your Life" in an episode broadcast on 2 June 2007. He was presented with the Red Book by Sir Trevor McDonald while presenting "American Idol".
On 1 July 2007 Cowell appeared alongside Randy Jackson and Ryan Seacrest as a speaker at the Concert For Diana, held at Wembley Stadium, London.
Cowell was a partner in the Royal Ascot Racing Club, a thoroughbred horse racing syndicate which owned the 2005 Epsom Derby winner, Motivator.
In May 2010, he portrayed himself again, in another episode of "The Simpsons", "Judge Me Tender".
In December 2010, he was added as a new entry to the latest edition of "Who's Who".
At the 2012 Pride of Britain Awards on 30 October, Cowell, along with Michael Caine, Elton John, Richard Branson and Stephen Fry, recited Rudyard Kipling's poem "If—" in tribute to the 2012 British Olympic and Paralympics heroes.
Personal life.
Cowell became engaged to make up artist Mezhgan Hussainy in February 2010, however the couple separated in 2012. They met on the set of "American Idol". Cowell is the godfather of pop singer Sinitta's adopted children.
Upon his appearance on "Top Gear", it was revealed that Cowell pays more than £21.7m per year in income tax, suggesting that his taxable income is over £54.25m per year with income tax at the time approximately 40%. (NB: UK Income Tax 40% for earnings over £34,600). Cowell was estimated to have a fortune of £200 million in the "Sunday Times Rich List" of 2011, making him the sixth richest person in the British music industry. Cowell splits his time between homes in London and Los Angeles. He owns a £9million home in Holland Park, West London, and has a £13.7million ($22 m), home in Beverly Hills, Los Angeles.
In April 2012 he said that he had an affair with fellow "The X Factor" judge Dannii Minogue during her time on the show.
Political views.
Cowell is a supporter of the Conservative Party. In 2010, Cowell endorsed David Cameron to be Prime Minister and claimed that he has the 'substance and the stomach to navigate us through difficult times'. In the aftermath of the election, it was reported that he had fallen out with fellow X Factor judge Cheryl Cole (who had declared her support for Labour and Gordon Brown) in a telephone conversation about politics.
