This page provides lists of best-selling single-volume books and book series to date and in any language. ""Best-selling"" refers to the estimated number of copies sold of each book, rather than the number of books printed or currently owned. Comics and textbooks are not included in this list. The books are listed according to the highest sales estimate as reported in reliable, independent sources. This list is incomplete, since there are many books such as "Don Quixote", "The Three Musketeers", "The Adventures of Pinocchio", "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland", and the individual "Harry Potter" books which are commonly cited as "best-selling books" yet have no reliable sales figures. There is a separate section on this page for books known to have sold over 10 million copies, yet do not have figures for their final sales data. 
The Bible, the Qur'an, The Communist Manifesto and Quotations from Chairman Mao, are widely reported as the most-printed and most-distributed books in the world, with hundreds of millions of copies believed to be in existence of each of them. Exact print figures for some such books may also be missing or unreliable since these kinds of books may be produced by many different and unrelated publishers, in some cases over many centuries. All such books have been excluded from this List of best-selling books for these reasons.
List of best-selling single-volume books.
No reliable sales figures.
Note: These books do not have reliable sales data; however, there is evidence that they have sold at least 10 million copies, and therefore belong on this list.
List of best-selling book series.
Notes.
The "Perry Rhodan" series has sold more than 1 billion copies, but is not listed because that figure includes magazine sales, not novels alone. Similarly, the "Jerry Cotton" series has sold over 300 million copies, but most of these were in magazine format.
"The Lord of the Rings" by J.R.R. Tolkien is included in the list as a single entry because it was written by Tolkien as a single book.
References.
 Footnotes 
 Citations 
