Just Dance 4 is a music video game, developed by Ubisoft as the fourth main installment of the "Just Dance" series of dance games. Announced at E3 2012 by Flo Rida & Aisha Tyler, it was released on the Wii, the PlayStation 3 (for PlayStation Move), and the Xbox 360 (for Kinect) on October 9, 2012 in North America, and was released in Europe and Australia on October 2, 2012. The Wii U version was released on November 18, 2012 in North America and was released on November 30, 2012 in Europe and Australia, alongside the system.
Gameplay.
Gameplay remains similar to other previous "Just Dance" games, as players are judged on their ability to mimic on-screen dancers performing a routine to a chosen song. New features in "Just Dance 4" includes dance battle routines, expansions to the game's "Just Sweat" mode, unlockable bonus routines for songs, and a "Puppet Master" mode exclusive to the Wii U version, which allows a player to use the Wii U's controller to serve as a "Master" to manipulate the routine and visuals. Previous additional modes (Simon Says Mode, Playlists, Medley, Speed-Shuffle, Just Create, and 8-Player) have been dropped. Additionally, the "On Fire" motive (from mostly Goods and Perfects in a row) and effort ratings have been removed, leaving only difficulty ratings. 
Players have "Dance Quests", six missions for each song, that can be completed. Each quest nets the player Mojo points. Downloadable songs do not have dance quests. Wii, Wii U, and PlayStation players can also create "Dancer Cards", which can display their favorite songs, best scores, challenges, and more. Personal leaderboards are also available for the Wii version of the game.
Track listing.
The game contains 50 music tracks.
Battle Mode.
The game includes a dance battle mode where two dancers from two different songs will dance against each other. Both players will have a health bar which is replenished between rounds, and one of them will go down if the other player dances better. Each round's time varies and when the timer for a round reaches zero, the dancer with the most health wins. If at any time either player's health bar is depleted, the opposing player automatically wins the current round. The player who wins a round will have their song be played for the next round. There are 5 rounds in total.
Dance Mash-Up Mode.
Dance Mashups, routines that consists of choreography from both previous "Just Dance" titles and Just Dance 4 integrated together into a single routine, return in "Just Dance 4".
Puppet Master Mode.
This feature is exclusive to the Wii U version of the game. In this mode, one player will take control of the role of Puppet Master, which is responsible for changing the choreography in real time. For this, the player must use the Wii U GamePad and choose one of four dance moves that are displayed on the controller's touch screen. Sometimes the "Take a Pose" button appears. When pressed, the TV screen will display a pose which other players must match. Whichever player best mimics the pose receives a 1,000 point bonus.
Downloadable Content.
PlayStation 3.
DLC's for PS3 are region locked (e.g., DLC's bought from US PSN Store will not work on a Region 3 disc).
Wii U.
DLC's for Wii U can be found only in the Nintendo eShop.
Note:"You Make Me Feel..." on the Wii and Xbox Kinect (NTSC region) is only available as Downloadable Content if it has not already been unlocked with a Cheetos code.
