American Dad! is an American animated sitcom created by Seth MacFarlane, Mike Barker and Matt Weitzman for the Fox Broadcasting Company. The series centers on the dysfunctional Smith family, consisting of brutal, reckless, and dog-eat-dog father, Stan Smith; his more level-headed but unpredictably fiendish better half, Francine Smith; their budding, adolescent son, Steve Smith; and their new-age hippie daughter, Hayley Smith. Other main characters include Hayley's stoner boyfriend Jeff Fischer; the family's pet, Klaus, a man in a fish's body; and the family's crude alien, Roger, who's full of , shocking antics, and misconduct. Stan rescued Roger from government capture and harbors him in the family's attic.
The show is set in the fictional town of Langley Falls, Virginia in the Washington, D.C. metro area, which is a gesture of parody of the actual town of Langley, Virginia, home to the headquarters of the CIA. Unlike its sister shows "Family Guy" and "The Cleveland Show", "American Dad!" does not use cutaway gags (though the show has used flashbacks, if the story calls for it), but rather focuses more on situational humor, character development and non sequiturs.
Since its debut on February 6, 2005, the show has broadcast 145 episodes and began airing season 8 on September 30, 2012.
"American Dad!" has been nominated for awards, most prominently two Primetime Emmy Awards and two Annie Awards, though it has been criticized by some watchdog groups such as the Parents Television Council. It holds a TV-14 rating for suggestive dialogue (D), offensive language (L), moderate to strong sexual content (S), and graphic violence (V).
Production.
Early history.
"American Dad!" officially premiered after Fox's broadcast of the Super Bowl XXXIX on February 6, 2005, alongside "The Simpsons", with "Pilot". The show debuted to 15 million viewers, with 23 million viewers in overall, alongside "The Simpsons" with ratings. The show returned on May 1, 2005, with "Threat Levels", obtaining 9.47 million viewers, after the season premiere of the revival of "Family Guy".
Summary.
"American Dad!" centers on the domestic life of its nominal title character, Stan Smith, an obdurate, offensive, and insensitive father figure, who's set in his wrong-headed ways and has no qualms with use of weapons and abuse, even to those closest to him. He is a staunchly conservative Republican CIA agent and self-proclaimed American patriot. His conservatism is deliberately treated in the show as severe intolerance and . He is married to Francine Smith, the level-headed, unpredictably fiendish housewife. Their two children are: Hayley, a vocal, passionate, insistent liberal. Hayley is a college-aged environmentalist and activist of whom Stan is commonly at odds with; and Steve, a nerdy, wimpy high schooler who is always trying to be popular with the girls, but never can. He constantly attempts to live up to Stan's expectations but can never really measure up to the high standards in place for him. 
The Smith family is also in possession of two bizarre non-humans: Roger, a very zany, callous, devious, and depraved alien. A former fugitive from Area 51, Roger is covertly living in the Smith home. Stan has allowed this in defiance of his employer because he owes Roger a "life debt"; and Klaus, a goldfish whom the CIA implanted with the brain (and vocal cords, evidently) of an East German Olympic ski jumper.
The Smith family resides on 43 Cherry Street, in the fictional community of Langley Falls, Virginia. The town name is a composite of Langley and Great Falls, two unincorporated communities located in Fairfax County. 
Plots generally center on the misadventures of various family members in their respective realms, as well as raucous interactions between the characters. Recurring themes include Stan's desire to see Steve mature properly (e.g. "The Magnificent Steven"), Roger's desires to establish a life outside of the house (e.g. "A.T. the Abusive Terrestrial"), Francine's desire of breaking out of an overly structured lifestyle (e.g. "Dungeons and Wagons"), Hayley's desire to rebel against her father's politics (e.g. "Stan Knows Best"), and Steve's desire to finally become one of the cool kids and lose his virginity, or at least "get some boob" (e.g. "Big Trouble in Little Langley").
Opening sequence.
In its initial seasons, "American Dad!" featured a recurring gag in its opening sequence that changed for every episode: changing newspaper headlines, usually featuring a topical, satirical joke directed at the United States Government, the media, or current affairs (such as "Pedophilia Down as Childhood Obesity Goes Up", "Israel Pulls Out of Gaza, Gaza Not Pregnant", or "Economy Takes a Turn, Falls Down Flight of Stairs"). As of Season 4, the opening sequence changed, with the newspaper gag being replaced by Roger wearing a different costume each episode to sing the final "Good morning, USA!" before Stan shoves Roger into the seat and crashes into the flagpole outside the CIA. Syndicated airings use the costume running gag, regardless of what episode airs.
Crossovers with other shows.
Characters from "Family Guy" and "The Cleveland Show" have made crossover appearances in "American Dad!" and vice versa. "Family Guy" and "The Cleveland Show" and "American Dad!" have all made an episode related to the same theme. The Hurricane episode was all the premieres in the 2011 season.
The first ever crossover with all three MacFarlane series occurs in "Night of the Hurricane", with a hurricane storming through the towns of Stoolbend, Quahog and Langley Falls. In the first part of the crossover, "The Hurricane!", Channel 6 News reporter Larvell makes a meta-reference to the event stating that the hurricane will make its way through Stoolbend, Quahog and Langley Falls (which is referred to as "American Dad town"). The actual crossover of the event takes place at the end of the final part – the "American Dad!" episode, "Hurricane!", when Stan faces Cleveland Brown and Peter Griffin in a standoff after the hurricane has passed.
References.
Notes
