The fifth season of "RuPaul's Drag Race" began airing on January 28, 2013 with a 90-minute special. This season has the most contestants since the creation of the show with fourteen. 
This season's winner will walk away with the title of "America's Next Drag Superstar" along with a lifetime supply of Colorevolution Cosmetics, a one-of-a-kind trip courtesy of AlandChuck.travel, a headlining spot on Logo's Drag Race Tour featuring Absolut Vodka and a cash prize of $100 000. Santino Rice and Michelle Visage are back as judges at the panel. The theme song playing during the runway every episode is I Bring the Beat, while the song playing during the credits is The Beginning.
Guest Judges.
Additional guest appearances this season include
Episodes.
Episode One: RuPaullywood or Bust.
"Airdate: January 28, 2013"
For the first time ever fourteen new queens begin their quests for the title of "America's Next Drag Superstar." During the underwater photoshoot, some rose to the occasion while others fell flat. Alaska gave up as she found it difficult to keep her composure while underwater. RuPaul announces that Detox is the winner of the mini-challenge and then reveals that the queens will be challenged to construct a 'Hollywood Glamour' outfit for the main stage presentation, made from materials salvaged from a dumpster in Beverly Hills. After revealing their looks on the runway; Detox, Coco Montrese, Alyssa Edwards, Honey Mahogony, Monica Beverly Hillz, Vivienne Pinay and Jinkx Monsoon were all called out as safe. RuPaul does stop them momentarily to request they impress her next week before they leave the stage, as being safe is not something to be proud of. Roxxxy Andrews, Ivy Winters, Alaska and Lineysha Sparx are praised for their looks, while Serena ChaCha and Penny Tration get critiqued on their outfits. Jade Jolie's look failed to show true Hollywood glamour as her aesthetic was over the top, but her personality shined through, and is safe. Roxxxy Andrews wins the challenge; gaining a custom made dress and immunity from elimination next week. Penny Tration and Serena ChaCha end up as the bottom two and lip synch for their lives to 'Party in the U.S.A.'. Penny is scrutinized by the other queens for not knowing the words to the song, whilst Serena turns out a party atmosphere, even dropping into the splits during her performance. RuPaul decides to give Serena a second chance, and Penny Tration sashays away. 
Episode Two: Lip Synch Extravaganza Eleganza.
"Airdate: February 4, 2013"
The contestants must lip synch to the spoken word, as they recreate classic moments from Drag Race history in scene-stealing viral videos. 
The mini-challenge consisted of lip-synching one of three of RuPaul's songs; Tranny Chaser, LadyBoy or Peanut Butter, with only their mouth visible. The winners were Serena ChaCha, Detox and Ivy Winters. The three winners became team captains for the main challenge. The main challenge was to impersonate memorable scenes from RuPaul's Drag Race Untucked season 2, 3 and 4.
Guest judges "Natural Born Killers"' Juliette Lewis and "3rd Rock from the Sun's" Kristen Johnston joined the judging panel. During the runway presentation, a tearful Monica revealed that she is in fact a transgender woman in the process of transitioning. Serena ChaCha landed in the bottom two for a second straight week alongside Monica Beverly Hillz. Rupaul decided to give Monica Beverly Hillz another chance, while Serena ChaCha sashayed away.
Episode Three: Draggle Rock.
"Airdate: February 11, 2013"
The queens connect with their inner child as they star in a fun-filled kids TV show. During the mini-challenge, each contestant paired-up with another contestant and had to take a blank mannequin doll and create a mini-pageant for "America's Junior Drag Superstar". Alaska and Lineysha Sparx paired up together and were the winner of the mini-challenge. For the main challenge, the queens had to create a kid TV-show. As winners of the mini-challenge, Alaska and Lineysha were team captains. Team Alaska was: Alaska, Detox, Vivienne Pinay, Roxxxy Andrews, Monica Beverly Hillz and Alyssa Edwards. Team Lineysha was: Lineysha Sparx, Jinkx Monsoon, Jade Jolie, Ivy Winters, Honey Mahogany and Coco Montrese. For their main runway look, the contestants had to dress in pink. On the runway, Honey, Ivy, Alyssa and Jade are all called safe. Lineysha is also called safe, but is warned by RuPaul that she would be in the bottom if it wasn't for her immunity. The judges liked Roxxxy, Jinkx and Detox's performances in the challenges, with RuPaul naming Detox the winner. Alaska is criticized for dressing in male drag for the challenge, but her runway look is a hit, so she is safe. Vivienne is also criticized for resting on pretty, but she is also safe, leaving Coco and Monica in the bottom two for their poor performances. Coco outshines Monica in the lip synch, and Monica sashays away.
Episode Four: Black Swan: Why It Gotta Be Black?
"Airdate: February 18, 2013"
For this episode's mini-challenge, the queens had to participate in a dance-off dancing to Jealous of My Boogie in a quick drag look wearing big afro hair. RuPaul chose Jinkx Monsoon and Coco Montrese as the winners of the mini-challenge and became team captains for the main challenge. This week, the queens are challenged to prove their elegance and dancing skills by starring in a ballet based on the life of RuPaul, and on the runway, are asked to present 'extravaganza' looks.
On the runway, Detox, Coco, Lineysha, Jade and Alaska are all declared safe. In their critiques, although Jinkx and Ivy are praised, both Alyssa's dancing and her characterisation of 'Bad RuPaul' secure her the win. Roxxxy is criticised for lacking energy, but RuPaul names Vivienne and Honey as the bottom two. After a fairly low-key lip synch, RuPaul surprises everyone by eliminating both queens, stating that neither brought the fire that proved they wanted to stay in the competition. RuPaul also added that he will not tolerate "half-stepping" and that he wants the queens to bring their best. This was the first in the history of RuPaul's Drag Race that two queens were eliminated on the same episode.
Episode Five: Snatch Game.
"Airdate: February 25, 2013"
The queens compete in a star-studded TV game show that showcases their celebrity impersonations. With guest judges comedienne Julie Brown and former MTV VJ, Downtown Julie Brown.
Episode Six: Can I Get An Amen.
"Airdate: March 4, 2013"
The queens test their vocal abilities as they sing in RuPaul's 1980s We Are The World-inspired charity single. With guest judges La Toya Jackson and The Pointer Sisters.
Episode Seven: RuPaul Roast.
"Airdate: March 11, 2013"
The dolls' comedy skills are put on the spot as they must roast RuPaul and the celebrity judges in front of a live audience. With guest judges The Help's Leslie Jordan and Absolut Image Czar Jeffrey Moran.
Reception.
One day after the premiere it was found that Rupaul's Drag Race Season 5 was the most watched season in the show's history. TV by the numbers posted the official results. "Monday night’s 9PM season five premiere of “RuPaul’s Drag Race” worked the ratings runway, averaging a .8 rating in the P18-49 demo. This number represents a 33% increase over Logo’s previous top-rated season premiere (fourth season premiere of “RuPaul’s Drag Race”) and clocks in as the highest-rated season premiere in Logo history. 
Additionally, the 90-minute premiere tallied 565,000 total viewers tuning in to meet the new cast of 14 drag queen hopefuls who will fight it out to be crowned “America’s Next Drag Superstar.” The fifth season premiere night of “RuPaul’s Drag Race” and companion series “Untucked: RuPaul’s Drag Race” delivered over 1.3 million viewers.
Furthermore, “Untucked: RuPaul’s Drag Race” was the most-watched premiere ever averaging 291,000 total viewers and a .5 rating P18-49. On social media platforms for premiere night, “RuPaul’s Drag Race” and “Untucked: RuPaul’s Drag Race” showed a 136% increase in social activity versus the fourth season premiere – this includes tweets, Facebook posts and Get Glue check-ins.
