Cornelius Crane "Chevy" Chase (; born October 8, 1943) is an American comedian, writer, and television and film actor. Born into a prominent New York family, Chase worked a plethora of odd jobs before moving into comedy acting with "National Lampoon". He quickly became a key cast member in the inaugural season of "Saturday Night Live," where his "Weekend Update" skit soon became a staple of the show. Chase is also well known for his portrayal of the character Clark Griswold in four "National Lampoon's Vacation" films, and for his roles in other successful comedies such as "Caddyshack" (1980), "Fletch" (1985), and "¡Three Amigos!" (1986). He has hosted the Academy Awards twice (1987 and 1988) and briefly had his own late-night talk show, "The Chevy Chase Show". In 2009, he became a regular cast member (Pierce Hawthorne) on the NBC comedy series "Community". Chase left the show in 2012, having already filmed most of the episodes in season 4.
Early life.
Family.
Chase was born in Lower Manhattan, New York City. His father, Edward Tinsley "Ned" Chase, was a prominent Manhattan book editor and magazine writer. His mother, Cathalene Parker (née Browning), a concert pianist and librettist, was the daughter of Miles Browning, who served a critical role at the Battle of Midway in World War II; she was adopted as a child by her stepfather, Cornelius Vanderbilt Crane, heir to Crane Plumbing, and took the name Cathalene Crane. As a child, Chase vacationed at Castle Hill, the Cranes' summer estate in Ipswich, Massachusetts.
Chase's paternal grandfather was artist/illustrator Edward Leigh Chase, and his great-uncle was painter/teacher Frank Swift Chase. Chase's maternal grandmother was an opera singer who performed several times at Carnegie Hall. Chase is a fourteenth-generation New Yorker, and was listed in the Social Register at an early age. His mother's ancestors arrived in Manhattan starting in 1624. Among his ancestors are New York City mayors Stephanus Van Cortlandt and John Johnstone; John Morin Scott, General of the New York Militia during the American Revolution; Anne Hutchinson, dissident Puritan preacher and healer; and "Mayflower" passengers and signers of the Mayflower Compact, John Howland, and the Pilgrim colonist leader and spiritual elder of the Plymouth Colony, William Brewster.
Chase was named for his adoptive grandfather Cornelius. The nickname Chevy was bestowed by his grandmother, derived from the medieval English "The Ballad of Chevy Chase". As a descendant of the Scottish Clan Douglas, the name "Chevy" seemed appropriate to her.
Chase's parents divorced when he was four; his father remarried into the Folgers coffee family, and his mother remarried twice. Both his parents died in 2005. Chase has stated that he grew up in an upper middle class environment and that his adoptive maternal grandfather did not bequeath any assets to Chase's mother when he died. In a 2007 biography, Chase claims that he was abused as a child by his mother and stepfather, John Cederquist.
Schooling and music.
He attended at the Stockbridge School in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, and also attended The Dalton School in the Upper East Side and Riverdale Country School in The Bronx. He then attended Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, New York, where he studied a pre-med curriculum and graduated in 1967 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in English.
Chase did not enter medical school, which meant he would be subject to the military draft. Chase was not drafted; when Chase appeared in January 1989 as the first guest of the just-launched late-night "Pat Sajak Show", he said he had convinced his draft board he deserved a 4-F classification by "falsely claiming, among other things, that he had homosexual tendencies."
Chase played drums with the college band The Leather Canary, headed by school friends Walter Becker and Donald Fagen. Chase has called the group "a bad jazz band"; Becker and Fagen later founded the successful group Steely Dan. Chase is gifted with absolute pitch. He played drums and keyboards for a rock band called Chamaeleon Church, which recorded one album for MGM Records before disbanding in 1969. To give the album a more soft-rock sound, producer Alan Lorber made several alterations in the mixing, including the muting of Chase's bass drum, and Chase was reportedly incensed when he heard the final mix. Before becoming famous as a writer, actor and comedian, Chase worked in many odd jobs including as a cab driver, truck driver, motorcycle messenger, construction worker, waiter, busboy, fruit picker, produce manager of a supermarket, audio engineer, salesman in a wine store, and a theater usher.
Early career.
Chase was a member of an early underground comedy ensemble called "Channel One" which he co-founded in 1967. He also wrote a one-page spoof on "" for "Mad Magazine" in 1970 and was a writer for the short-lived "Smothers Brothers" TV show comeback in the early 1970s. Chase made the move to comedy as a full-time career by 1973, when he became a cast member of "The National Lampoon Radio Hour", a syndicated satirical radio series. The "Lampoon Radio Hour" also featured John Belushi, Gilda Radner, Bill Murray, and Brian Doyle-Murray, all of whom later became "Not-Ready-For-Prime Time Players" on "NBC Saturday Night" (later retitled "NBC's Saturday Night" and finally "Saturday Night Live"). Chase and Belushi also appeared in National Lampoon's off-Broadway revue "Lemmings", a sketch and musical send-up of popular youth culture (in which Chase also played the drums during the musical numbers). He appeared in the theatrical release "The Groove Tube" which was directed by another co-founder of "Channel One", Ken Shapiro, and which featured several "Channel One" sketches.
"Saturday Night Live".
Chase was one of the original cast members of "Saturday Night Live" ("SNL"), NBC's late-night comedy television show, beginning in October, 1975. During the full first season, he introduced every show except one by saying, "Live from New York, it's "Saturday Night!"" The remark was often preceded by a pratfall, known as "The Fall of the Week." Chase has since become known for his skill at physical comedy. In one comedy sketch, he mimicked a real-life incident in which President Gerald Ford accidentally tripped while disembarking from Air Force One in Salzburg, Austria. This portrayal of President Ford as a bumbling klutz became a favorite device of Chase and helped form the popular concept of Ford as being a clumsy man. In later years, Chase met and became friendly with President Ford. Chase's physical stunts led to at least one self-injury.
Chase was the original anchor for the "Weekend Update" segment of "SNL", and his catchphrase introduction—"I'm Chevy Chase… and you're not"—became well known. His trademark conclusion—"Good night, and have a pleasant tomorrow"—was later resurrected by Jane Curtin and Tina Fey. Chase also wrote comedy material for "Weekend Update." For example, he wrote and performed "The News For The Hard Of Hearing." In this skit, Chase would read the top story of the day, aided by Garrett Morris, who would repeat the story by loudly shouting it. Chase claimed that his version of Weekend Update would later be the inspiration for other mock-news shows such as "The Daily Show" and "The Colbert Report."
Chase also performed in other skits on "SNL" including a recurring role as the Land Shark, a parody of the blockbuster movie "Jaws". His racially-charged "word association" skit opposite Richard Pryor from "SNL's" first season is frequently cited by television critics as one of the funniest (and most daring) skits in the show's history. 
Chase became the first breakout star of "SNL". He was committed contractually to "Saturday Night Live" for only one year as a writer, not an "SNL" cast member. He had signed a one year writing contract and became a cast member during rehearsals just before the show's premiere. Nonetheless, he received two Emmy Awards and a Golden Globe Award for his comedy writing and live comic acting.
In a 1975 "New York" magazine cover story which called him "The funniest man in America", NBC executives referred to Chase as "The first real potential successor to Johnny Carson" and claimed he would begin guest-hosting "The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" within six months of the article. Chase actually never did guest host the "Tonight Show" during his early peak years of success, and in fact did not even appear on the program until 1978, when he was promoting a prime time special for NBC. Carson later said of Chase after guest-hosting the "Tonight Show"; "He couldn't ad lib a fart after a baked bean dinner".
Chase acknowledged Ernie Kovacs' influence on his work in "Saturday Night Live", and he thanked Kovacs during his acceptance speech for his Emmy award for "Saturday Night Live". In addition, Chase spoke of Kovacs' influence on his work in an appearance in the 1982 documentary called "Ernie Kovacs: Television's Original Genius".
Leaving "SNL".
In 1976 Chase was the first member of the original cast to leave the show, after his contract ended. While Chase was offered starring roles in films due to his "SNL" fame, he attributes his departure to wanting to be with his girlfriend, Jacqueline Carlin, who did not want to move to New York. After leaving "SNL", Chase moved to Los Angeles and married Carlin. Chase made a few cameo appearances as the second season wound down; he was eventually replaced by Bill Murray.
After leaving the show, Chase hosted "SNL" eight times up through 1997. He appeared on the show's twenty-fifth anniversary special in 1999 and was interviewed for a 2005 NBC special on "SNL"'s first five years. He also made four later cameo appearances: a "Caddyshack" skit featuring Bill Murray, a 1997 episode with guest host Chris Farley, as the Landshark in Weekend Update in 2001 episode, and again on Weekend Update in 2007.
Film.
Chase's early film roles included "Tunnel Vision", "Foul Play", and "Oh Heavenly Dog". The role of Eric 'Otter' Stratton in "National Lampoon's Animal House" was originally written with Chase in mind, but he turned the role down to work on "Foul Play". The role went to Tim Matheson instead. Chase said in an interview that he chose to do "Foul Play" so he could do "real acting" for the first time in his career instead of just doing "schtick". Chase followed "Foul Play" with the successful Harold Ramis comedy "Caddyshack", in 1980. That same year, he also starred with Goldie Hawn in Neil Simon's "Seems Like Old Times" and released a self-titled record album, co-produced by Chase and Tom Scott, with novelty and cover versions of songs by Randy Newman, Barry White, Bob Marley, the Beatles, Donna Summer, Tennessee Ernie Ford, The Troggs, and the Sugarhill Gang.
Chase narrowly escaped death by electrocution during the filming of "Modern Problems" in 1980. During a sequence in which Chase's character wears 'landing lights' as he dreams that he is an airplane, the current in the lights short-circuited and arced through Chase's arm, back, and neck muscles. The near-death episode caused Chase to experience a period of deep depression, as his marriage to Jacqueline had ended just prior to the start of filming. Chase continued his film career in 1983's "National Lampoon's Vacation", directed by Ramis and written by John Hughes. He married Jayni Luke in 1983, and in 1985, he starred in "Fletch", the first of two films based on Gregory Mcdonald's "Fletch" books. Chase joined "SNL" veterans Steve Martin and Martin Short in the Lorne Michaels-produced comedy "¡Three Amigos!" in 1986, declaring in an interview that making "¡Three Amigos!" was the most fun he had had on a film. The trio hosted "SNL" that year, the only time the show has had three hosts on one show.
At the height of his career in the late 1980s, Chase earned around $7 million per film and was a highly visible celebrity. He appeared alongside Paul Simon, one of his best friends, in Simon's 1986 second video for "You Can Call Me Al", in which he lip-syncs all of Simon's lyrics. Chase hosted the Academy Awards in 1987 and 1988, signing on to the proceedings in 1987 with the opener, "Good evening, Hollywood phonies!" Chase filmed a sequel to "Vacation", 1985's "National Lampoon's European Vacation" and then a third, "National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation", in 1989, which, thanks to its holiday theme, has become one of his more durable films, airing on NBC every December. He played saxophone onstage at Simon's free concert at the Great Lawn in Central Park in the summer of 1991. Later in 1991, he helped record and appeared in the music video "Voices That Care" to entertain and support U.S. troops involved in Operation Desert Storm, and supported the International Red Cross.
Later work.
Chase's career took a downturn in the early '90s. Chase had three consecutive film flops from his later period: 1991's Razzie award-nominated "Nothing But Trouble", 1992's "Memoirs of an Invisible Man", and 1994's "Cops and Robbersons". The three releases had a combined gross of $34 million in the U.S. Even the durable "Vacation" series ground to a halt, following 1997's "Vegas Vacation" installment. Some of the more recent movies starring Chase (e.g., "Vacuums", "Rent-a-Husband", "Goose!") have not been released in the United States. He returned to mainstream movie-making in 2006, co-starring with Tim Allen and Courteney Cox in the comedy "Zoom", though it was both a critical and commercial failure.
In September 1993, Chase hosted "The Chevy Chase Show", a weeknight talk show, for the Fox Broadcasting Company. Though it had high commercial expectations, the show was cancelled by Fox after only six weeks. Chase later appeared in a commercial for Doritos, airing during the Super Bowl, in which he made humorous reference to the show's failure.
He was roasted by the Friars Club for a Comedy Central television special in 2002. This roast was noted for being unusually mean, even by the standards of other roasts, and has never re-aired. The only cast members of Saturday Night Live's first season who appeared at the roast were Laraine Newman (one of the actors on the show), and Paul Shaffer (a band leader on the show, and the host of the roast).
Chase was Hasty Pudding's 1993 Man Of The Year, and received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 1994. After having starred with Farrah Fawcett in the relatively successful "Man of the House" in 1995, he received Harvard Lampoon's Lifetime Achievement Award in 1996. In 2005, Chase was the keynote speaker at Princeton University's Class Day, part of commencement activities.
In 1998, a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs, California, Walk of Stars was dedicated to him.
On March 20, 2012, Dan Akyroyd announced through his Facebook page that he is currently working with Chase on a script for a new comedy that would star the two actors. The film would be their fifth together and first since 1991's "Nothing But Trouble".
Return to television.
Chase guest-starred as an anti-Semitic murder suspect in "In Vino Veritas", the November 3, 2006 episode of "Law & Order". He also guest-starred in the ABC drama series "Brothers & Sisters" in two episodes as a former love interest of Sally Field's character. Chase appeared in a prominent recurring role as villainous software magnate Ted Roark on the NBC spy-comedy "Chuck". In 2009, Chase and Dan Aykroyd provided voices for the "Family Guy" episode "Spies Reminiscent of Us".
Chase is currently starring in the NBC sitcom "Community", as aging moist-towelette tycoon Pierce Hawthorne, whom he has played since 2009. Though he has sometimes been in public disputes with creator Dan Harmon over the direction of the show, the role has nevertheless been his most prominent in many years. In 2010, he appeared in the film "Hot Tub Time Machine", as well as a short online film featuring the Griswold Family, and in the "Funny or Die" original comedy sketch "Presidential Reunion", where he played President Ford alongside other current and former "SNL" president impersonators.
TV commercials.
Chase has appeared in a number of television commercials, including Dollar Rent-a-Car (1996), Doritos (1996), History Channel (1999), Aflac (2003), Cola Turka (2003), T-Mobile (2009) and Chase Manhattan Bank (2010).
Personal life.
Chase is the father of three girls, Cydney Cathalene (born January 4, 1983), Caley Leigh (born January 19, 1985), and Emily Evelyn (born September 29, 1988). He lives with his wife, Jayni (née Luke), in Bedford, New York.
Chase is an active environmentalist and charity fundraiser. He raised money and campaigned for Bill Clinton in the 1990s and John Kerry in the 2004 Presidential Election. Following the 2004 elections, Chase criticized President George W. Bush during a speech at a People For the American Way benefit at the Kennedy Center, referring to the President as an "uneducated, real lying schmuck" and a "dumb fuck." Event organizers and several Bush detractors present at the event distanced themselves from Chase's comments, with Norman Lear remarking, "he'll live with it, I won't."
