Renan do Nascimento Mota Pegado, better known as Renan Barão, (born February 27, 1987) is a Brazilian mixed martial artist. He currently fights as a bantamweight in the Ultimate Fighting Championship. He is riding one of the longest unbeaten streaks in MMA history with 31 straight fights without a loss (30 victories and 1 no contest). As of December 2012, Barão is ranked the #1 bantamweight fighter in the world by Sherdog. He is the current Interim UFC Bantamweight Champion. His nickname "Barão" (baron) predates his athletic career and was given by his grandmother after a character in the 1986 brazilian soap opera "Sinhá Moça".
Mixed martial arts career.
He started his career in Kimura Nova União, a sports school in Natal, Rio Grande do Norte, Brazil. Since turning professional in 2005, Barão has competed for Shooto Brazil and other smaller organizations in his native country of Brazil, having fought Rony Mariano Bezerra and Anistavio "Gasparzinho" Medeiros both former contestants. He is a teammate and training partner of former WEC Featherweight Champion and current UFC Featherweight Champion Jose Aldo at Nova União. He received his Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu black belt from André Pederneiras in September 2011. 
In January 2010, Sherdog named him their top prospect in their list of "10 Brazilians to watch in 2010"
World Extreme Cagefighting.
Barão was expected to make his North American, as well as WEC debut in a Bantamweight bout against Clint Godfrey on June 20, 2010 at WEC 49, but Godfrey was forced from the card with an injury. Barão instead faced fellow WEC newcomer Anthony Leone at an agreed 142 lb catchweight. Barão defeated Leone via submission (armbar) in the third round.
Barão defeated Chris Cariaso by rear naked choke in the first round on December 16, 2010 at WEC 53.
Ultimate Fighting Championship.
In October 2010, World Extreme Cagefighting merged with the Ultimate Fighting Championship. As part of the merger, all WEC fighters were transferred to the UFC.
Barão was expected to make his UFC debut on May 28, 2011 against Demetrious Johnson at UFC 130, but an undisclosed injury forced Brad Pickett out of his fight with Miguel Torres on the same card. Johnson moved up to fight Torres, while Barão faced Cole Escovedo. Barão won his debut fight in the organization via unanimous decision.
Barão faced Brad Pickett on November 5, 2011 at UFC 138. He defeated Pickett by rear-naked choke in the first round, also winning "Fight of the Night" honors.
Barão faced Scott Jorgensen on February 4, 2012 at UFC 143. He won the fight by unanimous decision.
Barão was expected to face Ivan Menjivar on July 7, 2012 at UFC 148 to possibly determine the number one contender. Barão instead faced Urijah Faber for the Interim Bantamweight title after current champion Dominick Cruz was injured. It was originally scheduled to take place at UFC 148 however, due to an injury to headliner José Aldo (who supposed to make title defence in the events' main event fight), the Faber/Barão bout was moved to July 21, 2012 and headlined UFC 149 for the Interim Bantamweight Championship. He won the fight via unanimous decision to become the Interim UFC Bantamweight Champion. He was expected to face Dominick Cruz for the Unified UFC Bantamweight Championship at a later date. However, it was announced on December 4th, 2012 that Dominick Cruz suffered a second ACL tear that would require surgery, leaving Cruz now sidelined for 6-9 months.
In his first title defense, Barão retained the Interim UFC Bantamweight Championship against Michael McDonald on February 16, 2013 at . Barão maintained control standing for a majority of the fight's four rounds and won via arm triangle submission in the fourth round. The win also won him his first "Submission of the Night" honors.
