Bridesmaids is a 2011 American comedy film written by Kristen Wiig and Annie Mumolo, directed by Paul Feig and produced by Judd Apatow, Barry Mendel, and Clayton Townsend. The plot centers on Annie (Wiig), who suffers a series of misfortunes after being asked to serve as maid of honor for her best friend, Lillian (Maya Rudolph). Rose Byrne, Melissa McCarthy, Ellie Kemper, and Wendi McLendon-Covey costar as Annie's fellow bridesmaids, with Chris O'Dowd and Jill Clayburgh—who died of leukemia in November 2010 before the film was released—playing key supporting roles.
"Bridesmaids" was both critically and commercially successful upon its opening release on May 13, 2011, in the United States and Canada. The film grossed $26 million in its opening weekend, eventually grossing over $288 million worldwide, and surpassed "Knocked Up" (2007) to become the top-grossing Apatow production to date. The film received a 90 percent overall approval rating according to Rotten Tomatoes and served as a touchstone for discussion about women in comedy.
It was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy, and received multiple other accolades. On January 24, 2012, the film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress for Melissa McCarthy and Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay. This made it the first Apatow-produced film to be nominated for an Academy Award.
Plot.
Annie Walker (Kristen Wiig) is a single woman in her mid-30s. Following the failure of her bakery, she lost her boyfriend and her savings, reducing her career to a sales clerk and forcing her to share an apartment with an obnoxious roommate and his sister. Her business's failure was so painful that she has given up baking entirely. She has a no-strings-attached sexual relationship with the self-absorbed Ted (Jon Hamm) but hopes for something more. Her best friend Lillian Donovan (Maya Rudolph) is virtually her only source of happiness.
Lillian becomes engaged and asks Annie to be her maid of honor. At the engagement party, Annie meets her fellow bridesmaids: Lillian's cynical cousin Rita (Wendi McLendon-Covey); idealistic friend Becca (Ellie Kemper); raunchy future sister-in-law Megan (Melissa McCarthy); and Helen Harris III (Rose Byrne), the beautiful but over-the-top wife of Lillian's fiancé's boss. Helen and Annie, each jealous of the other's friendship with Lillian, take an instant dislike to each other, but Lillian persuades them to spend time together. 
Annie takes Lillian and the bridesmaids to a Brazilian steak restaurant for lunch before going to a chic bridal shop. However, Helen must use her influence to gain access to the shop when Annie neglects to make a reservation. While trying on gowns, the entire party—with the exception of Helen, who did not eat food at the restaurant—becomes sick from food poisoning, ruining their afternoon. Later, Annie's suggestion of a bachelorette party at Lillian's parents' lake house is overruled in favor of a trip to Las Vegas planned by Helen. Worried about her finances and too proud to accept a ticket paid for by Helen, Annie books a ticket in coach while the rest of the party flies first class. However, the trip is cut short due to an outburst from Annie, who due to her fear of flying had accepted a sedative from Helen. The scene on-board the plane forces an emergency landing in Casper, Wyoming, following which the party takes a bus back home. Annie tries to apologize but Lillian tells Annie she wants Helen to take over planning the shower and wedding.
Annie continues to hope for a relationship with Ted, but begins flirting with Officer Nathan Rhodes (Chris O'Dowd), a friendly traffic cop who earlier had let her off without a ticket for broken taillights. Nathan encourages her to open a new bakery, but Annie refuses. Following a night together, the next morning Nathan buys baking supplies with which he suggests Annie make them breakfast. Offended, Annie leaves. Annie is later fired from her job and—unable to pay rent—moves in with her mother.
Annie travels to Chicago for the bridal shower at Helen's home, which has been transformed into an Paris-themed event. Helen then upstages Annie's heartfelt, handmade shower gift by giving Lillian a trip to Paris, an idea Annie expressed earlier, which Helen stole. Enraged that Helen has taken credit for the Parisian theme, Annie throws a temper tantrum, is kicked out of the shower and the wedding. On her way home, Annie is involved in a car accident, but the other driver flees the scene. Still hurt from Annie's dismissal, Nathan refuses to help and she must instead call Ted to pick her up. When he asks her to perform oral sex on him on the way home, she breaks off the relationship and walks home.
Throughout the next several days Annie becomes reclusive, refusing to leave her mother's house and watching television obsessively. After a pep talk from Megan, Annie realizes her errors and tries to make amends with Nathan, but he ignores her. On the day of the wedding, Helen appears at Annie's doorstep distraught; Lillian has disappeared, and Helen begs for Annie's help in finding her. Helen and Annie have a reconciliation of sorts, and Helen apologizes to Annie. The two enlist Nathan to help, and he grudgingly agrees. The group find Lillian at her own apartment, discovering that she ran from her wedding due to Helen's micromanagement and her fear that Annie will end up alone. After reconciling, Annie helps Lillian prepare for her wedding.
Annie resumes her place as maid of honor at the wedding. After the wedding, which included over-the-top arrangements by Helen, she again apologizes to Annie and states her hope that they can be friends in the future. Realizing that Annie and Nathan were falling in love, Helen had also arranged for him to pick Annie up after the wedding, and the pair leave together.
Production.
Writing.
The script, originally titled "Maid of Honor", was written by Kristen Wiig and fellow actress and screenwriter Annie Mumolo. Friends for years, both had met each other at The Groundlings, a Los Angeles-based improvisational comedy troupe where they wrote sketches with one another, in the early 2000s. The basic premise for the film originated in 2006, shortly after Wiig was cast in the supporting role of a passive-aggressive cable television executive in producer Judd Apatow's comedy film "Knocked Up" (2007). Recognizing her comedic talent, Apatow asked Wiig if she had any ideas for a screenplay herself – a practice which had previously led to Steve Carell's idea for "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" (2005) – and she and Mumolo soon came up with "Bridesmaids". Over the following years, writing commenced, with Wiig working on "Saturday Night Live" in New York City and Mumolo grinding out the script in Los Angeles. The two would meet on weekends and conduct semi-regular table reads of drafts for Apatow to get his suggestions and notes.
Filming.
"Bridesmaids" was budgeted at $32.5 million. Though primarily set in Milwaukee and Chicago, principal photography actually took place in Los Angeles, California. Production designer Jefferson Sage, who has worked with Apatow and Paul Feig since their "Freaks and Geeks" days, noted that the first fact that appealed to him about the project "was that you had these two disparate worlds: There was Annie's world in Milwaukee, and then there was Helen's world in Chicago. It immediately drew this dichotomy between the rivalry that developed between them." However, Sage acknowledged that it was a challenge to find "architecture that would give us those Midwestern worlds. Chicago is a beautiful, distinctive city architecturally, and restricted views of downtown L.A. feel like Chicago." The production decided to use the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden as the location for Lillian and Dougie's wedding. Additional scenes where Annie meets Officer Rhodes on the highways between Milwaukee and Chicago were filmed in Oxnard, California, which Sage described as a "broad, flat, green area away from mountains."
Reception.
Critical reception.
The film-critics aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reported 90% of critics gave the film a positive review based on 232 reviews, with an average score of 7.5/10. The critical consensus is: "A marriage of genuine characters, gross out gags, and pathos, "Bridesmaids" is a female-driven comedy that refuses to be boxed in as Kristen Wiig emerges as a real star". Metacritic, which assigns a standardized score out of 100, rated the movie 76 based on 37 critics. Roger Ebert gave the film 3.5 stars of out 4. Jeff Bayer said that "Bridesmaids" is "The best female-driven R-rated comedy of all time".
"Ms." magazine noted, to its "enduring surprise", that despite the involvement of Apatow, and "done and done and done" themes, the film passed the Bechdel test of female-driven storylines.
Critic Owen Gleiberman of "Entertainment Weekly" pointed out the significance of "Bridesmaids" success as follows: "So far, the message that Hollywood seems to have taken from the incredible success of "Bridesmaids" is a predictably reductive one, something along the lines of: Hey, look! Raunchy comedies for women with awesome grossout scenes in the middle of them can be big box office too!! The message that Hollywood "should be taking" is: A comedy that's raunchy and fearless, and also brilliantly written and shrewdly honest about what's really going on in women's lives, may actually connect with the fabled non-teenage audience (remember them?)."
Despite the majority of praise, the film was not without its detractors. The reviewers of Spill.com gave it an aggregate "Some Ole Bullshit," saying that the main character played by Kristen Wiig was an "annoying, horrible person" who was "a victim of her own circumstance." However, they praised the performance of Melissa McCarthy and Chris O'Dowd.
Melissa McCarthy was nominated for the 2012 Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Supporting Role, and Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role.. The film itself also got a SAG nomination for best ensemble, considered by many to be a surprise due to the fact that "Bridesmaids" got nominated at the expense of the likes of more traditional fare like "Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy" and "Hugo" among others.
Box office.
"Bridesmaids" surpassed "Knocked Up" to become the top-grossing Judd Apatow production to date, grossing $26,247,410 on its opening weekend and settling for a strong second place behind "Thor". "Bridesmaids" grossed $169,106,725 domestically and $119,276,798 in foreign markets, totalling $288,383,523. It was reported that males made up 33 percent of the movie's audience and that 63 percent of the audience was over the age of 30.
Home media.
"Bridesmaids" was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc in theatrical (125 minutes) and unrated (131 minutes) versions on September 20, 2011. The DVD includes an audio commentary by director Paul Feig, co-writer Annie Mumolo, and cast members Kristen Wiig, Maya Rudolph, Melissa McCarthy, Wendi McLendon-Covey, and Ellie Kemper, as well as deleted, extended, and alternate scenes, a gag reel, Line-O-Rama (a typical Apatow-release extra), and a "commercial" from Annie's jewelry employer. The Blu-ray Disc features the same DVD content with additional deleted and extended scenes, a "Made of Honor: Behind the Scenes of Bridesmaids" featurette, a full song performance of Wilson Phillips' "Hold On", and a digital copy. iTunes Extras include Line-O-Rama, Deleted Scenes, Extended & Alternate Scenes & Cholodecki's Commercial. Another edition commemorating the 100th anniversary of Universal Studios was released on September 4, 2012.
