Ashley Michelle Tisdale (born July 2, 1985) is an American actress and singer who rose to prominence portraying the candy-counter girl Maddie Fitzpatrick in Disney Channel's "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody" and the female antagonist Sharpay Evans in the "High School Musical" film series. The "High School Musical" series became a successful franchise which included two television films, a feature movie, a spin-off and numerous soundtrack albums. The popularity earned by Tisdale in "High School Musical" led her to sign a solo record deal with Warner Bros. Records in 2006 that allowed her to release two studio albums, "Headstrong" (2007) and "Guilty Pleasure" (2009).
Tisdale has a prominent voice role as Candace Flynn in Disney Channel's "Phineas & Ferb", a cartoon which became television's most-watched animated series among kids and tweens and had been met with acclaim by critics. She also owns a production company named "Blondie Girl Production" and has worked as an executive producer in a number of movies and television shows that includes the ABC Family television film "Picture This" and the Bravo's 2012 unscripted series "Miss Advised". During 2009 and 2010, Tisdale had her first major broadcast role in The CW's television series "Hellcats" as Savannah Monroe, an intense and very religious cheerleader. In 2012, she was cast in a leading role in "Scary Movie 5", the fourth sequel to the 2000 movie, set to premiere in 2013.
Early life.
Tisdale was born in West Deal, New Jersey on July 2, 1985, to Lisa (née Morris) and Mike Tisdale, the manager of a construction company. Her elder sister, Jennifer Tisdale, is also an actress. Through her grandfather, Tisdale is related to businessman Ron Popeil. She grew up in Ocean Township. She is Jewish on her mother's side and was raised with "a little bit of both" of her parents' religions.
At the age of three, Tisdale met her current manager, Bill Perlman, at a New Jersey mall. He sent her to numerous auditions for commercials, resulting in her placement in more than 100 national network TV ads as a kid. She began her theatrical career by appearing in "" and "The Sound of Music" at Monmouth County's Jewish Community Center.
At the age of eight, she was cast to play the part of Cosette in a national touring production of the musical "Les Misérables". "When I was little, I saw the play Les Misérables on Broadway, I thought it was the most amazing thing I have ever seen so I went to my manager and told him I wanted to be in it", said Tisdale in an interview to "Newsday" in 2007. She also claims to have had only a single singing lesson before landing the role. Tisdale toured for two years on "Les Misérables" before landing a role in an international touring production of "Annie" in Korea. At the age of twelve, Tisdale sang at the White House for President Bill Clinton.
Career.
1997–2003: Career beginning and minor roles.
In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Tisdale had minor roles in several television shows such as "The Hughleys", "Smart Guy", "7th Heaven", "Boston Public" and "Bette" and in the feature films "A Bug's Life" and "Donnie Darko". During this time, she simultaneously worked as a Ford Model. For her role in "Boston Public", she received a 2000 Young Artist Award nomination for "Best Guest Performance In a TV drama".
2004–2006: "High School Musical" and breakthrough success.
In 2004, she was cast as the teenage candy-counter girl Maddie Fitzpatrick in the Disney Channel series "The Suite Life of Zack & Cody", which premiered in March 2005 and ended in 2008. She later won her first award at the UK Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards for "Best TV Actress", due to her performance as Fitzpatrick.
Although the producers of the Disney Channel Original Movie "High School Musical" did not initially consider her because of her "good-girl image" on "The Suite Life", Tisdale was eventually cast as the popular, narcissistic high school student Sharpay Evans in the 2006 film. "High School Musical" became Disney Channel's most watched movie that year, with 7.7 million viewers in its US premiere broadcast. The soundtrack, in which Tisdale lent her vocals for several songs, became the top-selling album in the United States that year. Tisdale became the first female artist to debut with two songs simultaneously on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart with "What I've Been Looking For" and "Bop to the Top", both tracks from the film's soundtrack. Due to the popularity earned by Tisdale through her performance in "High School Musical", Warner Bros. Records signed her for a recording contract in July 2006 and she started working on her debut album.
2007–2009: Solo music career and continued success.
"Headstrong" is Tisdale's US Gold-certified debut album, released in February 2007 via Warner Bros, which debuted at number five on the "Billboard" 200, with 64,000 copies sold in that week. "Be Good to Me" was released as the album's first single in the December 2006 and "He Said She Said" was released as the second, in September 2007. In 2008, "Not Like That" and "Suddenly" were released as singles in a selective number of countries that did not include North America. A music DVD entitled "There's Something About Ashley" followed the release of her debut album, with a three-song trilogy comprising music videos and a documentary about the creation of "Headstrong".
The success of the first "High School Musical" film led Tisdale to reprise the role in the 2007 sequel "High School Musical 2". She lent vocals for several tracks in the film's soundtrack and her performance in "High School Musical 2" was critically acclaimed by many media outlets such as "The Hollywood Reporter". Even more successful than the first film, "High School Musical 2" became the most-watched cable-television movie, receiving 17 million viewers on its premiere night. Also in 2007, Tisdale was given the voice role of Candace Flynn, the series' secondary antagonist, in "Phineas and Ferb", which became television's most-watched animated series among kids and tweens and had very positive reviews.
As a producer, Tisdale formed her own production company in 2008 and named it "Blondie Girl Productions". The 2008 ABC Family Original Movie "Picture This" marked Tisdale's debut as an executive producer and also in a leading role, in which she played Mandy Gilbert, an unpopular and bullied teenager. The film captured 4.3 million total viewers in its debut night.
Tisdale reprised her role as Sharpay Evans in the 2008 Walt Disney Pictures feature film "". Her performance in the film earned her an MTV Movie Award for "Breakthrough Performance Female" in 2009. and acclaim by critics including Owen Gleiberman of "Entertainment Weekly", who labeled her one of film's breakout stars and said her portrayal of Evans makes "narcissism a goofy, bedazzled pleasure", and Mark Kermode, who said Tisdale is 2008's "best supporting actress". "High School Musical 3" earned $42 million in its domestic opening weekend, which became the biggest opening for a musical film.
Her second studio album, "Guilty Pleasure", was released in 2009. Described by Tisdale as a "rocker and edgier" album, it generated mixed reviews, with a 54% rating on Metacritic, and "Billboard" claimed the album "doesn't give the singer room to comfortably let loose". "Guilty Pleasure" debuted at number twelve on the "Billboard 200", selling 25,000 copies in its first week, archiving a low commercial performance in comparison with her debut album. The song "It's Alright, It's OK" was released as the album's lead single in April in airplay and digital formats and a second single, "Crank It Up", was later released in October.
Tisdale starred in the 2009 20th Century Fox family feature film "Aliens in the Attic" as Bethany Pearson, the elder sister of the family and although she is credited as one of the main characters, "The New York Times" said Tisdale "spends much of the film off screen". The film was a minor success in box office, grossing $60 million worldwide.
2010–2012: Return into broadcast television and producing.
Tisdale's return into broadcast television occurred in 2010 when her involvement in The CW Television Network drama series "Hellcats" was announced in March by "The Hollywood Reporter", that reported Tisdale had signed on to co-star on her first major broadcast series role as Savannah Monroe, the peppy and fiercely intense captain of the Hellcats. The series had its script based on the book "Cheer: Inside the Secret World of College Cheerleaders" by journalist Kate Torgovnick and was described as ""Election" meets "Bring It On"" by critics. "Hellcats", however, had only one full season as it was cancelled by The CW in 2011. She had vocal roles in several TV cartoons, during 2010, including "The Cleveland Show", "Family Guy" and "Glenn Martin, DDS". A guest appearance in an episode of "Raising Hope" and a starring role in a CBS pilot produced by Louis C.K., which has not been picked up by the channel, followed in 2012. She has also booked a two-episode arc that same year in the fifth season of FX's "Sons of Anarchy" in which she played a desireble and high-priced escort.
A "High School Musical" spin-off entitled "Sharpay's Fabulous Adventure", released directly in DVD, featured Tisdale reprising her role as Sharpay Evans and also serving as the executive producer. The Disney Channel Original Movie captured 5 million viewers on its premiere night on Disney Channel. Tisdale voiced Candance Flynn in the 2011's that premiered on Disney Channel with 7.6 million viewers on its debut night.
During 2011, Tisdale started focusing on her career as a television and film producer. Her production company "Blondie Girl Productions" signed a multiyear production deal with Relativity Media in 2010, to create, develop and executive produce a series. Tisdale has been working in a film for Disney Channel titled "Adventure Quest", a project for Nickelodeon, a Bravo TV reality show titled "Miss Advised", an upcoming television series based on Laurie Faria Stolarz's book "Blue Is for Nightmares", three digital series, and a drama project for ABC Family.
2013–present: "Scary Movie 5" and film roles.
Tisdale's involvement in Dimension Films' "Scary Movie 5", the fourth sequel to the 2000 movie was announced in June 2012, by The Weinstein Company. She plays Jody, a late-20's dancer and mother of two, the leading role in the film, which also stars Lindsay Lohan and Charlie Sheen. The film is set for an April, 2013 release. In January, 2013, Tisdale was cast to star opposite Nicolas Cage in the movie "Left Behind" as Chloe Steele, a young woman that wanders America looking to find any remaining members of her family.
Public image and personal life.
Tisdale is represented by Creative Artists Agency. In 2007, Tisdale appeared in a promotional campaign for Staples Inc.'s "Geared 4 School" sweepstakes and appeared in promotional campaigns for Eckō Red clothing brand, that included a mall tour in the US which performances in fashion shows hosted at each. She appeared in commercials for T-Mobile and Toys "R" Us. She was ranked No. 10 in "Maxim"'s 2008 Hot 100 list and was ranked No. 94 on "Forbes"' 2008 Celebrity 100 list. In 2008, Tisdale was ranked No. 17 in "Forbes' High Earners Under 30" list and earned $2.8 million from "High School Musical 3". She also teamed up with Huckleberry Toys to produce a limited quantity of dolls modeled after her. She was the face of "Degree Girl" in the U.S. and recorded several commercials and songs to promote the product. In 2009, Tisdale signed a five-year endorsement contract with Italian clothes line, "Puerco Espin" and became a volunteer for the 2009 "Get on the Bus" charity campaign. In 2011, she joined Got Milk? campaign.
Tisdale was romantically involved with Jared Murillo and ended their relationship in March 2009. In March 2007, Tisdale told "Blender" she was drug and alcohol-free, and does not smoke and went on to add, "my mom really instilled confidence in me, so I'm not somebody who'd be under peer pressure".
Tisdale underwent a septoplasty procedure in November 2007 to correct her partially deviated septum. According to Tisdale, this was done for "health-related reasons and not out of a belief in plastic surgery". The procedure corrected two small fractures in her nose which were interfering with her breathing. She spoke to "People" magazine about the surgery, saying that it was important to her to be honest with her fans.
From 2009 to 2011, Tisdale was in a relationship with the music video director Scott Speer. The two reconciled in 2012 but has since ended their relationship. Tisdale posed nude for the May 2011 issue of "Allure" magazine. She was quoted as saying that "being in this shoot was me saying, ‘I’m not just the young girl everybody thinks I am. I’m actually a woman.’”.
