FC Anzhi Makhachkala () (often known as simply "Anzhi") is a Russian football club based in Makhachkala, capital of the Republic of Dagestan. Founded in 1991, the club competes in the Russian Premier League. Anzhi plays their home games at the 15,200-seat Dynamo Stadium in Makhachkala, yet train over 1,000 miles away in the Russian capital Moscow due to armed conflict in Dagestan. 
Founded in 1991, Anzhi entered the Russian league system the following year, advancing into the Premier League in 2000. During a short spell in the top flight, the side reached a record fourth-place finish in their first season, and were defeated in their first Russian Cup final in 2001. They were relegated in 2002 and returned to the Premier League for the 2010 season.
On 18 January 2011, Anzhi Makhachkala was purchased by local commodities billionaire Suleyman Kerimov. His funding has allowed the club to sign Cameroonian striker Samuel Eto'o on a world-record salary, and appoint Guus Hiddink as manager in February 2012.
History.
Early history.
The word "Anji" (Kumyk: "pearl") is a former Kumyk name for the city of Makhachkala.
The club was founded in 1991 by former Dinamo Makhachkala player Magomed-Sultan Magomedov, then head of Dagnefteprodukt, and took part in its first season in the Dagestan League the same year. They ended up as league champions with an unbeaten record and 16 wins out of 20 matches. 
Due to the dissolution of the Soviet Union, the club entered Zone 1 of the Russian Second Division (the third-highest tier) in 1992 and finished in 5th place. The club won their Group in 1993, but due to league reorganisation were not promoted, and remained in the new Western Zone of the third tier until a second-place finish in 1996 guaranteed promotion to the First Division, under the coaching of Eduard Malofeev. A key player in Anji's early history was Azerbaijani international forward Ibragim Gasanbekov, who was the team's top scorer in all of their first seven seasons. He was league top scorer in 1993 (30 goals) and 1996 (33 goals).
In 1999 Anji won the First Division, and were thus promoted to the Russian Premier League for the first time. The side missed out on a bronze-medal finish on the last day of the season, as they conceded a last-minute Torpedo penalty which took their opponents into third place. Anji's fourth-place finish in 2000 remains their highest-ever finish. On 20 June 2001, the club played in the final of the Russian Cup for the first time, losing to Lokomotiv on penalties after a 1-1 draw.
Anji finished 15th and were relegated from the Premier League in 2002, but during their first season back in the First Division they reached the semi-finals of the Russian Cup where they lost 1-0 to Rostov. In their seventh season in the First Division, Anji won the league and returned to the Premier League. On 5 December 2010, defender Shamil Burziyev died in a car accident, aged 25.
Modern history (2011–).
On 18 January 2011, the club was purchased by Dagestani billionaire Suleyman Kerimov, but later it was revealed that the President of Dagestan, Magomedsalam Magomedov met Kerimov and gave him a 100% stake in the club, including 50% of the shares of the former owner of the club Igor Yakovlev, in exchange for financial support. Kerimov is planning to invest over $200 million in infrastructure, of which a substantial amount will go in building a new stadium with a capacity of more than 40,000 spectators, which will meet all UEFA requirements.
Kerimov's investment was immediate as the club made signings in the 2011 Winter transfer window . The first significant signing came on 16 February, when the club announced the free transfer of Brazilian left-back Roberto Carlos, a World Cup winner in 2002. Further signings included €10 million on another Brazilian, the former Corinthians midfielder Jucilei da Silva and €8 million on Moroccan winger Mbark Boussoufa from Anderlecht. Boussoufa's transfer was finalised in the last minute of the window, on 10 March.
In summer 2011, the club signed the Hungarian Balázs Dzsudzsák, who signed a four-year deal to transfer for a reported €14 million. Anji also bought Russian midfielder Yuri Zhirkov from Chelsea for a similar fee. On 23 August 2011, Cameroonian striker Samuel Eto'o signed from Inter Milan for around €28 million, on a world-record €20.5 million annual salary.
In February 2012 the club appointed the experienced Dutchman Guus Hiddink as a new manager, after Yuri Krasnozhan's two month-long spell in charge. Hiddink's first signing was Congolese defender Christopher Samba, joining for £12 million from Blackburn Rovers.
On 30 January 2012, Roberto Carlos announced his plans to retire at the end of the season. He ended his football career on 9 March and took up a role as the club's Director.
On 10 October 2012, Anji opened a youth academy, the first in the Republic of Dagestan in order to develop youth talents to the first team. The academy is being run by Anji's Sporting Director Jelle Goes.
Ground and club culture.
Due to armed conflict in Dagestan, the club’s players live and train in a village near Moscow, at a training base previously used by Saturn Moscow. The club fly in for home matches, which have a heavy security presence.
The club's 15,200-seat Dynamo Stadium was built in 1927, and due to its facilities is not used in European competition, for which Anzhi have used the Saturn Stadium in Ramenskoye and Lokomotiv Stadium in Moscow. A high-priority goal of Kerimov when he purchased the club was the construction of a new 40,000 seater ground.
The club are hated by radical elements of support from Moscow-based sides and Zenit St Petersburg due to a lack of history and club culture in comparison to virtually unlimited finances, making them prime examples of the "modern football" which fans all over the world oppose to; and ethnic and cultural hatred of the peoples of the Northern Caucasus.
European competitions.
Anzhi participated in the 2001–02 UEFA Cup. Their opponents were Rangers of Scotland. Instead of usual home-and-away fixtures, UEFA decided to hold a single match in a neutral venue (Warsaw) due to the unstable situation in neighbouring Chechnya. Rangers won the match 1–0. After finishing 5th in the 2011–12 Russian Premier League, Anzhi qualified for the group stage of the UEFA Europa League for the first time in the club's history, after eliminating Budapest Honvéd in the 2nd qualifying round, Vitesse in the 3rd qualifying round, and AZ Alkmaar in the play-off round.
European record.
<div id="1"/>1 Only one leg was played, in a neutral venue in Warsaw, Poland, due to security concerns in Russia.
Current squad.
", according to the RFPL official website
Reserve squad.
Reserves are eligible to play in the league.
Reserve team.
Anzhi's reserve team played professionally in the Russian Third League from 1995 to 1997. For more details, see FC Anzhi-Bekenez Makhachkala.
Records.
Top Scorers By Season.
! Season !! Player !! League !! Cup !! Total
Notable players.
Had international caps for their respective countries. Players whose name is listed in bold represented their countries while playing for Anzhi.
