The term nostalgia describes a sentimental longing for the past, typically for a period or place with happy personal associations.
The word is a learned formation of a Greek compound, consisting of ("nóstos"), meaning "homecoming", a Homeric word, and ("álgos"), meaning "pain, ache". It was described as a medical condition, a form of melancholy, in the Early Modern period, and became an important trope in Romanticism.
In common, less clinical usage, nostalgia sometimes includes a general interest in past eras and their personalities and events, especially the "good old days," such as a sudden image, or remembrance of something from one's childhood.
The scientific literature on nostalgia is quite thin, but there are a few studies that have attempted to pin down the essence of nostalgia, and what causes it. Smell and touch are also strong evokers of nostalgia and memories in general due to the processing of these stimuli first passing through the amygdala, the emotional seat of the brain. These recollections of our past are usually important events, people we care about, and places where we have spent time. Music can also be a strong trigger of nostalgia.
A 17th Century medical student coined the term "nostalgia" for anxieties displayed by Swiss mercenaries fighting away from home, although some military doctors believed their problems were specific to the Swiss and caused by the Alpine racket of cowbells.
As a medical condition.
The term was coined in 1688 by Johannes Hofer (1669–1752) in his Basel dissertation.
Hofer introduced "nostalgia" or "mal du pays" "homesickness" for the condition also known as "mal du Suisse" "Swiss illness" or "Schweizerheimweh" "Swiss homesickness," because of its frequent occurrence in Swiss mercenaries who in the plains of lowlands of France or Italy were pining for their native mountain landscapes. Symptoms were also thought to include fainting, high fever, indigestion, stomach pain, and death.
In the eighteenth century, scientists were looking for a locus of nostalgia, a nostalgic bone. By the 1850s nostalgia was losing its status as a particular disease and coming to be seen rather as a symptom or stage of a pathological process. It was considered as a form of melancholia and a predisposing condition among suicides. Nostalgia was, however, still diagnosed among soldiers as late as the American Civil War. By the 1870s interest in nostalgia as a medical category had all but vanished. Nostalgia was still being recognized in both the First and Second World Wars, especially by the American armed forces. Great lengths were taken to study and understand the condition to stem the tide of troops leaving the front in droves (see the BBC documentary "Century of the Self").
As a description.
Nostalgia is triggered by something reminding an individual of an event or item from their past. The resulting emotion can vary from happiness to sorrow. The term of "feeling nostalgic" is more commonly used to describe pleasurable emotions associated with and/or a longing to go back to a particular period of time, although the former may also be true.
Romanticism.
Swiss nostalgia was linked to the singing of Kuhreihen, which were forbidden to Swiss mercenaries because they led to "nostalgia" to the point of desertion, illness or death. The 1767 "Dictionnaire de Musique" by Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that Swiss mercenaries were threatened with severe punishment to prevent them from singing their Swiss songs. It became somewhat of a "topos" in Romantic literature, and figures in the poem "Der Schweizer" by Achim von Arnim (1805) and in Clemens Brentano's "Des Knaben Wunderhorn" (1809) as well as in the opera "Le Chalet" by Adolphe Charles Adam (1834) which was performed for Queen Victoria under the title "The Swiss Cottage". The Romantic connection of "nostalgia", the "Kuhreihen" and the Swiss Alps was a significant factor in the enthusiasm for Switzerland, the development of early tourism in Switzerland and Alpinism that took hold of the European cultural elite in the 19th century. German Romanticism coined an opposite to "Heimweh", "Fernweh" "far-sickness," "longing to be far away," like "wanderlust" expressing the Romantic desire to travel and explore.
