Storage Wars is an American reality television series on the A&E Network that premiered in 2010. The show features the auctioneering couple of Dan Dotson and Laura Dotson, as well as buyers Dave Hester, the usually together but occasionally separated team of Darrell and Brandon Sheets, Barry Weiss, and the team of Jarrod Schulz and Brandi Passante. Executive producer and creator Thom Beers serves as off-screen narrator. When rent is not paid on a storage locker for three months in California, the contents are sold by an auctioneer as a single lot of items. The show follows professional buyers who purchase the contents based only on a five-minute inspection of what they can see from the door when it is opened. The goal is to turn a profit on the merchandise. Season one of "Storage Wars" consisted of 19 episodes, 17 of which were filmed at various self-storage facilities throughout Southern California. Two special episodes were filmed on location at a pair of StorageOne facilities in Las Vegas, Nevada. The show has enjoyed ratings success, and its second season premiere attracted 5.1 million total viewers, making it the most-watched program in A&E's history to that point. 
A spin-off of "Storage Wars" titled ' made its debut on A&E on December 6, 2011. The series features a new cast of bidders and an auctioneer. A second spinoff called ' was originally scheduled to debut on December 11, 2012. but has since been pushed out to January 1, 2013. 
"Storage Wars" can be seen internationally as well, as AETN International has sold the series to several channels in Canada, Australia, the United Kingdom, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Norway and Denmark. 
"Storage Wars" was recommissioned for another 26-episode season in January 2012, with the season officially premiering on June 5, 2012. Only 20 of the 26 episodes were aired however, with six of the episodes being held back for broadcast during the second half of the show's 3rd season which began airing on December 4, 2012.
Critical reception.
Critical response was mixed, with Mary McNamara of the "Los Angeles Times" calling "Storage Wars" "a strangely uplifting show — hope being one of the many things one can apparently find in an abandoned storage unit," and Neil Genzlinger of "The New York Times" called the series "an especially entertaining addition to the genre." Brian Lowry of "Variety" said that "'Wars' should have been left in storage, indefinitely." Writing for "Slate", Troy Patterson gave a mixed review, referring to the series as "trash TV" as well as "trivial and magnetic." Ellen Gray of the Philadelphia Daily News suggested "if there's an acquisitive bone in your body, you should probably steer clear."
Ratings.
The first season premiere episode drew 2.1 million viewers and the show was A&E's top-rated non-fiction show for 2010, with an average of 2.4 million viewers. The season two premiere consisted of back-to-back new episodes of the show; the second show drew 5.1 million total viewers and was the highest rating for an episode of a series in A&E history. The combined season premiere outperformed competing original episodes of NBC "Love in the Wild" and ABC's "Primetime Nightline".
Concerns about authenticity.
While some have speculated that some of the units have been stocked by producers, an A&E publicist said, "There is no staging involved. The items uncovered in the storage units are the actual items featured on the show." Executive producer Thom Beers has stated that the vast majority of the storage lockers investigated during production contain nothing of interest and therefore do not appear in the final show.
Lawsuit.
In December 2012, Dave Hester filed a lawsuit against A&E and Original Productions, claiming that the producers staged entire units, planted items in lockers after having them appraised weeks in advance, and funneled cash to weaker teams to buy lockers they could not have otherwise afforded. The suit claims that Hester and other cast members met with network officials to express concerns that those actions were in violation of federal law intended to prevent viewers from being deceived when watching a show involving intellectual skills.
In January 2013, A&E responded by stating that its composition of the show is covered by the First Amendment, and that Hester's claims do not apply; the network also said the Communications Act of 1934 is inapplicable to cable television, which did not exist in 1934, and that the format of "Storage Wars" involves no “chance”, “intellectual knowledge” or “intellectual skill” and so is not a game show. A&E also stated that there are “notable inconsistencies in [Hester's] exaggerated self-portrait," referring to his claims of value on the items he finds in lockers.
Opening titles.
Every episode opens with the narrator, Thom Beers, setting the basic premise for the series: "When storage units are abandoned, the treasures within are put up for auction." In Episodes 2, 3, 4 and 7 of season one, an extra line was added to the opening narration: "because in this high-stakes game, it's get rich or die buyin'." The narration is followed by the preview of the upcoming episode, followed by the opening titles. In the opening titles, the sequence of titles begins at Dave, then Darrell, then Brandi and Jarrod, then Barry, and finally at Dan and Laura. While Laura always appeared in the opening titles, her highlighted face and name were not added to the credits until episode 11 of Season 1. Dave Hester Jr. and Brandon Sheets also appear in the opening titles, but are not highlighted and credited. The show's theme song, "Money Owns This Town", which was written and recorded specifically for the show, plays during the opening.
