Tumblr, stylized as tumblr., is a microblogging platform and social networking website, owned and operated by Tumblr, Inc. The service allows users to post multimedia and other content to a short-form blog. Users can follow other users' blogs, as well as make their blogs private. Much of the website's features are accessed from the "dashboard" interface, where the option to post content and posts of followed blogs appear.
As of October 13, 2012, Tumblr has over 77 million blogs. According to comScore, it scored 13.4 million unique visitors in the United States alone in July 2011—up 218% from July 2010. Its headquarters is located in Midtown Manhattan, New York City.
History.
Tumblr was launched in February 2007 by David Karp. Marco Arment served as the lead developer, though he left the company in 2010 to focus on Instapaper. Within two weeks of its launch, the service had gained 75,000 users.
With Tumblr's 2009 acquisition of Tumblerette, an Apple App Store application created by Jeff Rock and Garrett Ross, the service launched its official iPhone app. The site became available to BlackBerry smartphones on April 17, 2010 via a Mobelux application in the BlackBerry App World. In June 2012, Tumblr released a new version of its iOS app, Tumblr 3.0 allowing support for Spotify, hi-res images and offline access.
In early June 2012, Tumblr featured its first major brand advertising campaign in conjunction with Adidas. Adidas launched an official soccer Tumblr blog and bought placements on the user dashboard. This launch was only two months after Tumblr announced it would be moving towards paid advertising on its site.
On December 3, 2012, Tumblr was attacked by a cross site scripting worm deployed by the internet troll group Gay Nigger Association of America. The message encouraged users to harm themselves as well as criticizing blogging as a whole.
Usage.
An analysis by AddThis of shares through their service in 2011 noted that Tumblr sharing had increased by 1299.5%. 
The service is most popular with the teen and college-aged user segments with half of Tumblr's visitor base being under the age of 25. As of 2009, Tumblr had an 85% user retention rate, compared with 40% for Twitter.
Finances.
Tumblr's original funding came from Karp's earnings as a software consultant at parenting site UrbanBaby. Tumblr has raised funding from Union Square Ventures, Spark Capital, Martín Varsavsky, John Borthwick (Betaworks), Fred Seibert, and Sequoia Capital (among other investors). Tumblr shares two lead investors with Twitter. President and COO John Maloney was the founder of UrbanBaby with wife Susan Maloney.
The company had a $800 million valuation in August 2011. In September 2011, the company raised $85 million in a round of funding led by Greylock Partners and Insight Venture Partners.
In an interview with Nicole Lapin of "Bloomberg West" on September 7, 2012, David Karp, founder and CEO of Tumblr, said the site was monetized by advertising, and he argued that with the high number of users of the service, advertisers would start to look seriously spending money there. Their first advertising launch started in May 2012 after 16 experimental campaigns.
