Chetan Bhagat (born 22 April 1974), is an Indian author, columnist, and speaker. Bhagat is the author of five bestselling novels, "Five Point Someone" (2004), "One Night @ the Call Center" (2005), "The 3 Mistakes of My Life" (2008), ' (2009) & ' (2011). All five books have remained bestsellers since their release and three have inspired Bollywood films (including the hit film "3 Idiots"). In 2008, "The New York Times" called Bhagat "the biggest selling English language novelist in India's history". Bhagat, an alumnus of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi and Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad, is seen more as a youth icon than as an author. "Time" magazine named him as one of the 100 Most Influential People in the World. 
Bhagat writes op-ed columns for popular English and Hindi newspapers, including the "The Times of India" and "Dainik Bhaskar", focusing on youth, career and issues based on national development. Bhagat voices his opinion frequently at leading events. He quit his investment banking career in 2009, to devote his entire time to writing.
Early days.
Bhagat was born in New Delhi to a middle-class family. His father was in the army and his mother was a government employee in the agricultural department.
Bhagat's education was mostly in Delhi. He attended the Army Public School, Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi (1978–1991). He studied Mechanical Engineering at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi (IIT-D)(1991–1995). He graduated from the Indian Institute of Management (1995–1997). After graduation he worked as an investment banker in Hong Kong. He had been working in Hong Kong for 11 years before shifting to Mumbai to pursue his passion for writing. He has written six books, all of which are bestsellers. His first three novels were written during his tenure as an investment banker.
Personal life.
Bhagat met his wife, Anusha Suryanarayan at IIM Ahmedabad. They married in 1999. Later, they moved to Hong Kong and worked there. Now based in Mumbai, Bhagat is focusing on his writing career. Bhagat and Anusha are the parents of twin sons, Shyam and Ishaan. The love story of Anusha and Chetan Bhagat was the inspiration for the book .
List of works.
Television.
Bhagat was a judge on the Voice of India "Star Anchor Hunt".
Speaker.
Among his other activities, Bhagat is known to deliver speeches at programs organised by newspapers and media houses like "Dainik Bhaskar", "The Times of India" and at other conclaves apart from writing columns for the same.
Controversies.
"3 Idiots" versus "Five Point Someone".
There was controversy when the film "3 Idiots" was released in 2009. Bhagat was unhappy over not getting credit for the film's story, which was based upon "Five Point Someone – What not to do at IIT!". According to him the film had taken more from the book than the filmmakers had led him to believe. Director Rajkumar Hirani said that Bhagat has been given his due credit according to contract. Hirani threatened to take legal action against Bhagat. Bhagat also accused Hirani of not showing him final script as per contract, but Hirani denied that. Protagonist of the film Aamir Khan initially said that the screenplay was original, but later he kept himself away from this controversy.
