Hunter Easton Hayes (born September 9, 1991) is an American country music singer, songwriter, and multi-instrumentalist. He is signed to Atlantic Records Nashville, and released his self-titled debut album in October 2011. The album includes the Top 15 country single "Storm Warning", the number 1 single "Wanted", and "Somebody's Heartbreak".
Life and career.
Hayes was born on September 9, 1991, at Larniurg Hospital in Breaux Bridge, Louisiana, as the only child to Lynette and Leo Hayes. He has Cajun ancestry. He began his musical career at age two when his grandmother gave him a toy accordion. At age four, he began making appearances at local performances and on national television, including showings on Maury, Rosie O'Donnell, and Nickelodeon's game show Figure It Out, where he performed Jambalaya (On the Bayou). American Songwriter writes that "Hayes received his first guitar from actor Robert Duvall at age six" At 7 years old, Hunter was invited to perform for President Bill Clinton for a White House lawn party. At the age of 13, Hayes appeared on "America's Most Talented Kids," a show hosted by Dave Coulier. He performed the hit Hank Williams song, "Hey Good Lookin'."
In 2008, he moved from his hometown of Breaux Bridge, Louisiana to Nashville, Tennessee to be signed with Universal Music Publishing Group as a songwriter. He graduated in 2007, at the age of 16, and in 2010, co-wrote "Play" for the Rascal Flatts album "Nothing Like This". In September 2010, Hayes was signed to Atlantic Records Nashville and began working on what would become his debut album. 
Hayes appeared as the opening act of ten dates of country star Taylor Swift's Speak Now World Tour throughout the summer of 2011 and concluded his leg of the tour in St. Louis, Missouri.
In late April 2011, Hunter went on his own radio tour that lasted approximately 10 weeks on which he debuted songs that would appear on his self-titled album. Hayes concluded the first leg his debut headlining tour entitled the Most Wanted Tour. This leg of the tour began on October 8, 2011 in Beaumont, Texas and ended on December 4, 2011 in San Bernardino, California. Hayes and actress/singer Victoria Justice contributed a duet to the soundtrack of 2011's "Footloose" remake, recording a cover of Mike Reno and Ann Wilson's 1984 hit "Almost Paradise" from the original film. Hayes made a sneak appearance on the compilation album "Now That's What I Call Music! 41" with his song "Somebody's Heartbreak," originally heard on his self-titled album.
From January to February 2012, Hayes was the opening act on the Rascal Flatts "Thaw Out" tour. 
"Where We Left Off" is an original song, written by Hayes, that can be heard on the for the 2012 war film "Act of Valor". 
During the 2012 O Music Awards, The Flaming Lips broke a Guinness World Record (previously held by Jay-Z) for most concerts played in multiple cities in a 24-hr period. Hunter was the opening act for The Flaming Lips at the Hattiesburg, Mississippi stop. 
In May 2012, Martin Guitars named Hayes as C.F. Martin & Co.'s newest brand ambassador. American Songwriter quoted Hayes on the subject: "It is an absolute honor to be named an official Martin Ambassador and to be recognized by the Martin family."
On September 7, 2012, 2 days shy of his 21st birthday, he was inducted, as the youngest member, into the Louisiana Music Hall of Fame at the Mahalia Jackson Theater in New Orleans, Louisiana during a benefit concert for the Oschner Pediatrics.
"Hunter Hayes" (2011-present).
The debut single from the album was "Storm Warning", released to radio on May 16, 2011. Hayes's debut, self-titled album, "Hunter Hayes", was released on October 11, 2011. Hunter co-wrote on every song, played every instrument found on the album and along with Dann Huff, Hunter also co-produced the album. "Wanted", the second single, was released to radio on March 5, 2012.
On July 24, 2012, Hunter appeared on the CBS show, The Talk, where he was then given an RIAA Gold Certification plaque for “Wanted”.
Just shy of two months since "Wanted" went gold, the song was certified Platinum by RIAA on August 23, 2012. 
"Wanted" is Hayes's first No. 1 single, with Wanted hitting the No.1 spot on Billboard Country Charts, Hunter broke a record (by a full 3 months and 1 week) and became the youngest solo male act to top the Hot Country Songs originally set in 1973 by Johnny Rodriguez.
Starting September 14, 2012, Hayes began appearing as the opening act on 90+ dates for Carrie Underwood's Blown Away Tour in support of his album.
Hunter is also nominated to a Grammy Award for Best New Artist at the 2013 Grammy Awards. Hunter is the youngest male country artist to ever be nominated in all 3 Grammy categories he's nominated for.
Personal life.
In his spare time, Hunter flies planes in hopes of obtaining a pilot license.
