Derek is a British television comedy-drama written, directed by and starring Ricky Gervais. The pilot produced by Derek Productions Ltd. for Channel 4, first aired on 12 April 2012. 
On 9 May 2012, Channel 4 announced that it had commissioned a full series, which began airing on 30 January 2013. On 19 September 2012, Netflix picked up the series for US distribution.
Overview.
The pilot episode first aired on 12 April 2012 on Channel 4. Filmed in a mockumentary style, it stars and was written and directed by Ricky Gervais. It is set in an old people's home and centres on a helper at the home, Derek, played by Gervais. The titular character is based on one that first appeared in Gervais' stand-up show "Rubbernecker" at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in 2001. The show portrays the home's workers and residents as unhappy outsiders who struggle in life due to being disadvantaged, excluded from and unwanted by mainstream society. 
Derek goes beyond his job description to help residents, including buying a lottery scratchcard for a resident. It wins £10, but she dies shortly before he returns to tell her.
The majority of the show takes place in the home. One scene takes place on a bus and another is in a local pub. The latter scene involves three girls taunting Derek causing his friend and co-worker Hannah to become angry and headbutt one of them.
Ricky Gervais revealed, on his blog, just after the pilot aired that he was halfway through writing a series of 6 more episodes.
Gervais has said that the programme was inspired by his relatives who work in care homes, saying, "Half my family are care workers. My sister works with kids with learning difficulties. My sister-in-law works in a care home for people with Alzheimer's. And four or five of my nieces work in old people's homes. I always write about what I know."
Protagonist.
Gervais plays 49-year-old Derek Noakes, a care worker in a home for the elderly; he began working there three years ago. He likes watching reality television shows and game shows and is interested in celebrities, fame and YouTube. He is a kind, helpful, selfless man with good intentions. He is vulnerable because of his childlike naiveté and lack of intelligence. He is ridiculed and ostracised, as well as being marginalised by mainstream society because of his social awkwardness, unattractiveness and lack of inhibitions. Derek says it is more important to be kind than to be clever or good-looking. Many media sources describe him as autistic, although Gervais himself has always stated that he sees Derek as not being mentally handicapped. The exterior of the care home is the old officers mess at RAF Uxbridge.
Supporting characters.
Kerry Godliman plays his colleague and friend Hannah; she has worked in the home for fifteen years. Karl Pilkington plays Dougie, the home's caretaker and bus driver who considers taking unwanted possessions for himself from residents who have recently died as a perk of his job. Derek and Dougie live in Dougie's council flat. David Earl plays Kev, a friend of Derek who does not work in the home; Kev collects autographs from celebrities.
Reception.
The show attracted controversy - most of it before it was aired - due to a perception by some that it mocks mentally disabled people. Tanya Gold, writing for "The Guardian", dismissed Gervais' claims that in "Derek" he was satirising prejudice against the disabled, instead saying it "feels more like lazy cruelty than satire". Jack Seale addressed this in his review for the "Radio Times", noting that Derek "is uncynically presented as a hero who is, in Gervais’s words, “better than us” because he lacks ego and guile and merely wants to be nice. Those seeking to take offence at Gervais’s portrayal of Derek will have to look hard". Seale went on to criticise the show for relying too heavily on elements and characterisations from previous programmes made by Gervais, but also praised the emotional final scene as "truly superb work from Gervais as actor, writer and director" and Kerry Godliman's performance, stating that "every moment she’s on screen is sigh-inducing magic." "The Guardian"'s Sam Wollaston also found the programme uncontroversial but was less positive on the show as a whole, finding it just "not very good" and that "the whole mockumentary thing feels tired now". It was watched by just over two million viewers, over ten percent of people watching TV at that time.
