Carnival Triumph is a post-Panamax "Destiny/Triumph"-class cruise ship operated by Carnival Cruise Lines in the Caribbean, entering service in 1999. It came to media attention in 2013 when an engine room fire stranded the ship at sea for several days with a loss of power that crippled not only the ship's propulsion, but also support systems.
Design.
"Carnival Triumph" is long and has a beam of . Fully laden, the ship draws of water. The vessel's gross tonnage, which is a measure of volume and not of weight, is 101,509.
"Carnival Triumph" has a "Great Cities of the World" theme. Her amenities include the Paris Dining Room, the London Dining Room, the Rome Lounge, Club Rio featuring music, and a workout center and the Spa Carnival. She is structurally identical to her sister ship, "Carnival Victory", and differs from her class's namesake, "Carnival Destiny", by the addition of extra balcony cabins on the lido deck and various changes to placement and shapes of her public areas.
The ship has one of the first seagoing mobile phone systems, called "Cellular at Sea", provided by WMS (Wireless Maritime Services), a joint venture of AT&T and MTN (Maritime Telecommunications Network). It allows guests to use their personal cell phones to make calls directly from the ship at any time, albeit at extra cost.
Like most modern cruise ships, "Carnival Triumph" has a diesel-electric propulsion system in which the main generators provide electricity for all shipboard consumers from propulsion motors to hotel systems such as air conditioning and lighting. Her power plant consists of six diesel generating sets, four 16-cylinder Wärtsilä-Sulzer 16ZAV40S and two 12-cylinder 12ZAV40S medium-speed diesel engines. Her two 17.6-megawatt electric propulsion motors and controllable pitch propellers give the ship a maximum speed of and a service speed of about . For maneuvering at ports, "Carnival Triumph" has six transverse thrusters.
Service.
"Carnival Triumph" was completed and entered service in 1999. She sails four and five-day voyages from Galveston, Texas to the western Caribbean. She relocated from her former home port in New Orleans, Louisiana following a period of dry dock.
2013 engine room fire.
On Sunday, February 10, 2013 at 5:30 a.m. CST, the ship suffered a fire in the aft engine room. Although the fire was automatically extinguished, it resulted in a loss of power and propulsion. There were no casualties or injuries to passengers or crew. While the emergency generator was providing some power, the ship was left adrift about 150 miles off the coast of the Yucatán Peninsula in the Gulf of Mexico. "Carnival Triumph" was originally expected to be towed to the Mexican port of Progreso. After drifting northward on currents in the Gulf of Mexico while awaiting arrival of large, seagoing tugboats, she was expected to dock in Mobile, Alabama instead. This was the fourth engine room fire on a Carnival-owned ship resulting in a loss of power, the others being the "Tropicale" in 1999, the "Carnival Splendor" in 2010, and the "Costa Allegra", owned by a Carnival subsidiary, in 2012.
By February 11, 2013, the emergency electrical generators allowed partial restoration of some shipboard functions, including the freshwater system. Additionally, the sewage system was restored to the forward section of the ship, but was still inoperative in the aft portion. Supplies were transferred from the "Carnival Elation" during the night of February 10, which departed by midnight. "Carnival Legend" was en route from Tampa and arrived on the scene around 3 p.m. on the afternoon of February 11 to complete a transfer of food and water, and to take on a patient in need of dialysis for transport to Cozumel. The "Carnival Conquest" en route to Montego Bay, Jamaica from New Orleans stopped and delivered food and supplies during the afternoon and early evening on February 11, 2013. 
On February 13, Carnival said the February 21 through April 13 sailings were being canceled, in addition to the February 11 and 16 sailings already canceled. Guests whose trips have been canceled will get a full refund of their cruise fare along with other considerations. Passengers on the disabled ship will get a full refund of their cruise fare along with additional considerations and compensation. The afternoon of February 13, two seagoing tugboats were towing the ship, with a third tugboat expected to arrive that evening. The goal was to reach port in Mobile, Alabama by early afternoon February 14, but strong winds delayed the expected arrival until 8 p.m. to 11 p.m. Eventually, four tugboats were towing the ship, with a fifth on standby. After a tow line broke, arrival was delayed still further. By 9:20 p.m. CST, the ship had docked, with passengers disembarking shortly thereafter.
After the ship made port an incident investigation was started by the Bahamas Maritime Authority, the U.S. Coast Guard, and the National Transportation Safety Board. The Bahamas Maritime Authority will be the lead investigative agency, because the "Carnival Triumph" is a Bahamian-flagged ship. Initial reports from investigators on February 18, 2013 indicated the fire was caused by a leak in a flexible fuel oil return line from the No. 6 Diesel engine, allowing fuel to spill onto a hot surface and ignite.
Two weeks prior to the engine room fire casualty at sea, the "Carnival Triumph" experienced propulsion issues that caused it to be five hours late returning to its Galveston home port on January 28, 2013, delayed the ship's departure for its next cruise from 2:30 p.m. until 8 p.m. that night, and resulted in the elimination of a scheduled stop in Cozumel because of the ship's diminished cruising speed. While in port, a Port State Control (PSC) vessel inspection by the Texas City, Texas, U.S. Coast Guard Marine Safety Unit was conducted, resulting in a finding that there was "a short in the high voltage connection box of one of the ships generators causing damage to cables within the connection box", a deficiency under 50AC SOLAS 2009 Ch 1 Reg 11. A directive with a compliance due date of February 27, 2013 was issued following the inspection, requiring that "the condition of the ship and its equipment shall be maintained to conform with the regulations to ensure that the ship in all respects will remain fit to proceed to sea without danger to the ship or persons on board." The Coast Guard Marine Information Safety and Law Enforcement System showed that this deficiency remained unresolved at the time of the subsequent fire and loss of power while at sea on February 10.
