Christopher Jonathan James Nolan (; born 30 July 1970) is a British-American film director, screenwriter, and producer, who is well known for his "The Dark Knight Trilogy" (2005–2012), the science fiction/heist film "Inception" (2010), and the psychological thrillers "Memento" (2000), and "The Prestige" (2006). He has received nominations from the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (Oscars), Hollywood Foreign Press Association (Golden Globes), British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA's), and the Directors Guild of America (DGA).
Nolan co-founded Syncopy Films with his wife, Emma Thomas, and they have produced all of his films since "The Prestige" (2006). He has collaborated with a variety of talents including cinematographer Wally Pfister, screenwriters David S. Goyer and Jonathan Nolan, film editor Lee Smith, composers David Julyan and Hans Zimmer, special effects coordinator Chris Corbould, and actors Christian Bale, Cillian Murphy, Tom Hardy, Ken Watanabe, Marion Cotillard, Leonardo DiCaprio, Hugh Jackman, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Gary Oldman, Morgan Freeman, and Michael Caine.
In total, his directorial efforts have grossed approximately US$1.6 billion in North America and US$3.5 billion worldwide, making him one of the most commercially successful filmmakers of all time. In July 2012, Christopher Nolan became the youngest director to be honored with a hand and footprint ceremony at TCL Chinese Theatre in Los Angeles.
Early life.
Christopher Nolan was born in London, to a British father, who worked as an advertising copywriter, and an American mother, a flight attendant. As a dual citizen of the United Kingdom and the United States, he spent his childhood in both London and Chicago. He began making films at the age of seven using his father's Super 8 camera and his toy action figures. While living in Chicago, he made short films with future film director and producer Roko Belic. They collaborated on a surreal 8mm short, "Tarantella" (1989), which was shown on Image Union, an independent film and video showcase on the Public Broadcasting Service. He was also briefly affiliated with Dan Eldon's African charity projects, working as a cameraman, in the early 1990s.
 Nolan was educated at Haileybury and Imperial Service College, an independent school on Hertford Heath in Hertfordshire, and later read English literature at University College London (UCL). "Studying English literature got me thinking about the narrative freedom that authors have enjoyed for centuries [...] it seemed to me that filmmakers should enjoy those freedoms as well". He chose the university specifically for its filmmaking facilities, which consisted of a Steenbeck editing suite and 16mm film cameras. Nolan was president of the Union's Film Society from 1992 to 1994, one of the oldest and most well established film societies in England. A contemporary described him as "talented and focused on learning as much as possible about the mechanics and technology of filmmaking". Nolan and his long-time film producer, Emma Thomas, would screen 35mm feature films during the school year and use the money earned from ticket sales to produce 16mm films during the summers. He was later named an Honorary Fellow of UCL, a title given out to individuals "who have attained distinction in the arts, literature, science, business, public life or have rendered exceptional service, which may include philanthropic support, to UCL." During this period he earned a living by directing corporate videos and industrial films, before moving to Los Angeles and getting a freelance job as a script reader.
About his work reading scripts, and the years after graduating, working as a struggling independent filmmaker, Nolan recalls. "I was getting $40 per script and I couldn't do more than a couple each day because I really felt responsibility to try and do it well. A lot of people don't by the way, but I did, so I was really, really slow. Before that I had spent a couple of years doing freelance video production in London, making absolutely no money. I had no personal entertainment budget for anything at all, and when I finally did get a salaried job in London, doing basically the same thing, my immediate response was: 'Well actually, now I can take half of what I'm making every week and buy film with it.' So as soon as I had regular money coming in- or what I felt like steady income - I decided to use it to make "Following". In L.A. I didn't give up my day job for a long time, even after "Following" started getting into festivals. You have to keep your day job a lot longer than you think, basically to pay the rent."
Career.
1990s.
Nolan began his filmmaking career with a series of short films. "Larceny" (1996), a short he made in black-and-white with a restricted cast, crew and equipment in the space of a weekend, contained many traits later to be seen in his first feature. "Larceny" was funded by Nolan himself, but shot using the society's equipment. It played at the Cambridge Film Festival in 1996, and is considered to be one of the best shorts produced by UCL in recent generations. "Doodlebug" (1997) is a kafkaesque short about a man chasing an insect with a shoe around a flat, only to discover on killing it that it is a miniature of himself. Nolan wrote, directed, co-produced, photographed, and edited the film. Jeremy Theobald, whom played the lead in both "Larceny" and "Doodlebug", would later play the protagonist in Nolan's first feature. The short has since been released on home video by Cinema16.
In 1998, Nolan directed his first feature film, "Following". The film depicts an unemployed young writer who trails strangers through London, hoping that they will provide inspiration for his first novel, but ends up being drawn into a criminal underworld when he fails to keep his distance. The inspiration for the film came directly from his experience of living in London and having his flat broken into: "There is an interesting connection between a stranger going through your possessions and the concept of following people at random through a crowd - both take you beyond the boundaries of ordinary social relations". He made the film on a budget of only £3,000, and shot it on weekends, over the course of a year. He was primarily working with friends he had met through the FilmSoc, such as musician and film composer David Julyan. To conserve expensive film stock, every scene in the film was rehearsed extensively to ensure that the first or second take could be used in the final edit. Nolan directed the film from his own script, and also photographed and edited it himself. It began to receive notice after a screening at the 1998 San Francisco International Film Festival, were the film caught the attention of Adrian Curry, who picked up the US distribution rights for his company Zeitgeist Films. While working the festival circuit, Nolan met cinematographer and future collaborator Wally Pfister, who had shot "The Hi-Line" (1999), which was in competition at Sundance, while Nolan was at the neighbouring Slamdance Film Festival. The film won several awards during its festival run, including the prestigious Tiger Award at the Rotterdam International Film Festival. On December 11, 2012, the film was released on DVD and Blu-ray as part of the Criterion Collection.
2000s.
As a result of the film's success, Newmarket Films optioned the script for Nolan's next film, "Memento". The movie is based on the short story "Memento Mori", written by Christopher's brother, Jonathan Nolan. It follows Leonard Shelby (played by Guy Pearce), who suffers from anterograde amnesia, and uses notes and tattoos to hunt for the man he thinks killed his wife. Pfister and Nolan shot about a quarter of the film in black and white, and elsewhere used colors, light and darkness to emphasize the "noir" nature of the story. "Memento" premiered on September 5, 2000, at the Venice International Film Festival, where it received a standing ovation. "Memento" was especially praised for its unique, nonlinear narrative structure and themes of memory, perception, grief, self-deception, and revenge. It was also championed by medical experts as one of the most realistic and accurate depictions of amnesia in any motion picture. The film was successful at the box office and received numerous accolades, including Academy Award nominations for Original Screenplay and Film Editing. "Memento" was subsequently mentioned by many critics as one of the best films of the decade (2000–2009), and the screenplay was featured in the Writers Guild of America, West list of 101 greatest screenplays of all time. Lionsgate re-released the film on DVD and Blu-ray following the 10th anniversary of the film.
Nolan followed "Memento" with the psychological thriller "Insomnia" (2002), starring Academy Award winners Al Pacino, Robin Williams and Hilary Swank. Shot in the frozen badlands of British Columbia, "Insomnia" is about two Los Angeles detectives sent to a northern town in Alaska to investigate the methodical murder of a local teenager. The film is a remake of the 1997 Norwegian film of the same name, albeit with major changes in both the plot and the nature of the main character. The never setting sun was a central reference point in the story, and indeed the title, and while filming in Alaska during the summer months, Nolan and Pfister opted for a natural look to evoke the landscape, and played with putting the actors in darkness or light. For instance, they asked the production designer (Nathan Crowley) to position the detective's bed in a certain way in relation to the window. This allowed them to move his face in and out of shadows. Pfister recounted one shot of Pacino, when his character was struggling with his guilt as local policemen came looking for him. Pfister explained to the actor in the darkness he would catch the "ambient bounce", but the light was eight stops over-exposed. He recalled, "I said, when you’re in the shadows, you’ll be catching the ambient bounce. If you move forward, you’ll be in this nuclear, bright melting light. He knew exactly how to play it." Steven Soderbergh, who had recommended Nolan as a potential director to Warner Bros., served as an executive producer with George Clooney, through the now defunct Section Eight Productions. "Insomnia" was well-received by critics, especially the lead performances from Pacino and Williams. The film also did moderately well at the box office, taking in $113 million worldwide, thus becoming Nolan's first commercial success for Warner Bros.
In 2005, Nolan co-wrote and directed "Batman Begins". After Warner Bros. put its Batman film franchise on an indefinite hiatus when the fourth installment was released to negative reviews and disappointing box office returns, Nolan, together with David S. Goyer, convinced Warner Bros. to entrust the series to a relatively unknown director. Nolan and Goyer began to work on the film in early 2003 and aimed for a darker and more gritty tone, with humanity and a sense of heightened realism being at the heart of the film. "Batman Begins" was released on 15 June 2005 to acclaim and commercial success. The film revived the franchise, and heralded a trend of darker genre films, that either retold back-stories or rebooted them altogether. "Batman Begins" ranked as the eighth highest grossing film of 2005 in the United States and the ninth highest grossing worldwide. Previous directors of the franchise, Tim Burton and Joel Schumacher, both embraced Nolan's take on the iconic character. When addressing his successor, Schumacher commented on the differences between his movies and Nolan's trilogy. "I think what's very interesting about "Batman" and how brilliant Chris Nolan is, if you look at the last "Batman", ours were at a much simpler time. Our job was to entertain the whole family. To make it fun and sell a lot of toys. It was a franchise. The last ones is really about what we're going through, the extraordinary gap between the haves and the have-nots... I think right now the last "Batman" is very reflective of the times we're living in, which are scary times." The film was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Cinematography and for three BAFTA awards. In November 2008, "Empire" ranked "Batman Begins" 81 in its 500 Greatest Movies of All Time list.
Before returning to the Batman franchise, Nolan directed, co-wrote and produced "The Prestige" (2006). "The Prestige" is an adaptation of the Christopher Priest novel about two rival magicians in the 19th century. The film revolves around the intense professional rivalry between two stage illusionists, their desire to develop better tricks than the other draws them into a battle of skill and technology, dominated by obsession, secrecy and duality. Like the novel before it, the film has aspects of metafiction and makes use of flashback to tell parts of the story. Its title refers to the final part of a stage performance, where the performer attempts to return a vanished object before the eyes of the audience. This usage of "prestige" is an archaic meaning that was revived by Priest for use in the book. The film received a mostly positive response from critics and made over $109 million worldwide. "The Prestige" obtained Oscar nominations for Best Cinematography and Best Art Direction.
In late July 2006, the sequel to "Batman Begins" was officially confirmed as "The Dark Knight" (2008). Nolan and his brother Jonathan wrote a script, based on a treatment written by himself and David S. Goyer. The film began production in early 2007 and was released on July 16, 2008 in Australia and July 18, 2008 in the United States. Considered one of the best films of the 2000s and one of the best superhero films ever made, the film received highly positive reviews and set numerous records during its theatrical run. The film earned $534,858,444 in North America and $469,700,000 in other territories for a worldwide total of $1,004,558,444. "The Dark Knight" is also notable for being the first feature film partially shot on the 15/70mm IMAX format. At the 81st Academy Awards, it was nominated for a total of eight Oscars, and won two, the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing, and a posthumous Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for Heath Ledger. The film was noticeably absent from the Best Picture list and many speculated that the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences later changed their number of nominees to ten, instead of the traditional five, because of the omission. In a question-and-answer session that followed the announcement, the Academy’s president Sidney Ganis said; “I would not be telling you the truth if I said the words "Dark Knight" did not come up.”
2010s.
After the success of "The Dark Knight", Warner Bros. contracted Nolan to a seven-figure deal to direct "Inception" (2010). Nolan directed, wrote and co-produced the film which was described as "a contemporary sci-fi actioner set within the architecture of the mind". Before its release, several reports suggested that the film was too complex to appeal to a broad audience, and that it would struggle at the box office. In an article written by The Wall Street Journal, industry executives and financiers commented that the commercial prospects of "Inception" could influence the industry as a whole. Veteran producer John Davis remarked; "I can promise you that heads of studios are already going into production meetings saying, We need fresh ideas for summer movies, we want original concepts like "Inception" that are big and bold enough to carry themselves." The film was released on 16 July 2010 to largely positive reviews and grossed over $800 million worldwide. "Inception" was nominated for eight Oscars, and won four awards; Best Cinematography, Best Sound Mixing, Best Sound Editing and Best Visual Effects. Writing in "Senses of Cinema", Ian Allen Paul placed "Inception" within a trend in modern American film which treats themes of simulation and "meta-reality". Exploration of the subjectivity of experience, and questioning the reality of the material world had been explored in the preceding decade in "The Matrix" (1999), "eXistenZ" (1999), in "Paprika" and Charlie Kaufman’s Baudrillard-inspired "Synecdoche, New York" (2008), and have existed long before in Western philosophy and post-modernism. Nolan's framework in "Inception" is slightly different to other films: characters sedate themselves, connect to a machine and can inhabit a shared dream space built by one of them, "the architect". The world is constantly evolving as each character's movements affects the shared environment.
During post-production on "Inception", Nolan gave an interview for "These Amazing Shadows" (2011), a documentary spotlighting film appreciation and preservation by the National Film Registry. He agreed to do the interview after speaking with Doug Blush, the producer, at a piano recital featuring his son and Blush's daughter. Nolan also appeared in "Side by Side" (2012), a documentary about the history, process and workflow of both digital and photochemical film creation.
In 2012, Nolan directed his third and final "Batman" film "The Dark Knight Rises". Nolan was initially hesitant about returning to the series, but agreed to come back after developing a story with his brother and Goyer that he felt would conclude the series on a satisfactory note. The film was released 20 July 2012 to critical acclaim, and like its predecessor, it performed extremely well at the box-office. During a midnight showing of the film at the Century 16 cinema in Aurora, Colorado, a gunman opened fire inside the theater, killing 12 people and injuring 58 others. Nolan released a statement to the press expressing his condolences for the victims of what he described as a senseless tragedy. He also wrote that "The movie theatre is my home, and the idea that someone would violate that innocent and hopeful place in such an unbearably savage way is devastating to me. Nothing any of us can say could ever adequately express our feelings for the innocent victims of this appalling crime, but our thoughts are with them and their families." Despite the horrific tragedy surrounding the release of the film, "The Dark Knight Rises" became the thirteenth film to cross the $1 billion mark, and Nolan the second film director to have two separate films doing so (the first being James Cameron with "Titanic" and "Avatar").
Upcoming projects.
Nolan is currently co-producing a reinvention of Superman, titled "Man of Steel" (2013). During story discussions for "The Dark Knight Rises" in 2010, David S. Goyer told Nolan his idea on how to present Superman in a modern context. Impressed with Goyer's concept, Nolan pitched the idea to the studio, who hired Nolan to produce and Goyer to write based on the financial and critical success of "The Dark Knight". Nolan admired Bryan Singer's work on "Superman Returns" for its connection to Richard Donner's version, but stated that the new film would not have any relationship with the previous film series. Although Zack Snyder is directing, Nolan will have significant creative input in the process.
On 30 June 2011, it was reported that Syncopy had set up a supernatural thriller at Warner Bros. and hired Keith Gordon to write and direct it. Nolan’s former assistant and producer Jordan Goldberg is the prime mover on the project, and Nolan and partner Emma Thomas will take executive producer credits.
On 13 June 2012, Nolan confirmed that he and Emma Thomas would executive produce Wally Pfister's directorial debut, "Transcendence". Jack Paglen wrote the screenplay, which has been described as a present-day science fiction film, with a fairly big concept.
On 9 January 2013, it was announced that Nolan will be directing and producing his next project; a science-fiction film titled "Interstellar". The script was written by Jonathan Nolan and was originally to be directed by Steven Spielberg. A day later it was revealed that Nolan was rewriting the script in order to incorporate an original idea of his own. The film will reportedly depict "a heroic interstellar voyage to the farthest borders of our scientific understanding".
Directorial style and collaborations.
Aesthetics.
Nolan spoke about his directing style in a 2012 interview for "DGA Quarterly".
He also spoke about his approach to working with actors.
Nolan prefers shooting on film, as opposed to digital video.
Nolan chooses to minimize the amount of Computer Generated Imagery for special effects in his films, preferring to use practical effects whenever possible. For instance, his films "Batman Begins" and "Inception" had 620 and 500 visual effects shots respectively, which is considered minor in comparison to contemporary visual effects epics that can have around 1,500 or 2,000 VFX shots.
His films share several common characteristics. In addition to actors who appear in multiple films, Nolan's visual style emphasizes urban settings, men in suits, generally muted colors - bordering on a monochromatic palette, dialogue scenes framed in wide close-up with a shallow depth of field, and strong emphasis on location and architecture, typically modern. His films draw heavily on neo-noir characteristics, with Nolan himself noting that he considers all of his films to belong to the genre. In terms of characters, his films usually revolve around obsessive protagonists, with some kind of psychological disorder, who are seeking vengeance over the death of a loved one. The characters are often driven by a philosophical belief, and their fate is left open to interpretation. Nolan's dialogue and writing-style can be described as naturalistic, and he often utilize meta-functional monologues, foreshadowing, and ambiguous endings. Scenes are often interrupted by an counterintuitive editing style of cutting away quickly from what would be the money shot, as well as crosscutting several scenes of parallel action to build to a climax. The editing is also used to represent psychological states and merge the characters’ subjectivity with that of the audience.
Nolan seems to be interested in the shared cinema going experience, and how impactful escapist entertainment can be. In "The Prestige", Angier says: "The audience knows the truth: the world is simple. It’s miserable, solid all the way through. But if you could fool them, even for a second, then you can make them wonder. Then you get to see something really special… It was the look on their faces." In "Inception", the character Mal tells Cobb a riddle, which may be interpreted as something similar: "You're waiting for a train, a train that will take you far away. You know where you hope this train will take you, but you don't know for sure. But it doesn't matter. How can it not matter to you where that train will take you?".
Thematically, the films explore themes such as existentialism, obsession, sacrifice, betrayal, loneliness, solitude, self-deception, memory, revenge, violence, terrorism, corruption, redemption, surveillance, theatricality, and deception, which may explain his frequent use of complex narrative structures, and morally ambiguous characters. Theatricality and deception are embedded as internal themes and also function as Nolan's commentary on the artifice of filmmaking itself.
Recurring collaborators.
This chart lists every actor who has appeared in more than one film directed by Nolan.
Nolan's wife, Emma Thomas, has produced all of his films, including "Memento", in which she is credited as an associate producer. His uncle John Nolan was cast as a police officer in "Following", and as Fredericks, a Wayne Enterprises Board Member in "Batman Begins" and "The Dark Knight Rises". His cousin Miranda Nolan appeared as the flight attendant in "Inception", and a maid working at Wayne Manor in "The Dark Knight Rises".
He often collaborates with his brother, screenwriter Jonathan Nolan, who describes their working relationship in the production notes of "The Prestige": "I’ve always suspected that it has something to do with the fact that he’s left-handed and I’m right-handed, because he’s somehow able to look at my ideas and flip them around in a way that’s just a little bit more twisted and interesting. It’s great to be able to work with him like that."
Lee Smith has been Nolan's editor since "Batman Begins", with Dody Dorn editing "Memento" and "Insomnia". Wally Pfister served as the cinematographer on all of Nolan's films starting with "Memento" and ending with "The Dark Knight Rises". Pfister spoke of his relationship with Nolan saying: "Mine and Chris’ working relationship is defined, quite simply, by the great respect we have for each other. I’ve learned so much from him in terms of him pushing me to find beauty in a simpler method of photography. We’re also very like-minded, we share a sense of humor, and from the beginning I trust his judgement." Pfister is currently in the process of making his directorial debut, "Transcendence", with Nolan and Thomas on board as executive producers.
David Julyan composed music for "Following", "Memento", "Insomnia", "The Prestige", and the short films "Larceny" and "Doodlebug", while Hans Zimmer and James Newton Howard provided music for "Batman Begins" and "The Dark Knight". Zimmer scored "Inception" and "The Dark Knight Rises" without Howard.
From "Batman Begins", Nolan has been collaborating with special effects supervisor Chris Corbould, stunt coordinator Tom Struthers and visual effects supervisor Paul Franklin (from Double Negative). Production designer Nathan Crowley has worked with Nolan since "Insomnia" (with the exception of "Inception").
Besides appearing in "Following" and "Batman Begins", actor Jeremy Theobald also appeared in Nolan's short films "Larceny" and "Doodlebug".
Nolan often casts older veteran actors whose careers have stalled in supporting roles. Examples include Rutger Hauer in "Batman Begins", Eric Roberts and Anthony Michael Hall in "The Dark Knight", Tom Berenger in "Inception", and Matthew Modine in "The Dark Knight Rises". About working with Nolan, Modine noted "There are no chairs on a Nolan set, he gets out of his car and goes to the set. And he stands up until lunchtime. And then he stands up until they say, ‘Wrap.’ He’s fully engaged — in every aspect of the film."
Actor Michael Caine has been a frequent collaborator since his appearance in "Batman Begins". In addition to his appearance in Nolan's "The Dark Knight Trilogy", Caine had important supporting roles in "The Prestige" and "Inception". Nolan, who considers him his "good luck charm", was described by Caine as "one of cinema's greatest directors", while comparing him favorably with David Lean, John Huston and Joseph L. Mankiewicz.
Personal life.
In 1997, Nolan married Emma Thomas, his girlfriend at UCL and long-time film producer. They own the production company Syncopy Inc. together. The name derives from "syncope", the medical term for fainting or loss of consciousness. Their working relationship has been described as "equal captains of the ship". Thomas handles the business side of things, so that Nolan can focus on the creative elements. They have four children and reside in Los Angeles.
Some of his favorite films include "Blade Runner" (1982), ' (1977), "The Man Who Would Be King" (1975), "Lawrence of Arabia" (1962), "Chinatown" (1974), and ' (1968). In 2013, Criterion Collection released a list of Nolan's ten favorite films from their catalog, which included "The Hit" (1984), "12 Angry Men" (1957), "The Thin Red Line" (1998), "The Testament of Dr. Mabuse" (1933), "Bad Timing" (1980), "Merry Christmas Mr. Lawrence" (1983), "For All Mankind" (1989), "Koyaanisqatsi" (1982), "Mr. Arkadin" (1955), and Erich von Stroheim's "Greed" (1924). He has also expressed his admiration for films such as "On Her Majesty's Secret Service" (1969), "The Hitcher" (1986), "Topkapi" (1964), and "The Black Hole" (1979).
Reception.
, Nolan's films have earned a total of over USD$ 1.6 billion at the North American box office, according to Box Office Mojo. The variance is large: his independent debut, "Following", was mostly shown at film festivals and earned $48,482 in just two theatres, while "The Dark Knight" earned $533,345,358 in 4,366 cinemas. According to the UK Film Council in their 2011 Statistical Yearbook, Nolan is the second most commercially successful British director since 2001.
Nolan has earned many fans and high praise from directors such as Steven Spielberg, Martin Scorsese, Paul Thomas Anderson, James Cameron, Paul Greengrass, Guillermo Del Toro, Kevin Smith, Danny Boyle, Brian De Palma, Joss Whedon, Steven Soderbergh, Duncan Jones, Damon Lindelof, Joe Carnahan, Francis Ford Coppola, Ben Affleck, Werner Herzog, Atom Egoyan, Matthew Vaughn, Brad Bird, Tim Burton, Rian Johnson, and Nicholas Winding Refn. In an article published by Empire, about the impact of "The Dark Knight", filmmakers such as Neil Marshall, Rupert Wyatt, David Koepp, Gareth Edwards, Drew Goddard, Adam McKay, Peter Berg, Zack Snyder, and Wes Anderson praised Nolan for his directorial effort. Sam Mendes stated that "Nolan proved you can make a huge movie that is thrilling and entertaining and has a lot to say about the world we live in, even if, in the case with "The Dark Knight", it’s not even set in our world."
In 2007, Total Film named him the 32nd greatest director of all time In 2011, Entertainment Weekly named him the fifth-greatest working director, writing that "Nolan is the rare director determined to make you, the moviegoer, walk out of the theater after his film and gasp, "I've never seen anything like that before." His movies are full of twists and riddles, and even his popcorn fare is stuffed with enough brain candy to fill up a graduate school syllabus." The following year, The Guardian ranked him #14 on their list of "The 23 Best Film Directors in the World"
