M'Baye Babacar Niang (born 19 December 1994 in Meulan) is a French professional footballer who plays for Italian club Milan in Serie A. He plays primarily as a striker, though his influence can extend out to the wings and the attacking midfield positions. Niang is described as "a phenomenon" and "a striker out of the ordinary" and made his professional debut, at the age of 16, in April 2011, in a league match with his former club Caen against Toulouse. His playing style has also drawn comparisons to fellow Milan striker Mario Balotelli. Niang made his first start the following week in a 4–0 away win over Nice. On 8 May, he scored his first professional goal in a 1–1 draw with Lens. Three days later, Niang scored the equalizing goal in another 1–1 draw, this time with Rennes. He has represented his nation France at under-16, under-17, and under-21 level.
Career.
Early career.
Niang was born in Meulan, a commune in the Yvelines department of the Île-de-France region, to Senegalese parents. He began his football career at the age of seven playing for local club Basse-Seine Les Mureaux. Niang spent two years at the club before being spotted by amateur club Poissy. After hearing of the player through word of mouth, Niang was spotted by professional club Caen scouts Laurent Glaize and David Lasry. Glaize later stated that before scouting the player, he was informed that Niang was possibly a "présu", a player claiming to be younger than his actual date of birth. The claim was made primarily because of Niang's height, which stood at when he was 13 years old. Despite the claim, the scouts continued to pursue Niang, who was also being linked to other professional clubs in France, such as Lille and Paris Saint-Germain.
Caen.
Niang joined Caen's youth academy at the age of 13 after excelling at a trial, in which he scored a hat trick. He quickly ascended up the club's youth hierarchy and, by the age of 15, was already featuring with the club's under-19 team. Niang was described by the team's coach Philippe Tranchant as a player with "huge potential" while also stating "we’ve never seen a player like him at the club before". After spending the second part of the 2009–10 season at under-19 level, Niang was promoted to the club's reserve team in the Championnat de France amateur, the fourth level of French football, ahead of the 2010–11 season. He made his reserve team debut on 14 August 2010 in a 0–0 draw with Avranches. In the team's ensuing match against Moulins, Niang scored the only goal for the team in a 1–1 draw. On 12 September, he scored both team goals in a 2–2 draw with the reserve team of professional club Lorient. After becoming the team's top scorer after its first six matches, Niang began earning praise from the local media who began predicting when the player would be called up to the senior team. He was also linked to several clubs abroad such as Italian club Juventus and English clubs Manchester City and Tottenham. The latter club reportedly offered Caen €8 million for the player.
On 18 February 2011, Niang signed his first professional contract agreeing to a three-year deal with Caen. He was called up the senior team for the first time on 23 April 2011 for the team's league match against Toulouse that was played on the following day. Niang was assigned the squad number 9 shirt and made his professional debut in the match appearing as a second-half substitute as the match ended in a 1–1 draw. At 16 years and 114 days, Niang's appearance in the match made him the youngest player ever to appear for Caen in the club's history. A week later, he made his first professional start in a 4–0 away win over Nice. On 7 May, Niang scored his first professional goal in a 1–1 draw with Lens. The goal made him the second youngest player to score a goal in Ligue 1 behind Laurent Roussey. In the team's next match against Rennes, Niang appeared as a substitute and scored the equalizing goal four minutes after coming on. In the team's final league match of the season against Marseille, he converted the team's second goal, which put Caen 2–0 up. Marseille later scored two unanswered goals to draw the match 2–2. Niang finished the campaign with seven appearances, of which four were starts, and three league goals.
Prior to the start of the 2011–12 season, Niang's professional contract became subject to debate after French newspaper "Le Parisien" revealed that his father did not agree to the signing of the contract. Due to Niang being a minor, it is required by French law that both parents of the player agree to the contract. Despite reportedly being present during the signing of the contract, Niang's father, through his lawyer, threatened to begin "a procedure for revocation of the contract". Despite the contract issues, Niang remained a Caen player and made his season debut on 13 August 2011 in a 2–1 win over Sochaux. On 24 September, he scored his first goal of the campaign in a 4–2 away win over Evian. Niang's only other goal during the season came in the 1–1 draw away to Nancy.
AC Milan.
Before the start of the 2012–2013 season, it was reported that Niang had gone on trial with English clubs Arsenal, Everton, and Tottenham Hotspur. On 27 August 2012, it was confirmed that Niang was in negotiations with Italian club Milan after arriving in the city and having dinner with club vice-president Adriano Galliani. On the following day, the move was confirmed on Milan's official website. Niang signed a three-year contract, while the transfer fee was undisclosed.
On the 13th December 2012, in the Coppa Italia 5th Round game against Reggina, Niang came on as a substitute and scored. The goal in the 70th minute put Niang into the history books as the second youngest goal scorer in Milan history at 17 years and 350 days. On his 18th birthday, Niang signed a contract extension with Milan, keeping him at the club until 2017.
International career.
Niang is a France youth international having represented his nation at under-16, under-17, under-21 level. In December 2009, he earned his first international call-up at under-16 level under coach Patrick Gonfalone for friendly matches against Belgium. Niang made his youth international debut in the first match against Belgium in a 4–1 win. In the second match against Belgium held two days later, he scored the only goal in a 1–0 win. Niang returned to the under-16 team in January 2010 to participate in the 2010 edition of the Aegean Cup in Turkey. In the competition, he appeared in all four matches France contested. He scored two goals; both in group stage victories over the Czech Republic and Romania. France won the competition after defeating the hosts 3–1 in the final to become the competition's two-time defending champions. Afterwards, Niang failed to earn a call-up under Gonfalone at under-16 level, which resulted in the player missing the Montaigu Tournament.
At under-17 level, Niang was among Gonfalone's first call-ups and made his debut at a European tournament in Serbia in the team's opening group stage match against the hosts. In first round qualification for the 2011 UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship, he appeared in all three group stage matches as France finished the round in the second place behind Italy. Despite appearing in the team's first eight matches, Gonfalone did not call Niang up again for the under-17 team. He, subsequently, missed both the UEFA European Under-17 Football Championship and 2011 FIFA U-17 World Cup.
Due to being born in France to Senegalese parents, Niang is eligible to represent the Senegal national team at international level. In May 2011, Senegalese media reported that Niang was named to the Senegal under-23 team to participate in 2011 CAF U-23 Championship qualification matches in June 2011. After this report was deemed inaccurate, in July 2011, it was reported that Niang had announced his desire to represent Senegal at senior international level. Later that month, he was named to the Senegal squad to face Morocco in August. On 4 August, Niang distanced himself from the reports and re-affirmed his desire to represent France at international level. He later stated "First, I never said that I had chosen Senegal or France. The only words I have spoken is that, for now, I prefer the French youth teams".
On the same day after reaffirming his decision to represent France, Niang bypassed three international levels and was called up to the France under-21 team by coach Erick Mombaerts to participate in a three-day training camp at the Clairefontaine academy. In September 2011, he was called up for the second consecutive time by Mombaerts for a 2013 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship qualification match against Latvia on 2 September and a friendly against Portugal on 5 September. He made his under-21 debut in the qualifier against Latvia appearing as a substitute in the 72nd minute. After 15 minutes on the field, Niang scored his first goal for the team. France won the match 3–0. In November 2012, Niang was suspended from his national team until 31st December 2013 due to disciplinary causes.
Controversies.
At the beginning of the 2012–2013 season, Niang was stopped by the police in Milan for driving without a driver's license. It was reported that Niang told the Carabinieri police that he was teammate Bakaye Traoré, an act which he subsequently denied. Niang was also banned from representing the French national team until December 31, 2012 for visiting a nightclub while breaking a night time curfew. Niang's reckless actions caused A.C. Milan's management to reconsider his future with the team.
Career statistics.
Club.
"(Correct as of 27 January 2013)"
