Christophe Guy Denis "Christopher" Lambert (born 29 March 1957) is an American-born French actor who has appeared in American, as well as French and other European productions. He is best known for his role as Connor MacLeod, or simply "The Highlander", from the movie and subsequent movie franchise series of the same name. He is also known for his roles as Tarzan in "" and as the thunder god Raiden in the first movie adaptation of the video game "Mortal Kombat". He is credited internationally as "Christopher Lambert", with the exceptions of French-speaking countries, where he is known as "Christophe Lambert".
Early life.
Lambert was born in Great Neck, New York. His father was a diplomat in the United Nations. Lambert grew up in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Career.
After appearing in supporting parts in several French films, Christopher Lambert was discovered by international audiences when director Hugh Hudson cast him in the title role of "" (1984). That same year, he also played his first lead role in a French film by appearing opposite Catherine Deneuve in "Paroles et musique". In 1985, Lambert played the male lead in Luc Besson's "Subway", for which he was awarded a César Award for Best Actor the next year. "Highlander" (1986), in which he starred as Connor MacLeod, was an international success, as well as his most famous role. He appeared in all three sequels that were released in cinemas – although he was not in the 2007 movie made for the Sci-Fi Channel – and had a cameo appearance in the pilot episode of the television series.
"The Sicilian", directed by Michael Cimino and starring Lambert as Salvatore Giuliano, was released in 1987, and was less successful than his previous pictures, receiving a lukewarm reception by critics and being only marginally profitable. "To Kill a Priest", in which he played a character based on Jerzy Popiełuszko, was well received by critics but was a financial failure. Lacking a recent box-office success, Lambert agreed to appear in the first "Highlander" sequel, "", which was poorly received.
During the 1990s, Lambert starred in action, thriller and science fiction films such as "Knight Moves", "Fortress" (1993), "Gunmen" (1994) and "Mean Guns" (1997), or the Italian-produced "Nirvana" (1997). His filmography included low-budget films such as "", which were generally poorly-received by critics. Some of his films enjoyed only direct-to-video release. In the course of that decade, Lambert also occasionally appeared in French films such as "Max et Jérémie" (1992).
In 1995, he played the role of the thunder god Raiden in a movie adaptation of the popular video game series "Mortal Kombat". Lambert was interested in reprising his character in the sequel, "", but he was committed to his role in "Beowulf" (1999), and the role was given to James Remar.
In 2001, he played the lead role of Gallic chieftain Vercingetorix in the France-Canada production "Druids", which was a critical and financial failure.
Lambert is also active as a film producer and has produced French films such as Patrick Braoudé's "Génial, mes parents divorcent" (1990) and "Neuf mois" (1994).
In 2009, Lambert was a lead in Claire Denis' "White Material"; both the film and Lambert's performance received critical acclaim.
Lambert had a role in the Marvel Comics film ' (2012). He underwent "sword training for 3 months" and shaved his head. Shortly afterwards, he appeared as the Chameleon in 2 episodes of '.
Personal life.
Lambert was married to Diane Lane from October 1988 to 1994. They have a daughter, Eleanor Jasmine. He married Jaiymse Haft on 6 February 1999. Since 2007, Lambert has been in a relationship with Sophie Marceau, with whom he appeared in "La disparue de Deauville". They married in 2012.
Lambert has profound myopia and cannot see without his glasses. Because he cannot wear contact lenses, he is often forced to act while virtually blind. This has led to injuries while performing his own stunts without glasses. His myopia is often credited as being part of his appeal, by giving his stare a peculiar charm.
Winery.
Along with owning a mineral water business and food processing plant, Lambert produces Côtes-du-Rhône wines with partner Eric Beaumard at a vineyard located in Sainte-Cécile-les-Vignes, France. The label, "Les Garrigues de Beaumard-Lambert", tops out at 4,000 cases and is sold mostly in Europe. Beaumard has primary creative control of the winery, but Lambert conducts barrel tests and monitors the various stages of evolution.
Novus Vinum gave his vintage 1998 Les Garrigues a score of 13/20.
Production company.
Lambert is also sole owner of Lamb Bear Productions, the name of the company is a play on his name ""pronounced Lamb-bear"".
