Ralph Victor Folarin (born Olubowale Victor Akintimehin in September 21, 1984), better known by his stage name Wale ( ), is a American locally-known rapper from Washington, D.C. Wale was born to Nigerian parents. He rose to prominence in 2006, when his song "Dig Dug (Shake It)" became popular in his hometown. Wale became locally recognized and continued recording music for the regional audience. Producer Mark Ronson discovered Wale in 2006 and signed him to Allido Records in 2007. While signed to that label, Wale released several mixtapes and appeared in national media including MTV and various urban magazines.
In 2008, Wale signed to Interscope Records for $1.3 million, and his debut album "Attention Deficit" was released in 2009 with the singles "Chillin", "Pretty Girls", and "World Tour". The album, although under-shipped, received positive reviews from critics. In early 2011 Wale signed on with Rick Ross' Maybach Music Group, where members of the label released a compilation album, "Self Made Vol. 1" on May 23, 2011. His second studio album, "Ambition" was released November 1, 2011, with mixed reviews.
Biography.
1984-2006: Early life and career beginnings.
Wale, a Nigerian American, was born Olubowale Victor Akintimehin in Gaithersburg, Maryland on September 21, 1984. His parents are of the Yoruba ethnic group of southwestern Nigeria and came to the United States from Austria in 1979. Wale's family first lived in Northwest Washington DC before moving to Montgomery County when Wale was 10. He graduated from Quince Orchard High School in Gaithersburg, Maryland in 2001 and later moved to Largo, Maryland. Wale attended Robert Morris University and Virginia State University on football scholarships, then transferred to Bowie State University but dropped out due to academic reasons. Wale's love of the game of football and the Washington Redskins has led to a longstanding rumor that Wale had a tattoo of tight end Chris Cooley.
Wale's first recording was called "Rhyme of the Century". It was his first song to ever be played on local radio. He was featured in the "Unsigned Hype" column of "The Source" magazine in 2006. He was signed to a local label called Studio 43 in 2006. "Dig Dug (Shake It)" became popular in Washington, D. C, Maryland and Virginia and was a tribute to Ronald "Dig Dug" Dixon, percussion player for the go-go band Northeast Groovers. The song became the most requested song by a local artist in D. C. radio history and Wale was the first local artist to get any BDS spins since DJ Kool in the early 1990s. The song was included in Wale's first mixtape, "Paint a Picture".
In July 2006, Wale found representation in Daniel Weisman, a former club DJ and promoter who had no previous experience in management. Weisman had been tipped off about the rapper by a friend in Washington, D. C and connected with him through Myspace. In September 2006, after dropping another go-go influenced single, "Breakdown", sampled from Huck-a-Bucks "Sexy Girl" and getting a mention in "The Washington Post", Wale released his first non-go-go original single, "Uptown Roamers. " On September 14, 2006, "Uptown Roamers" debuted on XM Radio Channel 66 and was played twice in one day. Both "Breakdown" and "Uptown Roamers" were on Wale's second mixtape, "Hate Is the New Love". Wale's song "Breakdown, " was featured on the video game Madden NFL 2009.
Wale won the award for "D. C. Metro Breakthrough Artist of the Year" at WKYS's Go-Go Awards in November 2006. On December 15, "The Fader" magazine associate editor Nick "Catchdubs" Barat visited Wale for an interview and photo shoot which appeared in the March 2007 issue of "The Fader". Manager Weisman told HitQuarters that the Fader feature, given the magazine's music/culture/fashion orientation, laid an important foundation for Wale to position himself as a "cool, smart, up-and-coming hip-hop artist who might actually be Drake".
2007–2009: National attention and major label signing.
In January 2007, Wale released a new single to radio called "Good Girls" produced by Gerard Thomas and Demario Bridges for TeamMusicGroup. Wale later appeared on Mark Ronson's remix of Lily Allen's "Smile" and was a headliner on Ronson's UK tour that year promoting Ronson's second album "Version". In June 2007, Wale signed to a production deal with Ronson's Allido Records.
In May 2010, Wale abruptly canceled a scheduled performance at DC Black Pride, an annual black gay pride event. In an email to the event's organizer, Wale's manager claimed he was unaware it was a gay event when he agreed to perform. However, on May 28, 2010, it was announced he would perform alongside the headliner for free.
Wale released his third mixtape, "100 Miles & Running", on July 11, 2007 as a free download on his Myspace page. This mixtape includes features from Mark Ronson, Daniel Merriweather, Amy Winehouse, and Lily Allen. It was released on the same day as his performance at the Highline Ballroom, in Manhattan. The Highline show was to promote the US release of Mark Ronson's album and included performances by Mark Ronson, Wale, Saigon, and Daniel Merriweather. Jay-Z, Beyoncé, Kanye West, Maroon 5, Clive Davis, Eve and Danny Masterson were all in attendance. There, Wale was interviewed by MTV News correspondent J. D. Tuminski for his first national TV feature on August 16, 2007. With Ronson, Wale performed "W. A. L. E. D. A. N. C. E. ", a remix of Justice's "D.A.N.C.E." from Wale's "100 Miles" mixtape, at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards in Las Vegas, Nevada. "The Washington Post" profiled Wale on the front page of the Sunday Style section in the October 21, 2007 edition. Wale was featured on the cover of the 150th issue of "URB" along with French electro group Justice.
In March 2008, Wale signed a joint venture deal with Mark Ronson's Allido Records and Interscope, joining Rhymefest and Daniel Merriweather as Allido artists. Epic Records, Atlantic Records, and Def Jam all competed to sign Wale. On May 30, Wale released his fourth mixtape"The Mixtape About Nothing", heavily produced by Best Kept Secret. Wale said that the television show "Seinfeld" inspired "The Mixtape About Nothing": "the TV show's 'honest dialogue' mirrors his lyrical style, which frequently references pop culture and politics while avoiding gangster-rap bluster".
After signing with Interscope, Wale began recording tracks for his major label debut: in a 2008 interview with "Express", a newspaper published by the Washington Post Company, Wale announced that he was recording a song with Chrisette Michele called "Shades", which discusses inter-black racism. Wale also appeared on Interscope label mate DJ Greg Street's single "Dope Boys" which samples Hip Hop classic T.R.O.Y. alongside Lupe Fiasco and Kardinal Offishall. Rapper Young Chris of rap duo Young Gunz also began plans for a collaboration mixtape with Wale.
On June 19, 2009, Wale released his fifth mixtape, "Back to the Feature", on which eleven of the tracks were produced by 9th Wonder, with contributions also coming from Mark Ronson and others. The album's title, a play off the name of the movie "Back to the Future", referred to the fact that a lengthy list of rappers joined Wale on the songs, including K'naan, Tamere Guess, Talib Kweli, Joell Ortiz, Beanie Sigel, Curren$y, J. Cole and Bun B. The mixtape received positive reviews from "Vibe" magazine and website Pitchfork Media, but Colin McGowan of "Cokemachineglow" commented that it represented neither "a step forward or back the artist so much as shouting-in-place. "
Wale did a guest performance on "Change", a song by the Australian singer/songwriter Daniel Merriweather. It was written by Merriweather and Andrew Wyatt and produced by Jayceon Dolinh and Mark Ronson. It was released on January 30, 2009, in the United States and Canada, and February 2, 2009, in the UK (where the song peaked at no.8). The song is included on Merriweather's album "Love & War".
On September 13, Wale, alongside the DC-based musicians of UCB (Uncalled 4 Band)- The Board Administration artists, served as the official house band for the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards.
2009–10: "Attention Deficit".
On November 10, 2009 Wale's debut album, "Attention Deficit", had primarily positive reception. It debuted at the number 21 spot on the "Billboard" 200 and sold 28,000 copies in its first week. Interscope claimed that the LP was undershipped and that was the reason for the low sales numbers. Daniel Weisman, Wale's manager, claimed that Interscope didn't ship enough copies of the album. The first single off "Attention Deficit" was "Chillin", featuring Lady Gaga, followed by "Pretty Girls" featuring Gucci Mane and Weensey and "World Tour" featuring Jazmine Sullivan. Other guest artists on the album included Pharrell; Bun B; Chrisette Michele; K'Naan; Marsha Ambrosius; J. Cole; and Melanie Fiona.
In March 2010, Rapper Wale announced he and K'Naan would kick off a short co-headlining tour across the east coast of the US, beginning at the end of March in New York City. According to Wale, he is in the studio with Gucci Mane, Waka Flocka Flame, Roscoe Dash, Sean Garrett, and Drumma Boy.
On August 3, 2010, Wale released his sixth mixtape, "More About Nothing" hosted by DJ Omega a follow-up to his critically acclaimed "The Mixtape About Nothing" under The Board Administration – an independent label co founded with Marketing Executive Le'Greg O. Harrison. "More About Nothing" took the internet by storm resulting in 100,000 plus downloads in 90 minutes. "More About Nothing" creatively integrates sitcom material with rhyme and wordplay to present Wale's frustrations on his plight to reach mainstream acceptance and success. Features include Wiz Khalifa, Waka Flocka, Daniel Merriweather, UCB, Board Administration Artists' Tiara Thomas, Black Cobain, Fat Trel, and NBA Player and DC Native Kevin Durant.
In the last half of 2010, inspired by Kanye West's G.O.O.D. Fridays project, Wale re-released a track from one of his previous mixtapes for free-download on his own website every Thursday, calling this enterprise ""Throwback Thursday"". Guests on those tracks included Bun B, Pusha T, John Mayer, Lil Wayne and K'Naan.
2011: "Ambition".
On February 5, 2011, during Super Bowl XLV festivities he announced his signing to artist Rick Ross' Maybach Music Group. He states that he will still continue to be able to put out the music that he believes in, with the support of Rick Ross. Since 2009, Wale has been signed to Jay-Z’s Roc Nation for management along with other artists such as J. Cole, Mark Ronson, Melanie Fiona and Rihanna.
May 6, 2011, Wale shared plans with MTV Networks regarding the potential release of two albums in 2011. Later the same month, he confirmed pre-production efforts for "Ambition", his second album, slated for a fall 2011 release under Maybach and Warner Music Groups. Production for "Ambition" took place at ZAC Recording in Atlanta, Georgia with The Board Administration Producer Tone P. Anticipation for "Ambition" was incited through the release and heavy viral promotion of mixtape, "The Eleven One Eleven Theory" done under Wale's label, The Board Administration. "The Eleven One Eleven Theory" debuted August 17, 2011 on "Life and Times" in honor of Wale's Twitter milestone of reaching one million followers and was purposefully made with the intent to build widespread anticipation for the November 1, 2011 scheduled release date of "Ambition". This marketing strategy was the of The Board Administration CEO Le'Greg O. Harrison and was executed through savvy social media integration, resulting in the first shut down of renowned file sharing site Hulkshare in the first 4 seconds of posting the link. Wale is the first mainstream artist to officially crash Hulkshare.
On September 7, 2011 Wale announced plans for a 32-city domestic tour titled The "Ambition" Tour, which initiated October 2, 2011 in Minneapolis Minnesota and has dates through December 2011.
The Board Administration Artist Black Cobain is the official opening act for each date and is followed by a rotation of various artists in select markets which include: Rick Ross, Meek Mill, Pusha T, J. Cole, Big Sean, Miguel, and more. The tour was booked by NUE Agency.
On September 28, 2011, Wale revealed that "Ambition" was complete and released the single "Lotus Flower Bomb", featuring Miguel on Twitter. On September 29, 2011, Funk Master Flex debuted Wale's song "Tats on my Arms", featuring Rick Ross. The next day, Wale released the album cover for "Ambition". On October 14, 2011, Wale released the single "Focused", featuring Kid Cudi. The official "Ambition" track listing includes 15 songs.
The Board Administration launched a robust social media campaign integrating never-seen-before social media strategy and savvy to virally promote "Ambition". The promotional campaign included a five-part "making of" documentary, a Twitter campaign centered on a hashtag blitz–aptly named #Ambition, daily new music and video releases from Wale, and promotional materials for purchase through Warner Music Group and Maybach Music Group such as "Ambition" wristbands and graphic tees. These efforts were also supported by televised "making of" episodes through networks such as MTV that hosted "Sucker Free Road to Release".
The never-seen-before element of Wale’s "Ambition" promo blitz included a partnership formed between the current most popular file sharing site Hulkshare and The Board Administration. Greater than 3 million people frequent Hulkshare daily, and through this collaboration could view banner ads on practically every Hulkshare download page flanked with Wale’s profile and a clock counting down the days, hours, minutes, and seconds until the album released.
On October 27, 2011 Wale unveiled an "Ambition" snippet sampler on YouTube for people to preview the album. Later the same day, a private "Ambition" media listening event, held at the Gansevoort Hotel of Chelsea New York, was attended by music executives, bloggers, various artists, and hip hop heads.
On November 2, 2011, Myspace and Hot 97 presented a complimentary Wale and friends midnight "Ambition" release show at The Highline Ballroom in New York City. The event was hosted by Miss Info and featured special guest DJ Funk Master Flex.
The album debuted number two on the "Billboard" 200, selling 162,600 copies in its first week. The album initially received mixed reviews, including a negative one in Wale's local "Washington City Paper". However, the album currently holds a 69/100 score on Metacritic, signifying "generally favorable reviews. " 
2012-present: "The Album About Nothing".
On November 25, 2011, shortly after the release of "Ambition", Wale announced on Twitter that he has already begun working on his third album. In an interview with UpVenue in January 2012, Wale confirmed the third album and the focus will be about his growth as a person. He was featured on Maybach Music Group's second studio album Self Made II. Wale released the mixtape "Folarin" on December 24, 2012 which is hosted by DJ Clark Kent. He released a trailer for "Folarin" on December 6, 2012. He has also started working on his third studio album which is to be released in 2013. The mixtape features guest spots Rick Ross, 2 Chainz, Scarface, Nipsey Hussle, French Montana and Trinidad James among others. Production comes from Hit-Boy, Jake One, Cardo, Diplo, Beat Billionaire and Rico Love among others.
Wale announced he was collaborating with Jerry Seinfield on his third studio album to be titled "The Album About Nothing". He later said he was also collaborating with producer No I.D. on the album. He also said he would release a collaboration mixtape with Meek Mill during 2013.
In December 2012, Wale had announced his fourth studio album would be a Go-go locally-produced album: "I wanna do the album for me. This is the second time I’m announcing it, but I’m doing a Go-Go album after my third rap album. And when I say Go-Go I don’t mean like cheesy Go-Go. It’s gonna be sequenced. It’s gonna be me probably rapping only 40-percent on the album, but getting the sound out."
Musical style.
In an interview with "Flavorwire", Wale said that he incorporates elements of go-go in his music. Cyril Cordor of allmusic described go-go as "a more raw, percussion-driven offshoot of disco" that originated in the Washington, D. C. area. Wale's early singles that were played primarily in his local metropolitan area heavily sampled 1990s go-go records. Reviewing "Attention Deficit", David Jeffries of allmusic remarked that Wale had a "post-Kanye, post-Lil Wayne, alternative-meets-hardcore style" and commented that Wale's single "Chillin'", which featured Lady Gaga, "crafts an instant floor-filler out of a sample from the '70s hit 'Na Na Hey Hey Kiss Him Goodbye'".
