"I Knew You Were Trouble" (stylized as "I Knew You Were Trouble.") is a song by American singer-songwriter Taylor Swift from her fourth studio album, "Red" (2012). It was released on October 9, 2012, in the United States by Big Machine Records and Republic Records as the third promotional single from the album. Later, "I Knew You Were Trouble" was released as the third single from "Red" on November 27, 2012, in the United States. It was released as the second single from the album in the United Kingdom on December 10, 2012. The song was co-written by Swift, Max Martin and Shellback and produced by Martin and Shellback.
"I Knew You Were Trouble" received generally positive reviews from music critics, who commended its mainstream appeal yet noted Swift's experimentation with dubstep as relatively limited. Due to strong digital sales, the song debuted at number three on the "Billboard" Hot 100, selling more than 416,000 copies within its first week, making it Swift's 14th entry in the top ten. It also charted in Australia, Canada, Ireland, Japan, New Zealand and the United Kingdom.The single has been certified Triple platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA).
Background and release.
During her performance at the 2012 iHeart Radio Music Festival in Las Vegas, Taylor Swift told "Rolling Stone" magazine that she would start unveiling the songs from her fourth studio album, "Red", one-by-one. "Starting this week I’m gonna start unveiling new music... I really want there to be so many surprises left on the record for when it comes out eventually, some collaborations that haven’t been talked about and some songs that are definitely what make the album so unique," she added. Talking about the accompanying tour for the album, the singer explained that she always thinks about the visuals associated with a song—"Ooh, how are we gonna play this in concert? What’s the lighting gonna be like? What costumes are we gonna have?"—and one of the songs that stood out to her for its visual aspect was called "I Knew You Were Trouble". 
"I had just gone through an experience that made me write this song about like knowing the second you see someone like, 'Oh, this is going to be interesting. It's going to be dangerous, but look at me going in there anyway... I think that for me, it was the first time I ever kind of noticed that in myself, like when you are curious about something you know might be bad for you, but you know that you are going to go for it anyway because if you don't, you'll have greater regrets about not seeing where that would go, but I think that for me it all went along with this record that was pushing boundaries, like the sound of this record pushes boundaries, it was writing about something I hadn't written before.
"I Knew You Were Trouble" was released as the third promotional single from "Red" on October 9, 2012, to iTunes Store for digital download, following "Begin Again" and the "title track". The song was later sent for radio adds in the United States on November 27, 2012, to Contemporary hit radio stations, thus becoming the third single from "Red", and the second pop single after "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together". A CD single was released through Swift's official website on December 13, 2012; the same day also saw the release of an "I Knew You Were Trouble" single package collection, consisting of a black t-shirt, a red drawstring bag, a spiral notebook, and the CD single, which was individually numbered. In the United Kingdom, "I Knew You Were Trouble" was the second single from the album and was released on December 10, 2012.
Music and lyrics.
The melody of the song was developed by Swift on a piano and she asked Martin and Shellback to make the final sound "as chaotic as that emotion felt". She also wanted to sing the bassline of the song in a particular way and sound, to which Martin and Shellback suggested to infuse little bit of dubstep. Unaware of the fact that the sound she had asked for in "I Knew You Were Trouble" was actually dubstep, Swift recalled having listened to dubstep music from British musician Ed Sheeran, who played her the songs popular in the UK clubs. However, she confessed that she had not studied that particular genre of sound further. 
According to Sarah Maloy from "Billboard", "I Knew You Were Trouble" is a departure from Swift's characteristic country songs, and blends pop and dubstep in its composition. The song begins as a typical country pop, sock hop music with jaunty guitar sounds and Swift singing the lyrics which describes the early stages of a romantic affair; the tune soon changes its composition. Featuring instrumentation from bass guitar, electric guitar and keyboards, "I Knew You Were Trouble"'s chorus is built around "whirring" sub-bass according to Mark Hogan from "Spin" maazine, with digitally tweaked vocal hooks and dubstep. During the middle eight of the song, all the background music stops and Swift sings in a shrill voice the lines "you never loved me, or her, or anyone, or anything". As per the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com the song is set in common time, with moderately fast tempo of 154 beats per minute. It is set in the key of E minor with Swift's vocal ranging from B3 to E5. The song follows D–G–A–D–Bm–Em–G–C as its chord progression.
The lyrics talk about a relationship which has ended and the protagonist was always aware of the fate, so the heartache is less evident. Maloy felt that the lyrics consisted of more universal sentiments with the line "I knew you were trouble when you walked in, It's a shame on me now, Flew me to places I'd never been, Now I'm lying on the cold hard ground." According to Stephanie Marcus of "The Huffington Post", the chorus and its lyrics echo Swift's sentiments in "Dear John" with the similar themed lyrics like "And I'll look back and regret how I ignored when they said run as fast as you can". There is also indication of romantic rivalry resulting in the end of the relationship with the lines "The saddest fear comes creeping in that you never loved me, or her, or anyone..." Sam Lansky from Idolator observed that the lyrics touched on the romantic story from a broader perspective, unlike Swift's previous songs she had written, giving less details about the whole ordeal.
Critical reception.
It's unfair to criticize a 22-year-old for adapting with the times, though, especially considering the sound in question is merely one part of a precision-built machine that is 'I Knew You Were Trouble'. After all, Swift is the pop moment, and the ways in which she and her peers adapt new sounds and vibes into their work is the lifeblood of pop innovation. Even if the bass drop in question is a conceit – it's not like the song is going to be a hit among dudes rocking to Rusko – the Max Martin/Shellback collaboration is made better by the bass (as is usually the case).
It's for that reason that Swift’s use of it has prompted so much discussion. Pop has been sonically conservative for the past half-decade (at least). Any hint at evolution or surprise from the upper echelons of the charts is a welcome development. And even if said surprise is little and relatively inconsequential, it serves as a reminder of pop's fluidity.
MTV News' Jocelyn Vena described the track as "chaotic", commenting on how "the song touches on all genres of music, with moments of straight-up Top 40 pop, country and even dance, with its grinding effects, especially on the bumping chorus." Sam Lansky from Idolator was conflicted but hopeful about the departure from Swift's typical sound, remarking that "the hook isn’t quite as immediate as 'We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together', but Martin's stamp is still all over 'Trouble', from the bright, sparkly instrumentation to the keen, radio-friendly melody. There might be a little part of us that misses Swift's very personal and idiosyncratic songcraft, but it's already clear that it's elsewhere on the album — and the introduction of these all-star producers into the mix is giving Swift a chance to show that she’s way more versatile than just a girl with a guitar." Chris Wilman from "The Hollywood Reporter" dubbed the song as a "great rock & roll song — and an emotional one, though the ear candy elements disguise that at first." Allison Stewart from "The Washington Post" gave a negative review of the song and its production, saying that "Martin and partner Shellback infect 'I Knew You Were Trouble' with a wobble right out of Hot Topic's dubstep department. It's gratuitous and weird, done for the sake of saying you did it, and so tentative they might not have bothered." Amanda Dobbins from "New York" felt that the dubstep inclusion in the song was minimal and described the song as "yet another plucky, vowel-laden Taylor Swift breakup jam!" James Reed from "The Boston Globe" compared the song and another track from "Red" called "22", saying that they "vaguely make Swift sound like she's Katy Perry approximating Joan Jett".
Commercial performance.
Prior to its release as a promotional single on October 9, 2012, the song debuted at number three on "Billboard" Hot 100 and number one on Hot Digital Songs with 416,000 copies sold in its first week, Swift's second largest first week singles sales. It became Swift's 14th top ten hit and her 11th song to debut inside the top ten. With sales of 416,000 from "I Knew You Were Trouble", Swift became the first artist in digital history to have two songs that debuted with sales of 400,000 or more copies. On November 27, 2012, the song is released as the second pop single from "Red". It is Swift's second single not to be released on country, following "The Story of Us". The song bounced back at the top ten and during the chart week of December 30, 2012 and three weeks later, after the song sold 582,000 copies, it reached its new peak at number two. This became the fourth best single-week digital sales of all time and second best for a track not on its debut frame. The song went to number one on the Pop Songs chart for five weeks, becoming her first number one there since her 2009 hit "Love Story" and her longest running number one on that chart. The song has sold more than 3 million copies in the US as of February 2013. 
The song also attained commercial success worldwide, reaching the top ten in ten countries. "I Knew You Were Trouble" became Swift's seventh top-five hit on Canada, reaching number two for two non-consecutive weeks, during its debut week and on January 12, 2013, when it was blocked from the top spot by "Scream & Shout" by Will.i.am featuring Britney Spears. The song is tied with "Love Story" as her highest peaking song in United Kingdom after it reached number two on January 19, 2013. "I Knew You Were Trouble" became Swift's seventh top ten hit and second top five hit from "Red" in Australia after it reached number three. It became her best-charting single in Denmark, reaching number three, surpassing her previous best peak of number sixteen with "Love Story".
Music video.
The music video began filming on November 18, 2012, in Los Angeles, California. Two days later, pictures from the set surfaced online showing Swift with a more "rocker" look and pink-tipped hair.
The video was directed by Anthony Mandler, photographed by David Devlin, and premiered on December 13, 2012 on MTV as part of the channel's week long celebration for the singer's birthday. Swift's love interest in the video is played by Reeve Carney who starred in as Peter Parker/Spider-Man. A 25-second preview was released prior to the video's released on the same day to MTV.com. The video was compared to "Ride" by Lana Del Rey, which also was directed by Mandler and had a "confessional voice over". "Rolling Stone" magazine highlighted the similarities between Swift's music video and the music video for the Rihanna single "We Found Love". Lauren Machernis was Taylor's body double for this video.
Synopsis.
The video starts with Swift speaking in a confessional voice-over. Swift wakes up on an abandoned desert, surrounded by trash and debris, and wearing dark makeup. Flashbacks show Swift and her boyfriend engaging in various stunts, along with a few tender moments, such as when Swift's boyfriend gives her a necklace as a gift. After a while of what seems to be a good relationship, she begins to realize something is wrong. While in his parked car, he leans over to kiss her when some police pull up for him. He starts a fight in a club, which results in the both of them being injured. There are also scenes of her in a grimy small bathroom, looking at herself in the mirror. While at an outdoor concert, she sees him kissing a large number of different girls. He then looks at her in a nonchalant fashion. She falls asleep in the desert where the party is being held, and wakes up alone the next morning. The video ends with her letting go of the necklace he gave her.
Live performances and covers.
Swift premiered the song at the "40th American Music Awards". Swift traveled to Australia on a promotional tour, which featured performances on "Today", followed by a performance at the ARIA Music Awards 2012. She also performed at Times Square on New Year's Eve on Rockin Eve. Swift performed the song live at the 2013 BRIT Awards on 20 February 2013. Biley Niles of "Hollywood Life" gave the performance a positive review, saying ""It was her performance of “I Knew You Were Trouble” during the ceremony that’s sure to be talked about for days to come!""<ref>
