Southland (stylized as SouthLAnd) is an American drama series created by writer Ann Biderman and produced by Warner Bros. Television. It premiered on NBC on April 9, 2009. On May 1, 2009, NBC announced that "Southland" had been renewed for a second season with an initial 13-episode order to begin airing on Friday, September 25, 2009 at 9:00 pm, one hour earlier than its original time slot. On August 27, 2009, shortly before its scheduled premiere, NBC moved the opening of its second season to October 23, 2009, citing the need to promote the show more fully. On October 8, 2009, NBC announced that the series had been canceled. 
On November 2, 2009, TNT announced it had purchased the rights to "Southland"s original seven episodes, as well as six completed episodes from its second season. "Southland" began airing on TNT on January 12, 2010. On April 26, 2010, TNT announced it had picked up "Southland" for a ten-episode third season to begin airing on January 4, 2011. TNT's renewal of the show included a substantial budget cut and corresponding cast reduction. "Southland" was renewed for a ten-episode fourth season on March 22, 2011, which premiered on January 17, 2012.
The series was renewed for a ten-episode fifth season which began airing February 13, 2013.
Plot.
According to NBC, "Southland" takes a "raw and authentic look" at Los Angeles and the lives of the LAPD officers who police it. The show's first season centers on the experiences and interactions of LAPD patrol officers and detectives, and is more a character-driven drama than a police procedural.
Among the characters are rookie Officer Ben Sherman and his training officer, John Cooper; Detective Lydia Adams, who must balance work with responsibility as a mother; Officer Chickie Brown, who aspires to be the first woman on the LAPD's elite SWAT team; and Detective Sammy Bryant, whose home life interferes with his working life. Ultimately, it was the dark tone of the series, deemed inappropriate for 9:00 pm, that led NBC to shut down production and cancel the show after previewing the first six episodes of the second season. TNT began negotiating a move from NBC shortly after the show's cancellation, a process that took nearly a month. TNT's rebroadcast of the first season was less heavily censored, with only the more extreme profanity bleeped out.
Cast.
After its first season on NBC following the change of network to TNT, the second season, which premiered on TNT following the rebroadcast of the first season, de-emphasizes the ensemble cast and focuses more on the Adams and Sherman characters and their partners. Stories now center more on how crimes come together, with less-serialized storylines.
Crew.
The series was created by Emmy Award-winning writer Ann Biderman, who began her television writing career on the first season of police drama "NYPD Blue". The series' executive producers are Biderman, Christopher Chulack, and John Wells. Wells and Chulack, both also Emmy Award winners, had previously worked together on critically acclaimed medical drama "ER" and emergency services drama "Third Watch". Many other crew members had previously worked with Wells and Chulack on these series. Wells and Biderman also write for the series and Chulack is a regular director. Biderman left her executive producer position after the second season but continued to write for the series' third season.
Ex-police officer Angela Amato Velez served as a consulting producer and writer for the first season; she had previously worked for the executive producers on "Third Watch". Dee Johnson also served as a consulting producer and writer for the first season; she had previously worked with Wells and Chulack on "ER". Emmy Award-winning writing team Mitchell Burgess & Robin Green were hired as executive consultants and writers for the second and third seasons; they had previously worked together as executive producers on "The Sopranos". Diana Son served as a consulting producer and writer for the second season; she had previously worked on the crime drama "".
David Graziano became a co-executive producer for the second season. Andrew Stearn was a producer for the first two seasons and was promoted to co-executive producer for the third season; he had previously worked on "Third Watch". Jonathan Lisco was hired as a co-executive producer for the third season; he is a former lawyer and created the New Orleans police drama "K-Ville". Jason Horwitch, creator of AMC's "Rubicon", joined the show as consulting producer for the fourth season. 
"ER" and "Third Watch" veteran Nelson McCormick is also a regular director for "Southland". Steadicam expert J. Michael Muro serves as a regular cinematographer and occasional director for the series. Dana Gonzales is the other regular director of photography.
Critical reception.
"Southland" has received positive reviews from critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the first season received an average score of 69, based on 22 reviews and the second season received an average score of 77, based on 12 reviews both indicating "Generally favorable reviews". Upon returning for its third and fourth season the series received wide critical acclaim, receiving an average score of 81, based on 9 reviews for the third season and an average score of 87, based on 7 reviews for the fourth season both indicating "Universal acclaim". Season 5 has a rating of 85/100 based on 7 reviews.
Alessandra Stanley for "The New York Times" compared "Southland" favorably to series like "The Shield", "Rescue Me" and "The Wire" in citing the series debut as "one of the most gripping opening episodes of any network crime series". Noting the show's "bold, contemporary tone", Stanley concluded that ""Southland" is commendably stinting and cold, a series that doesn’t aim to please, and is all the more pleasurable for it." In a second review a year later, Mike Hale was less effusive in his praise. While commending the series for fine performances from its cast—in particular Cudlitz, McKenzie and Hatosy—and its combination of straightforward immediate plots and long-range storytelling, Hale criticized the "heavyhandedness" he saw in some of the writing, noting especially the "sententious lectures about the nature of police work" delivered to Sherman by Cooper in the pilot episode. He finds the show "worthy" but in need of work to qualify as a classic.
Dorothy Rabinowitz of "The Wall Street Journal" says "Prattle is, in any case, a minor note compared with the crackling pace of the first script, its evocative mood of menace at every turn, each police car racing to destinations that will reveal who knows what tragedy or unspeakable sight." The "Kansas City Star" stated the show in even a more positive light saying ""Southland" is built to be bigger, and in that sense it succeeds immediately, thanks to excellent casting (especially Michael Cudlitz and Regina King as a cop and a detective), gritty location shooting around L.A. and storytelling that doesn’t hold the viewer’s hand."
DVD release.
Shortly before its TNT premiere, Warner Home Video released the first season on DVD in an uncensored version, with the profanities intact.
In May 2011, they also released the second season in a similarly uncensored version. This title is currently only available through the studio's manufacture-on-demand (MOD) program. 
On February 5, 2013, a box set titled "Southland: The Complete Second, Third, and Fourth Seasons" was released on DVD; it includes over an hour of bonus features.
The studio is not currently considering Blu-ray releases for any of the show's three seasons.
