Michael Gregory "Mike" Mizanin (born October 8, 1980), better known by his ring name The Miz, is an American professional wrestler, reality television star, media personality, announcer, and actor signed to WWE. Mizanin first gained fame as a cast member on MTV's ', which first aired in 2001, and its spinoff series, "Real World/Road Rules Challenge". He later entered the fourth season of "Tough Enough", a televised competition that would award the winner a WWE contract, and became the first runner-up. Mizanin has also made appearances on television shows including "Battle of the Network Reality Stars", "Fear Factor", "Identity", "Ghost Hunters", ', "Psych" and "Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?". Mizanin trained and wrestled with Ultimate Pro Wrestling and Deep South Wrestling, where he became the first Deep South Heavyweight Champion. Mizanin was sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), working in tag team matches and winning the tag team title, the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship, on one occasion.
After signing with WWE, Mizanin became host of the annual WWE Diva Search competition in 2006. Following his hosting duties, Mizanin made his wrestling debut in September 2006, as a villain who went undefeated. In 2007, was drafted from SmackDown to the ECW brand, where he formed a partnership with John Morrison, in which the two held both the WWE Tag Team Championship and the World Tag Team Championship. He was drafted to the Raw brand as part of the 2009 WWE Draft, and won the WWE United States Championship on two occasions. He also won WWE Unified Tag Team Championship with The Big Show and the WWE Tag Team Championship with John Cena. In July 2010, he won a Money in the Bank ladder match at the first WWE Money in the Bank pay-per-view, earning a contract for a WWE Championship match, which he used in November to win the WWE Championship, which he held for six months. In 2011, The Miz was ranked number one on "Pro Wrestling Illustrated"'s annual PWI 500 list. In 2012, The Miz captured WWE Intercontinental Championship, which made him the 25th Triple Crown Champion of the company. On October 3, 2012, The Miz was named as an announcer for "Main Event".
Early life.
The Miz, a native of Cleveland, Ohio, attended Normandy High School, where he was the captain of the basketball and cross country teams. He also participated in swimming, the student government and was the editor of his high school yearbook. He then attended Miami University, where he was a member of the Theta Chi Fraternity, and studied business at the Richard T. Farmer School of Business.
Television career.
Mizanin dropped out of college, where he was pursuing a degree in business in order to appear on the of MTV's reality television program "The Real World" in 2001. He went on to appear in multiple seasons of its spin-off series, "Real World/Road Rules Challenge", along with contestants from both "Road Rules" and "The Real World", including ', ', ', ', and "". Except for "Battle of the Sexes 2", Mizanin made it to the end of all the "Challenges" on which he competed and won both "Battle of the Seasons" and "The Inferno 2".
After a seven year long absence from "The Real World/Road Rules Challenge", Mizanin returned to the reality show on April 4, 2012 as the host of "" season finale Reunion special. It marked the first time The Miz appeared on the series since becoming a main event "WWE" superstar.
It was during an episode of "The Real World" that Mizanin first displayed an alter ego known as "The Miz". In contrast to Mizanin's usually placid demeanor, The Miz was angry, combative, and headstrong. Mizanin later realized that "The Miz" would make an excellent professional wrestling gimmick.
In 2004, he appeared on the Bravo reality show "Battle of the Network Reality Stars", where his team finished second. Mizanin was also a contestant in the "Reality Stars" episode of "Fear Factor". His partner was his former girlfriend and cast mate, Trishelle Cannatella, and the two won the competition. In April 2007, he appeared on the game show "Identity", where he appeared as a stranger, and contestant John Kim correctly identified his identity as a professional wrestler by the odd way he added "Miz-" before most words. In 2008, Mizanin appeared on the Sci Fi reality series "Ghost Hunters Live" as a guest investigator. In 2009, Mizanin appeared on two episodes of "Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader?", which were both aired on September 29. He appeared on an episode of "Destroy Build Destroy" on March 3, 2010. On October 5, 2011, Miz starred in an episode of "H8R". He also appeared as a guest star in a March 2012 episode of "Psych". On March 31, Miz appeared in the first ever Slime Wrestling World Championship at the Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, losing to the Big Show which resulted in him being thrown into a tub of slime. In 2012 Miz appeared on Disney XD show Pair of Kings as a guest star.
Professional wrestling career.
Ultimate Pro Wrestling (2003).
Pursuing the goal of becoming a professional wrestler which he had harbored from an early age, Mizanin joined Ultimate Pro Wrestling (UPW), where he trained in the Ultimate University. He made his in-ring debut in 2003 as The Miz. During his time with UPW, The Miz competed in UPW's Mat War's tournament, making it to the finals before losing to Tony Stradlin.
World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE.
"Tough Enough" and training (2004–2006).
In October 2004, Mizanin entered the fourth season of "Tough Enough", a televised competition which would award the winner a World Wrestling Entertainment contract and US$1,000,000. Despite coming last in an arm wrestling tournament on November 25, 2004, Mizanin outlasted six other wrestlers, and made it to the final round. At the pay-per-view event, Armageddon, Mizanin faced the other remaining entrant, Daniel Puder, in a three round "Dixie Dogfight" (boxing match). Neither man achieved a knockout, and the contest was awarded to Puder on the basis of crowd reaction. On the December 16, 2004 episode of "SmackDown!", Puder was announced as the winner of "Tough Enough" by head trainer Al Snow.
Despite losing the "Tough Enough" contest, Mizanin had piqued the interest of WWE, and he was eventually offered a developmental contract. Mizanin was sent to Deep South Wrestling (DSW) to train under Bill DeMott, relocating to McDonough, Georgia in the process. In July 2005, he wrestled two dark matches for WWE, teaming with former "Tough Enough" champion Matt Cappotelli to face The Highlanders (Robbie and Rory McAllister). On December 1, 2005, Mizanin defeated Mike Knox in the finals of a tournament to determine the inaugural Deep South Heavyweight Champion. He continued his partnership with Matt Cappotelli throughout the second half of 2005 in WWE dark matches and house shows until Cappotelli, nominally of Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), was diagnosed with a brain tumor after an injury at a taping in December 2005.
On January 3, 2006, it was reported that Mizanin had been transferred to OVW. On the January 18, 2006, OVW TV show, Mizanin made his debut as "Miz", with a "Miz TV" segment, where he was shown talking backstage. On the January 28, 2006 episode of the OVW television show, The Miz wrestled his first singles match against Rene Dupree, but lost by countout.
At the February 8, 2006 TV taping, Miz and Chris Cage captured the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship, defeating Chet the Jett and Seth Skyfire. In what was deemed a "disciplinary move", WWE released Cage over the weekend of March 18, 2006, making it necessary for Miz and Cage to drop the titles. On March 19, 2006, Deuce Shade defeated Miz in a singles contest to win the championship for his team The Untouchables (Deuce Shade and Domino).
Debut (2006–2007).
On March 7, 2006, WWE's official website featured a video of "The Miz" stating that he was headed to SmackDown! and throughout April, "SmackDown!" aired vignettes hyping his debut. When Mizanin actually attempted to make his debut on the April 21, 2006 episode of "SmackDown!", however, he was, in storyline banned from entering the arena by "network executive" Palmer Cannon who told him that he had been "canceled" before having security escort him from the premises.
On May 31, 2006, WWE's official website announced that he would serve as "SmackDown!"'s "host". The Miz debuted as the "host" on June 2, 2006, announcing the planned card at the top of the show and attempting to hype up the crowd. Other "host" duties included backstage interviews and hosting a bikini contest. The hosting duties seemed sporadic at best, with some weeks having little to no involvement of Miz at all. Starting in July, Miz, along with Ashley Massaro, became host of the annual Diva Search competition appearing on both "Raw" and "SmackDown!".
After the end of the Diva Search competition, The Miz returned exclusively to "SmackDown!" and as a villainous persona, starting his in ring competition with win over Tatanka in September 2006 episode of "SmackDown!". After this win he, along with commentator Michael Cole, began to note whenever possible that he was "undefeated", though he only wrestled five matches over the next two months, defeating such superstars as Matt Hardy, Funaki, and Scotty 2 Hotty. At the same time he began a feud with Diva Search winner Layla El, who spurned his advances on more than one occasion, leading to Miz helping Kristal defeat her in various competitions. Soon, however, Miz and Kristal found themselves being stalked by The Boogeyman. This began a feud in which the Boogeyman ended The Miz's winning streak at December's Armageddon event.
Following a brief absence from television, The Miz returned to "SmackDown!" to host an interview segment called "Miz TV". After the unsuccessful segment, The Miz returned to in-ring competition with a more intense style and began to pick up wins once again. On the June 11, 2007 episode of "Raw", Mizanin faced off against Snitsky in a match to determine a draft pick for SmackDown!. Snitsky easily defeated The Miz to give ECW the draft pick, but after constantly assaulting The Miz after the match, the referee reversed the decision and awarded the match to Miz, thus allowing SmackDown! a draft pick. SmackDown!'s pick was then revealed to be Chris Masters.
Teaming with John Morrison (2007–2009).
Miz was drafted from SmackDown! to ECW on June 17, 2007 as part of the 2007 Supplemental Draft. He was absent from the first few weeks of "ECW", though he was the subject of backstage mentions between matches and had several short "Miz TV Crashes ECW" video segments. He made his debut on the July 10 episode of "ECW" in a match against Nunzio, which he won.
Following this match, Extreme Exposé began expressing admiration in him and gave him a lap-dance, starting a new gimmick for him of a self-proclaimed "chick magnet". Extreme Exposé then became managers for The Miz. He then began a feud with Balls Mahoney, after Kelly Kelly began to fall in love with Mahoney on screen. On the October 2 episode of "ECW", it was revealed that Miz owned the contracts of Kelly Kelly, Layla, and Brooke Adams, and used this excuse to stop Kelly from going out with Mahoney. He was voted at Cyber Sunday to face CM Punk, for the ECW Championship but lost the match.
On the November 16 episode of "SmackDown", he became one half of the WWE Tag Team Champions with John Morrison when they defeated Matt Hardy and Montel Vontavious Porter (MVP) in a title match, which gave The Miz his first title within the company.
In February 2008, Miz and Morrison were given a streaming segment on the WWE website named "The Dirt Sheet" in which they mocked other wrestlers and facets of pop culture, showing off their promo skills. Morrison and The Miz co-wrote each episode of "The Dirt Sheet" each week. As the duo continued to hold the titles, WWE downplayed the angle of Miz and Morrison disliking each other, and portrayed them as friends. The team had many successful title defenses over the next few months, before dropping the championship to Curt Hawkins and Zack Ryder at the Great American Bash in a Fatal Four-Way match which also featured Jesse and Festus and Finlay and Hornswoggle. Neither Miz nor Morrison were pinned, as Hawkins pinned Jesse to win the titles. Miz and Morrison soon followed a feud with Cryme Tyme (Shad Gaspard and JTG) as a battle of their webshows, "Word Up" and "The Dirt Sheet". The two would be victorious against Cryme Tyme in a match at Cyber Sunday where they were voted in. On December 13, 2008, Miz and Morrison defeated Kofi Kingston and CM Punk to win the World Tag Team Championship during a WWE house show in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. The team then engaged themselves in a feud with The Colóns (Carlito and Primo). In a dark match at WrestleMania XXV, they lost the World Tag Team Championship to The Colóns in a Lumberjack match to unify the World Tag Team and the WWE Tag Team titles.
On the April 13 episode of "Raw", The Miz lost a match to Kofi Kingston due to Morrison's inadvertent interference, which gave Raw a draft pick in the 2009 WWE Draft. The pick was then revealed to be The Miz, and he subsequently attacked Morrison, ending their partnership.
Championship reigns (2009–2011).
Miz challenged John Cena to a match on the April 27 episode of "Raw", but as Cena was out due to injury, Mike "Miz" claimed an unofficial win via forfeit and continued to do this over the following weeks, until Cena defeated him in a singles match at The Bash. On the August 3 episode of "Raw", The Miz lost a match to Cena, which meant that, in storyline, he was banned from the Staples Center, Raw and SummerSlam. The following week, on August 10, Miz competed under a mask as "The Calgary Kid", and won a Contract on Pole match against Eugene, earning a contract in storyline, and revealing himself by removing his mask afterwards. After removing the mask to reveal himself. he cut a promo and debut his catchphrase "Because I am The Miz and I'm Awesome."
On the August 17 edition of "Raw", The Miz announced his intention to challenge for the WWE United States Championship, and also debuted new ring attire and a new finishing move and defeated Evan Bourne. He challenged for the United States Championship at the Night of Champions, Breaking Point and Hell in a Cell pay-per-views, but was unsuccessful. On the October 5 episode of "Raw", the night after Hell in a Cell, The Miz received a rematch for the championship, and defeated Kofi Kingston to win the United States Championship and his first singles championship in WWE. The following pay-per-view event, Bragging Rights, was themed with interpromotional matches and now that The Miz was the second-tier champion on Raw he was booked against SmackDown's Intercontinental Champion, his erstwhile tag team partner John Morrison. In the build up to their first match since splitting, the two hosted a one-off edition of "The Dirt Sheet" on the October 16 episode of "SmackDown" where the two compared themselves to '80s tag team The Rockers, debating over which is more comparable to the successful Shawn Michaels and which was the less successful Marty Jannetty. At Bragging Rights, Miz pinned Morrison to become the only member of the Raw roster to win an interpromotional match. The following month at Survivor Series, Miz captained a team of five wrestlers against Team Morrison in a five-on-five Survivor Series elimination match and once again bested his former partner.
In 2010, The Miz began a rivalry with MVP that began with a critically well-received verbal exchange between the two. The two met in an unadvertised match for the United States Championship at the Royal Rumble event with Miz retaining his title, but in the Royal Rumble match itself MVP eliminated both himself and The Miz. During the rivalry with MVP, Miz began showing signs of an allegiance with The Big Show and on the February 8 episode of "Raw", the two defeated champions D-Generation X (Triple H and Shawn Michaels) and The Straight Edge Society (CM Punk and Luke Gallows) to become the Unified WWE Tag Team Champions, making Miz a triple champion (U.S., World Tag Team, and WWE Tag Team Champion).
On February 16, it was announced that he would be on the "WWE NXT" show as the storyline mentor of Daniel Bryan. At WrestleMania XXVI, Show and Miz defeated John Morrison and R-Truth to retain the title again. During the 2010 WWE Draft on the April 26 episode of "Raw", ShoMiz lost the Unified WWE Tag Team Championship to The Hart Dynasty when Tyson Kidd made The Miz submit to the Sharpshooter. After the match, The Big Show knocked out The Miz, and was later drafted to the SmackDown brand, leaving The Miz on Raw. On May 10, Kidd defeated The Miz in a match, which earned any member of The Hart Dynasty a match for the United States Championship, and The Miz, who was allowed to choose his opponent, elected to face Bret Hart. On the following episode of "Raw" on May 17, Hart defeated The Miz to win the United States Championship, despite Chris Jericho, William Regal, and Vladimir Kozlov attempting to interfere on The Miz's behalf. The Miz had a tumultuous relationship with Bryan, who was eliminated from "NXT" on May 11, although he returned the following week to attack The Miz.
On June 1, The Miz announced that he would be returning as a Pro for the second season of "NXT", to mentor Alex Riley, the only Pro to do so. On the June 14 episode of "Raw", The Miz defeated R-Truth, John Morrison, and Zack Ryder in a fatal four-way match to win the United States Championship for the second time, and successfully retained the championship against R-Truth at the Fatal 4-Way pay-per-view.
On July 18, at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view, The Miz won a Money in the Bank ladder match to win a contract for a WWE Championship match that he could utilize at any time over the next year and became the first superstar to win Money in the Bank while being a champion. Over the next few weeks, The Miz attempted to cash in his Money in the Bank contract on the WWE Champion Sheamus, but was continually interrupted by other wrestlers before the matches could occur, which meant that he retained the contract for future use. Daniel Bryan returned to WWE at SummerSlam, taking The Miz's place on Team WWE, causing The Miz to attack him. This began a rivalry between the two, with The Miz losing the United States Championship to Bryan at the Night of Champions event in September. The following month, Miz defeated John Cena to become the captain of Team Raw, but at the Bragging Rights pay-per-view Team Raw—The Miz (with Alex Riley), R-Truth, John Morrison, Santino Marella, Sheamus, CM Punk, and Ezekiel Jackson—were unsuccessful in defeating Team SmackDown.
On the November 22 episode of "Raw", following a successful WWE Championship defense by Randy Orton against Wade Barrett, he cashed in his Money in the Bank contract to become the new WWE Champion making him the first person from Tough Enough to win the WWE Championship. He successfully defended the championship against Jerry Lawler in a Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match on the following episode of "Raw", due to help from Michael Cole and Riley, and again at the pay-per-view in December by defeating Orton in a Tables match following interference from Alex Riley. The Miz defeated Morrison to retain the championship in a Falls Count Anywhere match on the first Raw of 2011. He defeated Orton again at the Royal Rumble, after interference from CM Punk, in January 2011 and Lawler the following month at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view to retain the championship.
The night after Elimination Chamber, The Miz and John Cena were paired together by the Raw General Manager to challenge The Corre (Justin Gabriel and Heath Slater) for the WWE Tag Team Championship. The Miz and Cena were successful in winning the titles, but lost them back to Corre immediately afterward in a rematch, after The Miz turned on Cena. This made their reign the shortest in the championship's history. The following week, The Miz lost Riley as his apprentice after Cena defeated Riley in a steel cage match with the stipulation that if Cena won, Riley was fired from his job, but The Miz hired Riley back, this time as his VP of Corporate Communications, in mid-March. On April 3 in the main event of WrestleMania XXVII, The Miz successfully defended the WWE Championship against Cena, following interference from The Rock. At the Extreme Rules pay-per-view on May 1, The Miz lost the WWE Championship to Cena, in a triple threat steel cage match, also involving John Morrison. The following night on "Raw", The Miz failed to regain the championship from Cena in a singles match when he lost by disqualification, and failed to regain the championship again in an "I Quit" match at Over the Limit .
On the May 23 episode of "Raw", The Miz fired Riley, blaming him for not being able to regain the championship because of Riley not being present at the Extreme Rules PPV when Miz lost the title, the following night on Raw when Riley held up the arm that Miz was holding the belt with leading to his disqualification and at the Over the Limit PPV when he left his phone behind that he used to trick the referee into thinking that Cena had said "I Quit". This led to Riley attacking his former mentor, sending him crashing into a barricade at ringside and then head first over the announce table and which turned Riley a fan favorite for the first time in WWE. On the May 30 episode of "Raw", The Miz assaulted Riley after an interview from Michael Cole, but Riley gained the upper hand and Miz escaped through the crowd. At Capitol Punishment, Riley defeated Miz in a singles-match. He went on to lose to Riley in various singles and tag team matches. It was later announced that Miz would be a participant in the Raw's Money in the Bank ladder match at Money in the Bank, though he was unsuccessful in winning the match following a knee injury kayfabe and then returning but stopped from claiming the briefcase by Rey Mysterio. The following night on Raw Miz made it to the finals of the WWE Championship tournament defeating his former NXT rookie, Alex Riley in the first round. The following week on Raw Miz would be defeated by Rey Mysterio. At Summerslam,The Miz teamed up with R-Truth and Alberto Del Rio in a losing effort to Rey Mysterio, Kofi Kingston and John Morrison.
Awesome Truth and Intercontinental Champion (2011–2012).
On the August 22 episode of "Raw", Miz and R-Truth attacked Santino Marella before his match. They would then cut a promo agreeing there was a conspiracy in the WWE keeping the both of them out of the main event picture, and declared they would, together, seize any opportunity that came their way in the future. The duo would soon begin referring to themselves, on Raw and in other media, as "The Awesome Truth". On the August 29 episode of "Raw", Truth interfered in Miz's match and the duo attacked CM Punk. The following week, Miz and Truth announced that they would challenge Air Boom (Evan Bourne and Kofi Kingston) to a match for the WWE Tag Team Championship at Night of Champions. At the pay-per-view, following the referee being distracted while The Miz was attempting a pin, Miz would assault the referee, causing his team to lose by disqualification. Seeking retribution, Miz and Truth later attacked both Triple H and CM Punk during their no disqualification match in the main event. Because of their actions from the previous night, R-Truth and The Miz were fired by Triple H on the September 19 episode of "Raw". At the conclusion of the main event match at Hell in a Cell, R-Truth and The Miz jumped the barricade wearing black hooded sweatshirts and entered the cell as it was being raised. They then used weapons to attack Alberto Del Rio, CM Punk, John Cena, the Referee and camera men while the cell was again lowered. After this, the entire WWE roster led by Triple H came out to find a way into the cell, before New Orleans Police Department officers were able to get the door open and arrest them. The two later posted a video on YouTube apologizing to the WWE Universe for their actions. The Miz and R-Truth were reinstated by John Laurinaitis on the October 10 episode of "Raw". At Vengeance, Miz and R-Truth defeated CM Punk and Triple H in a tag team match, after interference from Triple H's long time friend Kevin Nash. Later that night they assaulted John Cena during his WWE Championship match with Alberto Del Rio. On the October 24 episode of "Raw", Awesome Truth attacked John Cena and Zack Ryder. On the November 7 episode of "Raw", Miz and R-Truth defeated Cena and Ryder. At Survivor Series, The Awesome Truth were defeated by John Cena and The Rock.
On the November 21 episode of "Raw", Cena instigated an argument between R-Truth and Miz, which resulted in Miz hitting his finisher on Truth as they were heading up the steel ramp, signaling the end of their alliance. This was a pretext to explain R-Truth's absence during his suspension as a result of his violating of the Wellness Policy.
On the November 28 episode of "Raw", Miz defeated John Morrison in a Falls Count Anywhere match after he, once again, hit his finisher on their steel ramp. On the December 5, episode of "Raw", Miz qualified for a Triple Threat Tables, Ladders, and Chairs match against Alberto Del Rio and CM Punk at for the WWE Championship after a win over Randy Orton via count out, but was unsuccessful. On the December 26 episode of "Raw", R-Truth returned only to viciously attack Miz after a match and promised this will continue week-after-week. The following "Raw", Truth would hide in the audience and attack Miz again during his match with Sheamus. On the January 9 episode of "Raw", Miz would retaliate by attacking R-Truth until Truth turned the tables and chased him out of the ring. On the January 16 episode of "Raw SuperShow," Miz was defeated by Truth in an Over The Top Rope Challenge, also involving Sheamus and Wade Barrett. The following "Raw", Miz was defeated by R-Truth in a singles match with a stipulation in place where the loser of the match would enter the Royal Rumble match as the first entrant. In the Rumble match, Miz was the longest lasting participant, lasting over 45 minutes before being eliminated by former tag team partner, Big Show. At Elimination Chamber, Miz failed again to capture the WWE Championship after being eliminated last by CM Punk. Desperate for a spot on the card for the upcoming WrestleMania XXVIII event, Miz joined John Laurinaitis' team for the 12-man tag team match after saving Laurinaitis from Santino Marella. Miz picked up the win for Team Johnny after pinning Zack Ryder with the help of Eve, which ended his 20 match losing streak dating back to 2011. He again defeated Ryder the following night on "Raw", thus ending his losing streak in singles matches. In the pre-show of Extreme Rules, Miz unsuccessfully challenged Santino Marella for the United States Championship. The following night on "Raw", Miz was part of a Beat the Clock challenge to determine the number one contender for the WWE Championship match at Over the Limit; he defeated Marella in 4:18 before being beaten by Randy Orton and Daniel Bryan. At the pay-per-view, Miz was the last man to be eliminated in a 20-man "People Power" battle royal to battle for either the WWE United States Championship or the WWE Intercontinental Championship, being eliminated by the winner Christian. Later on in the PPV, he was defeated by Brodus Clay in a singles match. After a two month absence, The Miz returned on July 15 at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view, as a last-minute participant in the WWE Championship Money in the Bank contract match sporting a new haircut that replaced his signature fauxhawk. However, he would be unsuccessful as the match was won by old rival John Cena.
On July 23 at "Raw 1000", Miz defeated Christian to win his first Intercontinental Championship. With this, Miz also became the 25th Triple Crown Champion in WWE history. Four days later on "SmackDown", Miz successfully defended his title against Christian in a rematch. At SummerSlam, Miz defeated Rey Mysterio to retain the Intercontinental Championship. At Night Of Champions, Miz successfully defended the Intercontinental Championship in a Fatal Four Way match against Cody Rhodes, Rey Mysterio, and Sin Cara. From September, Miz started hosting the "MizTV" talk show. On the October 17 episode of "WWE Main Event", Miz lost the Intercontinental Championship to Kofi Kingston. Miz failed to regain the title from Kingston in two rematches, the first on October 28 at Hell in a Cell, and the second on the November 6 episode of "SmackDown".
Face turn (2012–present).
On the November 6 episode of "SmackDown", The Miz started a babyface turn by offering a handshake to Kofi Kingston after Kingston yet again defeated him in an Intercontinental Championship match. Miz's face turn was cemented by him joining Mick Foley's babyface team at Survivor Series. At Survivor Series, The Miz eliminated Wade Barrett before being eliminated by Alberto Del Rio. In the months to come, Miz's turn was not well received by critics, who commented that Miz as a babyface was too similar to his heel character because he was "still cocky, arrogant, and egotistical" while "pivoted toward calling out established heels". Other criticisms were that Miz was "juvenile", lacking of depth, "grating and not endearing to the audience" and that "there was not that moment when he officially turned and aligned his values with the audience's".
On the December 4 edition of "Raw", Miz had CM Punk take a polygraph, however, it went unfinished as The Shield interrupted the test and the show ended. At TLC: Tables, Ladders & Chairs, The Miz would host "Miz TV" with 3MB being the guests. After 3MB assaulted the Spanish announcers, he, along with Alberto Del Rio, and the Brooklyn Brawler would defeat them in a six man tag team match. The next day on Raw he and Del Rio teamed with Tommy Dreamer and again defeated 3MB. He continued to feud with Ziggler, when he mocked Ziggler's on-screen girlfriend AJ Lee, in order to get laid out by their "friend" Big E Langston. This led him to a match against Ziggler on 28 December edition of "SmackDown" which ended in a losing effort, after getting distracted by Langston. He then entered a feud with Antonio Cesaro, after Cesaro disrespected the USA. On January 14, 2013 during the "Raw" 20th Anniversary special, Miz hosted "Miz TV" with guest Ric Flair. They were interrupted by Cesaro but Miz hit the Skull Crushing Finale on him and Ric Flair gave The Miz the honor of applying his submission move, the figure-four leglock, on Cesaro. Miz would then go on to adopt the figure-four from Flair and use it as a new finisher. The Miz faced Cesaro for the United States Championship on Royal Rumble 2013 pre-show but ended in a losing effort. He also competed in the Royal Rumble match that night being the 28th entrant in the 30-man match, only to get eliminated by Ryback. Miz continued his rivalry with Cesaro on "Raw Roulette" the following night when he was placed as the special guest referee in Cesaro's match with Randy Orton. Cesaro went on to lose the match and then Miz hit the Skull-Crushing Finale on him afterwards. 
On the February 4 edition of "Raw", The Miz invited Paul Heyman to appear on "Miz TV", but after berating Heyman and Vickie Guerrero for what happened to Mr. McMahon at the hands of Brock Lesnar the previous week, he ended up being attacked and then getting an F-5 from Lesnar. On February 8 edition of "SmackDown", Miz and Cesaro continued their feud, with both fighting a backstage brawl. The next week on "Raw", Cesaro attacked Miz and repeatedly swung him into the barricade with a giant swing during Miz's match with Cody Rhodes, thus injuring Miz's shoulder (kayfabe). On the "SmackDown" episode on the same week, The Miz defeated Cody Rhodes by submission. The Miz faced Cesaro again for the United States Championship at Elimination Chamber, but was disqualified after he accidentally hit a low-blow to Cesaro. The next night on "Raw", he defeated Cesaro in a No Disqualification match with the figure-four, which kept him in contention for the championship. That week on "SmackDown" he again defeated Cody Rhodes by submission.
Other media.
Mizanin played a small role in the movie " The Campaign". On April 30, 2012, it was announced that the Miz would star in WWE Studios film "". Mizanin replaced fellow wrestler Randy Orton who was dropped of the role due to his past with the USMC. That day, it was also announced that Mizanin will be featured in the WWE Studios and Kare Production project "Les reines du ring" ("Queens of the Ring") alongside Eve Torres and CM Punk. On October 26, 2012, it was announced that the Miz would be starring in a movie sponsored by WWE and ABC Family titled "Christmas Bounty".
Mizanin won Sirius XM's fantasy football league for 2011 and was also the runner-up in WWE magazine fantasy football league that year and also competed in both leagues in 2012, but failed to win both. Mizanin has hosted a fantasy football show called "First & Awesome" on Sirius XM since 2011.
Mizanin is featured in Mick Foley's children's Christmas book "The Most Mizerable Christmas".
Mizanin has become a top media spokesman for WWE. He has been guest on several late-night talk shows. He has appeared on "Conan" 2 times. He has appeared in 1 episode each of "Lopez Tonight", "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", "Jimmy Kimmel Live", "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno", "Attack of the Show!", "Daybreak", "Red Bull PLAY!", "H8R" and "Rove LA". He has also appeared in 8 episodes of "Clash Time". He also appeared on the 30th May 2011 edition of "Tough Enough" as a top-level superstar giving advice to the rookies.
He has also done promotional work for WWE in countries like Russia, Brazil, UK, Poland, Australia and in many other countries. He flew a F/A-18 jet plane at USS John C. Stennis (CVN-74) during doing promotional work for WWE's annual "Tribute to the Troops" special.
Personal life.
He passionately roots for his hometown Cleveland Browns, Indians, and Cavs. Prior to the Indians vs. Angels game on Tuesday, July 26, 2011 Mizanin fulfilled one of his lifelong goals when he threw out the first pitch. When Mike was 11, his parents divorced. He has a step-father named Donnie and two step-siblings, Jimmy and Tonia. His father George Mizanin, owns several Mr. Hero sandwich shops in the Cleveland area.
