The fourth season of the television comedy series "Community" premiered on February 7, 2013. The season consists of 13 episodes and airs on NBC on Thursdays at 8:00 pm ET as part of the network's "Comedy Night Done Right" programming block.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
Production.
The series was renewed for a fourth season of 13 episodes on May 10, 2012.
The fourth season sees several behind-the-scenes changes as series creator and executive producer Dan Harmon no longer serves as showrunner, as writers David Guarascio and Moses Port (co-creators of the short-lived "Aliens in America") took over as showrunners and executive producers. Sony Pictures Television, which produces the series with Universal Television, says that Harmon would serve as a consulting producer, but Harmon affirms he was not informed of any of this and will not return in a position without executive prerogatives. Other departures include executive producers Neil Goldman and Garrett Donovan, writer/producer Chris McKenna, actor/writer Dino Stamatopoulos, and frequent episode directors and executive producers Anthony and Joe Russo. Returning writers for fourth season include Andy Bobrow and Megan Ganz, who have been with the series since season two, and writing team Steve Basilone and Annie Mebane, who joined the series in season three. Season 4 began shooting in August 2012.
Cast member Jim Rash (who won an Academy Award for co-writing "The Descendants") will write an episode of the series, with the episode revolving around an alumni weekend at Greendale.
The series was initially scheduled to premiere on October 19, 2012, airing in a new time slot on Fridays at 8:30 pm. In early October 2012, NBC delayed the premiere. NBC.com released a video of the cast of "Community" in character addressing the delay of the season premiere. On October 30, 2012, NBC announced that the fourth season would premiere on February 7, 2013, returning to its original time slot of Thursdays at 8:00 pm.
On November 21, 2012, it was announced that Chevy Chase left the show by mutual agreement between the actor and network. As the majority of season four has been shot, Chase will only be absent in one or two episodes. Because the season 4 finale was filmed before his official departure, Pierce Hawthorne's story will be part of the season's concluding storylines.
Critical reception.
The fourth season of "Community" received "generally favorable" reviews, scoring 70 out of 100 based on 16 critics, on Metacritic. Verne Gay of "Newsday" stated, "Still defiantly "Community", still good and still uninterested in adding new viewers." On the other hand, "Hitfix"s Alan Sepinwall stated, "It feels like Port, [David Guarascio and the other writers decided to reverse-engineer the Harmon version of "Community", but couldn't quite manage without the missing ingredient of Harmon himself." Mike Hale of "The New York Times" has stated that the series "has been dumbed down, its humor broadened past recognition, and the two episodes provided for review...have fewer laughs between them than a single good scene from the old "Community"."
