This Is 40 is a 2012 American spin-off comedy film written, co-produced and directed by Judd Apatow. It is a stand-alone sequel to the 2007 film "Knocked Up" and stars Paul Rudd and Leslie Mann. Filming was conducted in mid-2011, and the film was released in North America on December 21, 2012. The film follows the lives of middle-aged married couple Pete and Debbie as they each turn 40, with their jobs and daughters adding stress to their relationship.
"This Is 40" received generally mixed reviews from critics who praised its acting, and cast, as well as the film's very comedic moments and perceptive scenes, but criticized the film's overlong running time and occasional aimlessness.
Plot.
The film begins with couple Debbie (Leslie Mann) and Pete (Paul Rudd), first seen in "Knocked Up"; they are having sex on Debbie's 40th birthday. Pete reveals that he took a Viagra given to him by his friend Barry (Rob Smigel); this enrages Debbie and they stop. Debbie is angered that she is turning 40. 
After five years, Debbie owns a boutique with Desi (Megan Fox) and Jodi (Charlyne Yi) working for her. Pete owns his own record label, with his friends Ronnie (Chris O'Dowd) and Cat (Lena Dunham) working with him. Pete's business is struggling financially. The couple also are having to deal with their daughters Sadie, a young teenager, and eight-year-old Charlotte. For Debbie's birthday, the couple goes on a romantic weekend to a resort. There they get high off of "special cookies", and fantasize out loud about ways they would kill each other. 
After speaking with her friends Jason (Jason Segel) and Barb (Annie Mumolo), Debbie decides to improve her marriage and family through exercise, and becoming more connected with their parents. Debbie tells Pete that he needs to stop lending his dad, Larry (Albert Brooks), money, because it is hurting them financially. Pete goes to visit him, but is unsuccessful at giving him the news, and still agrees to give him money. Meanwhile, Debbie visits her gynecologist (Tim Bagley), and discovers that she is pregnant. She decides to not tell Pete about this. Later, she yells at a student, Joseph (Ryan Lee), who has been taunting Sadie. She yells at him so much, to the point, where his mother, Catherine (Melissa McCarthy), gets into an argument with Pete. They later have a meeting with the principal, but the couple denies everything that happened. 
One night, Debbie takes Desi out dancing at a club, planning to confront her with her suspicions that she has been stealing money from the store. Afterwards, Debbie drops Desi off at her house, and confronts her about the money, saying she's been taking money to buy drugs. Desi reveals she is able to afford nice things because she is also an escort. Later, Debbie meets up with Jodi, and she confesses that she stole the money to buy Oxycontin. Debbie fires her and leaves. Meanwhile, Pete and Debbie are having to deal with Sadie and Charlotte fighting all the time, which results in arguments between the family.
On Pete's 40th birthday party, he argues with his dad about the money he wants from them. Debbie argues with her dad about not spending too much time in her life, and how his is perfect. Oliver then explains that his life is not perfect, and how he has always cared about her and loved her. Later, Pete overhears Debbie talking about her pregnancy, and rides out of the house on his bicycle in anger. Debbie and Larry then go after Pete, trying to find him. Soon, they find that he wrecked after hitting his head on a car door. Pete then gets into an argument with the driver of the car who then punches him in the face. Debbie and Larry take Pete to the hospital, where Larry apologizes for everything, and Debbie forgives him. Debbie and Pete talk later and Pete explains that he is actually thrilled about having a third baby, and that he doesn't feel trapped, so the two reconcile. Sometime later, Pete and Debbie are watching a small concert with Ryan Adams performing. Debbie then suggests that Pete should sign him to his label and plan to talk to him as they finish watching the show. 
Production.
The film—Apatow's fourth directorial effort—was announced in October 2010, while he was producing Universal's "Wanderlust". 
Release.
"This Is 40" was originally scheduled to be released on June 1, 2012. In May 2011, Universal postponed the release to December 2012, allowing the studio to use that date for their release of "Snow White & the Huntsman"; the "Snow White" film was seen as better competition with a rival 2012 Snow White film project, "Mirror Mirror", by Relativity Media. 
The premiere for "This Is 40" was held on December 12, 2012 at the Grauman's Chinese Theatre, in Los Angeles. The film was released on December 21, 2012, opening in 2,912 locations nationwide.
Box office.
Upon its debut, the film grossed an estimated 3.7 million on Friday, coming in third behind "" in its second weekend and "Jack Reacher". Over the course of three days it grossed an estimated 12.031 million dollars. The audience poll rated the film a CinemaScore of B-. The audience was 57 percent female and 43 percent male. It was the worst opening weekend among all the films Apatow has directed; the box office was lower than 21.4 million earned by "The 40-Year-Old Virgin".
On Christmas day, the film grossed $4,369,495, ranking #6 behind newcomers with "Les Misérables" ranking #1 with $18.1 million. This put the film's five day total to $17,463,430, still behind the last three Apatow films at this point. In its second weekend on December 28, the film grossed an estimated 4.1 million, which was up 10.6% from the previous Friday. By the end of the weekend, the film grossed $12,501,060, ranking #6, behind "Jack Reacher". This weekend's total was up 8.0% from the first weekend, bringing its total to $36,431,350. In the film's third weekend, it dropped 33.2% to $8,353,350, ranking #7 behind Jack Reacher. This brought the film's total gross to $54,255,195, meaning that it had past the domestic total of "Funny People". In the film's fourth weekend, it had its highest percentage drop with 47.6% and grossed $4,373,225, bringing its domestic total to $61,442,180. 
Critical reception.
"This Is 40" received generally mixed reviews from critics. It currently holds a 51% rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 175 reviews stating: "Judd Apatow definitely delivers funny and perceptive scenes in "This Is 40", but they're buried in aimless self-indulgence." At Metacritic, the film received a score of 58 based on 38 reviews and a user score of 6.9 based on 69 reviews.
Robbie Collin of "The Daily Telegraph" gave the film two stars out of five, commending its premise but criticising its execution. "This is 40 is a comedy film about the hell of getting older in a place where ageing naturally is the last taboo, and I only wish it lived up to that utterly inspired concept...every scene feels like an airbrushed composite of dozens of rambling takes, and 133 minutes is drainingly long for a story this sitcom-slight", he wrote. 
Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" gave the film three stars out of four, saying "There are big laughs here, and smaller ones that sting. Rudd and Mann are a joy to watch, especially when their comic darts draw blood, as when Debbie tells "charmboy" Pete that inside he's a dick. Cheers as well to a terrific supporting cast, including Melissa McCarthy as a mother from hell, John Lithgow as Debbie's withdrawn father, and the priceless Albert Brooks as Pete's dad, living off his son's dole to support his tow-headed triplets. "This Is 40" doesn't build to a catharsis. It sometimes dawdles as it circles the spectacle of a marriage in flux. Yet Pete and Debbie's sparring yields some of Apatow's most personal observations yet on the feelings for husbands, wives, parents, and children that we categorize as love."
Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" said "More like "This Is Whiny"", giving the film two and a half stars out of four. ""This Is 40" has its share of clever, zingy material, proving that writer-director Judd Apatow has lost none of his ability to land a punch line with the right, unexpected turn of phrase. 'My boobs are just ... gone,' bemoans Debbie, played by Leslie Mann, comparing hers with those of her employee, played by Megan Fox. Then comes the second line, building smartly on the setup: 'They didn't even say goodbye.' Mann is wonderful, a uniquely skillful comic and dramatic actor—wide-eyed yet merrily devastating when the venom's called for. Rudd can get away with murder on sheer charm. But it's easy, and sort of lazy, to establish jokes and entire scenes built upon mocking somebody's dialect, or the older daughter's obsession with "Lost"."
Richard Roeper gave the film a C- and called the film "a huge disappointment." His main complaint about the film was its running time and most of the unnecessary supporting characters.
However, "The New Yorker"s Richard Brody writing that "This Is 40" is the stuff of life, and it flows like life, and, like life, it would be good for it to last longer."
