The following is a list of "Saturday Night Live" cast members, past and present. The cast members of "Saturday Night Live" are often referred to as the "Not Ready For Prime Time Players".
List of cast members.
As of September 2012, the show has featured 132 cast members. The list below includes both repertory and featured players, but omits "SNL" writers and others who were not listed as cast members during the show's credits. The dates given are those of the years they were part of the cast. Also noted on the chart is whether the cast member ever served as an episode's host, appeared as the anchorperson of the "Weekend Update" segment (by any of its titles), or has been the subject of their own "Best of" home video collection. Many of the cast members were writers as well.
(d) denotes deceased
Cast timeline.
Lighter colors denote "featured players" versus repertory cast members.
ImageSize = width:1000 height:2000
PlotArea = left:100 bottom:60 top:0 right:40
Alignbars = justify
DateFormat = mm/dd/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/1975 till:12/31/2012
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:mm/dd/yyyy
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:5 start:01/01/1975
Colors =
LineData =
BarData =
PlotData =
</timeline>
Family connections.
Some cast members are related to former staff of the show. One example is Jim Belushi, who is the younger brother of cast member John Belushi. Before that, Bill Murray's older brother, Brian Doyle-Murray, was a writer and cast member. When Dan Aykroyd left the show in 1979, he was replaced by a series of short-lived featured players, one of whom was his brother Peter Aykroyd. Short-lived featured player Matthew Laurence was the identical twin brother of 1977-1980 associate director and bit player Mitchell Laurence. Long-time writer and sometime performer Jim Downey is former cast member Robert Downey, Jr.'s uncle. Former SNL cast member Abby Elliott is the daughter of former cast member Chris Elliott (and granddaughter of Bob Elliott, who appeared on "SNL" as a guest performer on the 1978 Christmas episode hosted by Elliott Gould).
Other staff are related by marriage. For instance, cast member Gilda Radner was briefly married to G. E. Smith, who later became the show's bandleader. Michael O'Donoghue was married to "SNL" band pianist Cheryl Hardwick. Cast members Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Brad Hall were married in 1987. Former cast member and head writer Tina Fey is married to former show composer Jeff Richmond.
Longest tenures.
The following is a list of the cast members with the longest tenures, who have spent at least eight seasons on the show.
Shortest tenures.
The following is a list of the former cast members who have had the shortest tenures, spending less than a full 20-episode season on the show.
Youngest cast members.
The following is a list of the youngest people to join the show
Oldest cast members.
The following is a list of the oldest people to join the show.
President of the United States impression.
Impersonating the sitting President of the United States is considered "about as high of an honor that can be bestowed upon a cast member." The following is a list of people who have impersonated the president.
Michael McKean portrayed Bill Clinton during a brief period after Phil Hartman's departure. There was also a sketch featuring Chris Farley, David Spade, Chris Elliott, Adam Sandler, and Tim Meadows "auditioning" for the role of Clinton. There was also a gag in a 2001 sketch with Tracy Morgan "filling in" for Will Ferrell as George W. Bush.
Deceased cast members.
Although "SNL" is best known as the launchpad for many successful careers, eight cast members have died prematurely. This has given rise to a superstition known as the ""Saturday Night Live" Curse".
Two cast members have died of a drug overdose at the age of 33 in parallel situations. John Belushi and Chris Farley overdosed from a "speedball," an injection of cocaine and heroin. Belushi's death led to the conviction of Cathy Smith for administering the fatal injection. Nearly four years before Belushi's death, "SNL" aired a short sketch titled "Don't Look Back In Anger" featuring an elderly Belushi as the last living of the "not ready for prime time" cast members. Farley's death occurred nearly two months after he came back to host "SNL", which turned out to be his final television appearance.
Original cast member Gilda Radner died on May 20, 1989 from ovarian cancer. Radner was originally scheduled to host the show's thirteenth season finale, a first for a former female cast member, but the show was canceled due to a Writer's Guild of America strike. Radner's health worsened the following year. Shortly before the fourteenth season finale, news came of Radner's death and Steve Martin delivered his visibly shaken monologue, followed by the sketch called "Dancing in the Dark" that he and Radner performed on an episode he hosted in 1978, and a musical tribute to Radner performed by her former husband G. E. Smith and the SNL Band.
Danitra Vance, a cast member during its eleventh season, died on August 21, 1994, three years after her breast cancer was put in remission.
Original cast member and writer Michael O'Donoghue died on November 8, 1994 of a cerebral hemorrhage after suffering from severe chronic migraine headaches for most of his life. Bill Murray honored O'Donoghue's memory in an appearance on the twentieth season episode (hosted by Sarah Jessica Parker with musical guest R.E.M.) by replaying O'Donoghue's sketch, "Mr. Mike's Least Loved Bedtime Stories: The Soiled Kimono" from December 1977.
Phil Hartman, a long-time veteran cast member between 1986 and 1994, was killed on May 28, 1998 by his wife while he slept in his Encino, California home. Before committing the act, Brynn consumed a combination of cocaine, alcohol, and the antidepressant drug Zoloft, and later shot herself.
Doumanian-era performer Charles Rocket was found dead on October 7, 2005 in his Canterbury, Connecticut backyard. Local police ruled his death a suicide. Rocket had allegedly taken his own life by slashing his throat with a box cutter.
Tom Davis, a cast member and writer for the show's first five years, died on July 19, 2012, after a three-year battle with throat and neck cancer. Davis is the latest "SNL" cast member to die prematurely.
Survivor.
Julia Sweeney was diagnosed with cervical cancer in the mid-1990s, but has survived and transformed her experiences into a one-woman show, "God Said, Ha!", developed at LA's alternative comedy show, "Un-Cabaret". Miramax released the film version of the show in 1998, produced by Quentin Tarantino. The film version of the play earned the Golden Space Needle Award, while Sweeney's recording earned her a Grammy nomination for best comedy album. It was released on DVD in 2003.
