The marketing mix is a business tool used in marketing and by marketing professionals. The marketing mix is often crucial when determining a product or brand's offering, and is often synonymous with the four Ps: "price", "product", "promotion", and "place"; in service marketing, however, the four Ps have been expanded to the sevenPs or eight Ps to address the different nature of services.
In recent times, the concept of four Cs has been introduced as a more customer-driven replacement of four Ps.
And there are two four Cs theories today. One is Lauterborn's four Cs ("consumer", "cost", "communication", "convenience"), another is Shimizu's four Cs ("commodity", "cost", "communication", "channel").
History.
The term marketing mix was coined in an article written by Neil Borden called “The Concept of the Marketing Mix.” He started teaching the term after he learned about it from an associate, James Culliton, who in 1948 described the role of the marketing manager as a ""mixer" of ingredients"; one who sometimes follows recipes prepared by others, sometimes prepares his own recipe as he goes along, sometimes adapts a recipe from immediately available ingredients, and at other times invents new ingredients no one else has tried.
Four Ps: the producer-oriented model.
The marketer E. Jerome McCarthy proposed a four Ps classification in 1960, which has since been used by marketers throughout the world.
The seven Ps is an additional marketing model that refers to the already mentioned four Ps, plus 'Physical evidence', 'People', and 'Process'. 'Physical evidence' refers to elements within the store -- the store front, the uniforms employees wear, signboards, etc. 'People' refers to the employees of the organization with whom customers come into contact. 'Process' refers to the processes and systems within the organization that affects its marketing process. These latter three factors are not cited nearly as often as the first four outlined in depth above.
Four Cs: in the seven Cs compass model.
After Koichi Shimizu proposed a four Cs classification in 1973, this was expanded to "the seven Cs compass model" to provide a more complete picture of the nature of marketing in 1981. It attempts to explain the success or failure of a firm within a market and is somewhat analogous to Michael Porter's diamond model, which tries to explain the success and failure of different countries economically.
The factors related to consumers can be explained by the first character of four directions marked on the compass model. These can be remembered by the cardinal directions, hence the name "compass model": 
These can also be remembered by the cardinal directions marked on a compass. The seven Cs compass model is a framework in co-marketing (symbiotic marketing). 
It has been criticized for being little more than the four Ps with different points of emphasis. In particular, the seven Cs inclusion of consumers in the marketing mix is criticized, since they are a "target" of marketing, while the other elements of the marketing mix are "tactics". The seven Cs also include numerous strategies for product development, distribution, and pricing, while assuming that consumers want two-way communications with companies.
