Eagle is a common name for some members of the bird family Accipitridae, and belong to several genera that are not necessarily closely related to each other. Most of the more than sixty species occur in Eurasia and Africa. Outside this area, just eleven species can be found - two species (the Bald Eagle and Golden Eagle) in the United States and Canada, nine species in Central America and South America, and three species in Australia.
Description.
Eagles are large, powerfully built birds of prey, with a heavy head and beak. Even the smallest eagles, like the Booted Eagle ("Aquila pennata") (which is comparable in size to a Common Buzzard ("Buteo buteo") or Red-tailed Hawk ("B. jamaicensis")), have relatively longer and more evenly broad wings, and more direct, faster flight - despite the reduced size of aerodynamic feathers. Most eagles are larger than any other raptors apart from some vultures. The smallest species called eagle is the South Nicobar Serpent Eagle ("Spilornis klossi"), at 450 g (1 lb) and 40 cm (16 in). The largest species are discussed below. Like all birds of prey, eagles have very large hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong muscular legs, and powerful talons. The beak is typically heavier than most other birds of prey. Eagles' eyes are extremely powerful, having up to 3.6 times human acuity for the martial eagle, which enables them to spot potential prey from a very long distance. This keen eyesight is primarily contributed by their extremely large pupils which ensure minimal diffraction (scattering) of the incoming light. The female of all species of eagle known are larger than the male.
Eagles normally build their nests, called eyries, in tall trees or on high cliffs. Many species lay two eggs, but the older, larger chick frequently kills its younger sibling once it has hatched. The dominant chick tends to be the female, as they are bigger than the male. The parents take no action to stop the killing.
"They have at least one singular characteristic. It has been observed that most birds of prey look back over their shoulders before striking prey (or shortly thereafter); predation is after all a two-edged sword. All hawks seem to have this habit, from the smallest kestrel to the largest Ferruginous - but not the Eagles."
Among the eagles are some of the largest birds of prey: only the condors and some of the Old World vultures are markedly larger. It is regularly debated which should be considered the largest species of eagle. They could be measured variously in total length, body mass or wingspan. Different lifestyle needs among various eagles result in variable measurements from species to species. For example, many forest-dwelling eagles, including the very large Harpy and Philippine Eagles, have relatively short wingspans, a feature necessary for being able to maneuver in quick, short bursts through dense forested habitats. On the other hand, eagles in the genus "Aquila" are found almost strictly in open country, are superlative soarers, and have relatively long wings for their size.
Here are lists of the top five eagles going on weight, length and, lastly, wingspan. Unless otherwise noted via reference, the figures listed are the median reported for each measurement in the guide "Raptors of the World" (Ferguson-Lees, et al.), in which only measurements that could be personally verified by the authors were listed.
Species.
Major new research into eagle taxonomy suggests that the important genera "Aquila" and "Hieraaetus" are not composed of nearest relatives, and it is likely that a reclassification of these genera will soon take place, with some species being moved to "Lophaetus" or "Ictinaetus".
FAMILY ACCIPITRIDAE
Eagles in culture.
The modern English name of the bird is derived from the Latin term "aquila" by way of the French "aigle". The Latin "aquila" may derive from the word "aquilus", meaning dark-colored, swarthy, or blackish, as a description of the eagle's plumage; or from "aquilo", the Latin version of Greek "boreas", or north wind; however, "aquilus" and "aquilo" may just as well derive from "aquila" (or be unrelated) and the latter may be of unknown origin.
Old English used the term "earn", related to Scandinavia's "ørn / örn". The etymology of this word relates it to Greek "ornís", meaning "bird", though other Indo-European languages (such as Welsh "eryr" or Russian "orël" / орёл) show that the meaning 'eagle' is older. The Greek word may be an old diminutive. The Albanian word for eagle is "shqiponje", deriving from the root "shqipe", which means "eagle".
In Britain before 1678, "eagle" referred specifically to the Golden Eagle, with the other native species, the White-tailed Eagle, being known as the Erne. The modern name "Golden Eagle" for "aquila chrysaetos" was introduced by the naturalist John Ray.
Religion.
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshiped the animal and often depicted eagles in their art.
Despite modern and historic Native American practices of giving eagle feathers to non-indigenous people and also members of other tribes who have been deemed worthy, current United States eagle feather law stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual reasons. In Canada, poaching of eagle feathers for the booming U.S. market has sometimes resulted in the arrests of First Nations person for the crime.
In Hindu religion, Garuda is a lesser Hindu divinity, usually the mount (vahanam) of Vishnu. is depicted as having the golden body of a strong man with a white face, red wings, and an eagle's beak and with a crown on his head. This ancient deity was said to be massive, large enough to block out the sun.
The eagle is also the patron animal of Zeus. In particular, Zeus was said to have taken the form of an eagle in order to abduct Ganymede, and there are numerous artistic depictions of the Eagle Zeus bearing Ganymede aloft, from Classical times up to the present (see illustrations in the Ganymede (mythology) page.)
The Eagle is also the symbol of Libby, Montana which was recently named "The City of Eagles"
Eagles as national symbols.
Eagles have been used by many nations as a national symbol.
