Despicable Me is a 2010 American computer-animated 3D comedy film from Universal Pictures and Illumination Entertainment that was released on July 9, 2010 in the United States. The first Illumination Entertainment production, it was directed by Pierre Coffin and Chris Renaud, based on an original story by Sergio Pablos.
The film stars the voice of Steve Carell as Gru, a super-villain who adopts three girls (the voices of Miranda Cosgrove, Dana Gaier, and Elsie Fisher) from an orphanage; and the voice of Jason Segel as Vector, a rival of Gru who steals the Great Pyramid of Giza. When Gru learns of Vector's heist, he plans an even greater heist to shrink and steal the Earth's moon. 
The film was entirely animated by the French animation studio Mac Guff, which was later acquired by Illumination Entertainment.
The film earned positive reviews from critics, and grossed over $543 million worldwide, against a budget of $69 million. A sequel, "Despicable Me 2", is set to be released on July 3, 2013, followed by a spin-off, featuring Gru's Minions as the main characters, on December 19, 2014.
Plot.
Gru, a super-villain, has his pride injured when an unknown super-villain steals the Great Pyramid of Giza; an action that is described as making "all other villains look lame." Gru decides to do better by shrinking and stealing the moon; an idea based on his childhood dream of being an astronaut, which was always discouraged by his mother, Marlena. The plan is quite expensive and Gru seeks a loan from the Bank of Evil. The Bank's president, Mr. Perkins, is impressed by the plan, but will only provide the money if Gru can obtain a shrink ray first.
Gru and his minions steal a shrink ray from a secret base in Asia but the up-and-coming super-villain, Vector, who was also responsible for the Pyramid theft, immediately steals it from Gru. Gru attempts to break into Vector's fortress to get the shrink ray back, but is defeated by numerous booby traps. However, he notices three orphan girls -- Margo, Edith, and Agnes -- easily walk into the base to sell Vector cookies. Gru, faking his credentials, adopts the girls from Miss Hattie's Home for Girls, planning on using them to infiltrate Vector's base so he can steal the shrink ray back. However, Gru has much difficulty nurturing them properly between their own rambunctiousness, their ballet classes, and his own ineptitude as a parent.
Eventually, Gru and the girls arrive at Vector's fortress and Gru manages to steal the shrink ray. The girls then suggest a day at the local theme park; Gru agrees, believing he can leave the girls there, but he warms up to the girls after they compliment him over destroying a rigged carnival game. Later, Gru contacts Mr. Perkins, stating that he has finally got the shrink ray in his possession, but Perkins rejects him again, stating that the bank would rather see a younger super-villain, such as his son Vector, complete the theft. As Gru mopes about at home, the girls offer the contents of their piggy bank to fund the plan. Gru, inspired, sacrifices parts of his lair to construct the spacecraft. Gru plans to steal the moon when it is nearest the Earth but this ends up being the same day as the girls' ballet recital. Gru becomes conflicted and Dr. Nefario, seeing this as interfering with the plan, arranges for the girls to be returned to the orphanage. Around the same time, Mr. Perkins informs Vector of Gru's possession of the shrink ray and the adoption of the three girls, inciting Vector to take action.
Gru proceeds with his plan to steal the moon, successfully shrinking it to fit in his hand, but is too late to attend the recital. He then receives a note from Vector, who has kidnapped the girls, telling him to give him the moon in exchange for them. After arriving at Vector's lair, Gru eagerly makes the trade, but Vector reneges on the deal, flying off with the girls and the moon, much to Gru's anger. Meanwhile, Dr. Nefario has discovered that the effects of the shrink ray are temporary; the bigger the object is, the faster it will regain its normal size. As the moon starts to expand in Vector's ship, Gru, Dr. Nefario, and the minions pull off a daring mid-air rescue of the girls just as the moon puts Vector's ship into hyperjump before the ship explodes, launching itself back into orbit with Vector stranded on its surface, much to his shock.
Some time later, Gru has readopted the girls and treats them as his daughters and he writes them a bedtime storybook framed around his own experience. The girls perform their own ballet recital for Gru, his mother, Dr. Nefario, and the minions with the movie ending as they all get on stage to dance to "You Should Be Dancing".
Music.
"Despicable Me: Original Motion Picture Soundtrack" is the soundtrack to the film of the same name, and it was released on July 6, 2010. It features new songs from the film written, performed, and/or produced by composed by Pharrell Williams, and performances by Destinee & Paris, The Sylvers, Robin Thicke, The Bee Gees and David Bisbal.
Release.
Marketing.
NBC (which is owned by Universal) had an extensive marketing campaign leading up to the film's release. Sneak peeks were shown in episodes of "The Biggest Loser". "Despicable Me" was also featured on "Last Comic Standing" when Gru comes in to audition. IHOP restaurants promoted the film by introducing three new menu items, a kids' breakfast meal, and a drink all having the word "minion" in them.
Airheads candy released packages of the characters and came with a code for the "Despicable Me" video game.
Best Buy released a free smartphone application called "Movie Mode" that translates what the Minions are saying during the end credits for the 3-D Theatrical release. Special content can be unlocked from the application after seeing the film.
Books.
In May 2010, three books related to the movie were published, as well as the children's puppet book featured in the film. The first, "My Dad the Super Villain" (ISBN 0316083828), was rated as a preschool book. The second, "Despicable Me: The Junior Novel" (ISBN 0316083801), was rated as being a Junior Reader for ages 8 to 12. The third, "Despicable Me: The World's Greatest Villain" (ISBN 0316083771), was rated for ages 3–6 years. The puppet book "Sleepy Kittens" (ISBN 031608381X) was written by Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio and illustrated by Paul.
Video game.
A video game titled "Despicable Me: The Game" was released for the PlayStation 2, PlayStation Portable and Wii. A Nintendo DS version was released under the name "Despicable Me: Minion Mayhem". Namco also released a version for the iPhone and iPad platform entitled "Despicable Me: Minion Mania", developed by Anino Games.
Home media.
"Despicable Me" was released on DVD, Blu-ray, and Blu-ray 3D on December 14, 2010. The release included three new short films, titled "Home Makeover", "Orientation Day" and "Banana". Also, the website MinionMadness was launched to promote the home media release. Best Buy Movie Mode was updated for the home media release. Now the minions are translated during the whole movie.
Reception.
Critical response.
The film received generally positive reviews from critics. Review aggregate Rotten Tomatoes reports that 81% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 188 reviews, with an average score of 6.8/10. The critical consensus is: "Borrowing heavily (and intelligently) from Pixar and "Looney Tunes", "Despicable Me" is a surprisingly thoughtful, family-friendly treat with a few surprises of its own."
Metacritic, another review aggregation website, assigned the film a score of 72%, based on 34 reviews from mainstream critics.
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" praised the film, awarding it three stars out of a possible four.
Other positive reviews came from Michael Phillips of the "Chicago Tribune" and Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone".
In contrast, A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" disliked the film, stating "while there's nothing worth despising, there's not much to remember either."
</ref>
Box-office performance.
Released on July 9, 2010, in the United States, "Despicable Me" opened at the number one spot at the box office and pulled in $56.3 million, making it the third biggest opening grossing for an animated film in 2010 behind "Toy Story 3" and "Shrek Forever After". In its second weekend, the film dipped to 42% to second place behind "Inception" with $32.8 million earned. The film then had another drop of 27% in its third weekend and finished in third place with $23.8 million. On August 5, 2010, the film crossed the $200 million mark, becoming the first Universal film to reach the milestone since 2007's "The Bourne Ultimatum".
On the weekend lasting from September 3–5, 2010, it surpassed "Shrek Forever After" to become the second highest-grossing animated film of 2010 in the United States and Canada, behind "Toy Story 3". It is also the highest-grossing non-DreamWorks/non-Disney·Pixar animated film of all time in these territories. The film has made $251,513,985 in the United States and Canada as well as an estimated $291,600,000 overseas for a worldwide total of $543,010,705, against its $69 million budget. This film is also Universal's sixth highest-grossing film (unadjusted for inflation) and the tenth-highest-grossing animated feature of all-time in North America. In worldwide earnings, it is the sixth biggest film of Universal Studios, the fourth highest-grossing animated film of 2010 trailing "Toy Story 3", "Shrek Forever After", and "Tangled", the 20th highest-grossing animated film of all time and the 9th highest-grossing film of 2010.
Sequel.
A sequel, "Despicable Me 2", is scheduled to be released on July 3, 2013. It will be produced by the same team that was behind the first film - along with directors Pierre Coffin and Chris Renaud, and writers Cinco Paul and Ken Daurio. Steve Carell, Russell Brand, Miranda Cosgrove and Kristen Wiig will reprise their roles. New cast includes Al Pacino as a Gru's nemesis, and Steve Coogan in a yet unnamed role.
External links.
