Saturday Night Live airs its thirty-eighth season during the 2012–2013 television season on NBC. The season officially began on September 15, 2012, with host Seth MacFarlane and musical guest Frank Ocean.
Prior to the start of the season, many cast changes occurred. Andy Samberg and Kristen Wiig, both cast members since 2005, decided not to return following the end of the previous season. As well, prior to the start of the season, Abby Elliott, who had been a cast member since 2008, was let go after only four seasons on the show. Vanessa Bayer, Taran Killam and Jay Pharoah were upgraded to repertory status.
To fill the void, the show hired three new cast members: Chicago improvisers Aidy Bryant, Tim Robinson, and Cecily Strong. According to the official press release, "Bryant trained at the iO Chicago, Annoyance Theatre and she was also part of the ensemble that performed on the Second City E.T.C Stage. Robinson also trained at the The Second City, he performed on their Mainstage and was also part of their National Touring Company. Like Robinson, Strong has also performed as part of the National Touring Company and trained at the iO Theater".
Also airing this season were two election-themed episodes of "Saturday Night Live Weekend Update Thursday", which aired on September 20, 2012 and September 27, 2012.
Two months before the start of the season, original "SNL" writer and occasional featured player Tom Davis died after a two year battle with throat and neck cancer.
Cast.
Repertory players
Featured players
bold denotes Weekend Update anchor
Writers.
Seth Meyers and Colin Jost are the season's co-head writers. Prior to the start of the season, Upright Citizens Brigade Theater performers Josh Patten and Neil Casey joined the writing staff.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude>
</onlyinclude>
Specials.
"Saturday Night Live Weekend Update Thursday".
The third season of "Saturday Night Live Weekend Update Thursday", a limited-run series based on "Saturday Night Live"'s "Weekend Update" sketch, has aired in conjunction with this season. The specials focus on the United States presidential election. The show is hosted by Seth Meyers, "Update"'s current host.
