Yami Gautam (born November 28, 1988) is an Indian film and television actress. Her initial appearances were on Indian television commercials and soap operas like "Chand Ke Paar Chalo" and "Yeh Pyar Na Hoga Kam".
In 2010, she made her cinematic debut with Kannada film "Ullasa Utsaha", co-starring Ganesh. In 2012, Gautam made her Bollywood debut in Shoojit Sircar's romantic comedy "Vicky Donor", which touched on the topic of sperm donation. Upon release, the film was a critical and commercial success, and Gautam gained positive reviews for her performance.
Career.
Gautam was 20 when she moved to Mumbai to pursue a career in movies. She made her television debut with "Chand Ke Paar Chalo", which was followed by "Raajkumar Aaryyan". Following this, she played her most notable role in "Yeh Pyar Na Hoga Kam", which aired on Colors. Furthermore, she participated in the reality shows "Meethi Choori No.1" and "Kitchen Champion Season 1".
Gautam made her film debut in Kannada film Ullasa Utsaha. Whilst the film failed at the box office, Gautam received positive reviews for her performance.
Gautam later made her Bollywood debut with "Vicky Donor", in which she starred opposite Ayushmann Khurrana. She played the role of Bengali girl Ashima Roy, a girl who falls in love with a Punjabi boy with a past. Despite its small budget, the movie became a major commercial success and received critical appreciation. Gautam received appreciation for her performance. Taran Adarsh writes "Yami Gautam makes an imposing debut. She adds enormous value to the movie by her act, screen presence and striking looks. She's truly admirable towards the latter part of the film." Madhureeta Mukherjee adds that Gautam "is a sheer delight to watch, emoting effortlessly."
In 2012, she featured on the cover page of Prevention (magazine) and Wedding Affair which discussed her life, personality and interest in Hot yoga Furthermore, she featured on the cover of Femina (magazine) November 2012 issue.
Gautam is currently filming for "Hamara Bajaj", "Gouravam", "Tamilselvanum Thaniyar Anjalum", "Courier Boy Kalyan" and "Aman Ki Aasha".
