Teen Wolf is an American television series developed by Jeff Davis for MTV. It is based on the 1985 film of the same name. The show's central character is Scott McCall (Tyler Posey), a high school student and social outcast who is bitten by a werewolf while looking for a dead girl in the woods. Scott attempts to maintain a normal life, keeping the fact of his being a werewolf secret from everyone, with the exception of his best friend "Stiles" Stilinski (Dylan O'Brien), who helps him through the changes in his life and body, and another mysterious werewolf, Derek Hale (Tyler Hoechlin).
"Teen Wolf" premiered on June 5, 2011, following the 2011 MTV Movie Awards. The second season premiered on June 3, 2012 after 2012 MTV Movie Awards. On July 12th, 2012, "Teen Wolf" was renewed for a third season which will include 24 episodes and the production location was moved to Los Angeles, California. The series received a generally positive response from critics, earning a score of 61 out of 100 on review site Metacritic.
Plot.
The series revolves around social outcast Scott McCall, a young lacrosse-playing student at Beacon Hills High. Scott's life drastically changes when he is bitten by a werewolf, which in turn transforms him into one of these mythical creatures. He must henceforth learn to balance his problematic new identity with his day to day teenage life. The following characters are instrumental to his struggle: Stiles, his best friend; Allison, his girlfriend, who comes from a family that partakes in werewolf hunting; and Derek, a mysterious werewolf. Throughout the show, he strives both to keep his loved ones safe and maintain the relationships and secrets he shares with each person around him. The theme of "finding your place" is a prevalent undertone that is mirrored by the pack mentality of the werewolves.
Development and production.
In June 2009, MTV announced that they would be adapting "Teen Wolf" into a new television series "with a greater emphasis on romance, horror and werewolf mythology". This is the second television adaptation of the film. An animated version aired on CBS from 1986–87. Australian director Russell Mulcahy directed the pilot presentation and serves as executive producer and in-house director. MTV's "Teen Wolf" became a re-imagining of the Michael J. Fox film from 1985 with the creator and executive producer, Jeff Davis developing a darker, sexier and edgier version than the original. Davis' desire was to make a thriller with comedic overtones with a tone more similar to that of the "The Lost Boys". Once the show was a go, Davis lined up Mulcahy, who added the horror to the project. According to Davis, it all started with an idea to do a homage to "Stand by Me", in the beginning, where the kids go out and search for a body in the woods and it's not quite what they expect. On the werewolf look they went for something a little more "Pan’s Labyrinth". Guillermo Del Toro's creatures were an inspiration, describing them as beautiful, elegant and scary, at the same time.
Casting announcements were all announced in December 2010, with the main cast being, Tyler Posey, Crystal Reed, Tyler Hoechlin, Dylan O'Brien, Holland Roden, and Colton Haynes. Posey was cast as the lead Scott McCall, a dorky high-school student who after being bitten by a werewolf, starts to notice changes in himself, Reed playing Allison Argent, a sweet new girl at school who is immediately attracted to Scott, Hoechlin playing Derek Hale, a handsome local boy who in fact is a vicious and predatory werewolf, and O'Brien playing Stiles, Scott's best friend. Roden playing Lydia Martin, Jackson Whittemore's popular and controlling girlfriend, and Haynes playing Jackson Whittemore, Scott's lacrosse teammate and rival.
Production on twelve episodes began in October 2010 in Atlanta, Georgia. MTV released a sneak peek of the first eight minutes of the pilot on their website, on May 31, 2011. "Teen Wolf" episodes are composed by music composer Dino Meneghin. As of Season 2, the opening credits of the show changed dramatically to a longer format featuring the main characters appearing whilst performing an action (such as Colton Haynes performing a lacrosse throw), along with the respective names of the actors. The new opening credits also feature the show's new theme song. In June 2012, the series received conditional approval for a California film and TV tax credit. At Comic-Con 2012, the cast confirmed that the show had been renewed for a longer third season, comprising twenty-four episodes.
Differences and similarities from films.
The original film is about a typical awkward team sports playing teenager named Scott dealing with high school and life as a werewolf. In both versions, Scott reaps the benefits of werewolf stardom, achieving confidence and acceptance from his peers with his newly discovered powers and has a close friend named Stiles. Also what the series takes from the movie that spawned it, is people know the basic idea of what Hollywood considers to be a werewolf.
There are significant differences between the film and TV series. MTV's version is a drama/comedy with a darker tone while the 1985 film was a comedy. The humor in the new series is a darker humor but pays tribute to the original feel of the movie. In promos before airing, the producers said they were influenced by Joss Whedon's high school drama series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer". Whedon's central premise was: "High school as a horror movie. And so the metaphor became the central concept behind "Buffy", and that's how I sold it." The writers have confirmed they have no intention to include vampires but other creatures may be considered. There is also a surprising amount of violence and horrific images in the new series, this includes a dead body that has been torn in half, scenes of people being burned alive, as well as multiple fight scenes that result in deaths or grievous wounds and hallucinations of torture.
In this series, Scott plays lacrosse instead of basketball. In the original, Scott inherits the werewolf trait from his father, who hid his lycanthropy from his son in the hopes that it would skip a generation, while the Scott on MTV's show gets bitten by a werewolf in the woods. In the series Scott's parents are divorced of Scott. The new Stiles wears T-shirts featuring the Beatles and the Royal Air Force roundel symbol, while the original Stiles favored shirts that included highly-offensive phrases.
Another difference is that in the original everyone knew Scott was a wolf: in the new one it's a secret.
Series Werewolf mythology.
Classifications.
In the series, there is a hierarchy in place that designates various stations under which werewolves are classified. The highest of these ranks is an Alpha werewolf. So far the only known way for a werewolf to achieve Alpha ranking is by killing another Alpha. Alphas are also the only type of werewolf that can transform humans into werewolves with their bite. Alphas are able to transform to a greater degree than Betas and Omegas, such that they can become hulking wolf-men or fully formed canine wolves depending on their physiology. Alphas' eyes glow red when agitated or in their full hirsute persona. Alphas are typically the leaders of a werewolf pack and are much stronger than all other werewolves. Due to a symbiotic relationship between pack members, the larger the pack, the greater an Alpha's strength speed and skill increases. They are often able to subdue members of their own pack, even when driven purely by werewolf instinct, as on an early full moon, simply by roaring. Some rare packs, as depicted in season 3, can be composed entirely of Alpha werewolves, with one dominant leader.
The second rank of werewolf is a Beta. These are the most common form of werewolf. Although they have heightened senses, they cannot change out of human form. Their transformation involves the growth of claws and some facial differences, such as the growth of facial hair, elongated canines, and a widening of the nose, resembling that of the 1960s television character Eddie Munster. Beta werewolves have glowing blue or yellow eyes when agitated.
The third and lowest level of werewolf is the Omega. These are lone wolves who have no desire to join a pack. Due to the symbiotic strength speed and skill werewolves receive from their pack-mates, the Omega wolf is often considered weakest of the werewolves and are often killed by werewolf hunters as easy prey. Like Betas, Omegas cannot change out of their human form. Omega werewolves have orange glowing eyes when agitated.
Other traits.
One can become a werewolf by one of two methods: being bitten by an Alpha werewolf or by having biological werewolf parents. Being bitten by an Alpha werewolf is not always successful and some bitten humans die from the bite rather than turn.
A werewolf's physical abilities are increased to an extremely high level. This allows them to do such things as: sense when a person is lying by listening to their heart rate, run incredibly fast by using a combination of both their hands and legs, excel at sports due to their heightened agility, track a person via their scent, maintain a high endurance level, and heal from wounds very quickly. The bite, if successful, also cures previous medical conditions like asthma and epilepsy. It is unknown if the bites from Beta and Omega werewolves are deadly or harmless to humans. Werewolves can come back to life if their bodies are still in tact only on the night of a new full moon, on the last night of winter. (Also known as the Worm Moon.) To come back to life, they need the light of the full moon shining on their bodies and a few drops of blood from a Alpha werewolf. If the werewolf brought back to life is an Alpha werewolf, they revert to a Beta classification.
Werewolves are highly allergic to wolfsbane and, like other supernatural creatures, are weakened by mountain ash. Werewolves are physically unable to cross into territories that have been surrounded by mountain ash, especially in its powdered state due to its potency.
The full moon brings about a natural wildness to werewolves, sometimes causing the werewolf to act out violently. New werewolves often restrain themselves during this period so as not to harm humans or draw attention to themselves. With practice, this lunar side-effect can be mentally controlled.
Symbols also have significance among werewolves. The spiral symbol represents an intent for revenge or a vendetta.
One way a werewolf can communicate is by lengthening their nails and driving them into the back of another werewolf's neck. This process will imprint a series of memories from the attacker to the attackee.
Reception.
Critical.
The series has generated a generally positive response from professional critics, with some praising it as better quality when compared to other shows by MTV. According to Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the show holds an average score of 61 out of 100, which indicates "Generally favorable reviews", based on fourteen reviews. Metacritic also lists the show as the second-highest rated MTV series by professional critics behind "Awkward." Linda Stasi, a writer from the "New York Post", awarded the series' premiere a perfect score, stating, "Not only is it really well thought out, but the good-looking kids in the show can actually act." Verne Gay from "Newsday" also reserved high praise for the show, calling it a "winner and best of all, fun." David Hinckley of "New York Daily News" commented favorably on the series, ending his review with "Werewolves, pretty girls, dumb bullies and lacrosse. What more, really, could you ask of high school?" Film critic Rex Reed is a notable fan of the series, calling it "the sexiest show on television today."
Some critics had a less positive reaction toward the first episode. Troy Patterson from "Slate" gave it a mixed review, referring to it as "light and passably witty supernatural drama." James Poniewozik from "Time" magazine also had mixed feelings towards the show, saying, "The pilot isn't bad, exactly—it's well-paced if a little dour in spots and there's some decent CW-esque banter—but it's pretty much entirely what I would have expected from any supernatural teen drama".
Following the first season finale in August 2011, Ian Grey of "indieWire" gave the series a positive review and Angel Cohn of "Television Without Pity" named it the third best new show of the summer. BuddyTV ranked "Teen Wolf" #4 on its list of 2011's best new TV shows.
Ratings.
The series' premiere attracted a total of 2.17 million viewers. After airing its third episode, "Teen Wolf" was reported to be heading into its fourth week with tremendous momentum following a 23% increase among persons 12–34, with a 1.6 in the demo. With double digit percentage gains among total viewers and key demos, "Teen Wolf" was the #1 show in its timeslot with women 12–34. The first season finale attained a series high in persons 12–34 (1.9) and 2.1 million viewers overall, as well as being first in its timeslot among teens and females 12–34.
Other Media.
Books.
In June 2012, MTV Books released the book "On Fire", by Nancy Holder. The cover art features Tyler Posey with glowing yellow eyes, with a fire red background. The book tells the story of Scott McCall and the first season of "Teen Wolf".
Comic.
A comic themed upon the show was released in September 2011 by Image Comics.
