Kyle Egan Richards (born January 11, 1969) is an American actress and television personality. She is known for returning to television with her sister, Kim Richards, on Bravo's "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills".
Early life.
Richards was born in Hollywood, California, the daughter of Kenneth E. Richards (1935–1998) and Kathleen Dugan (1938–2002). The couple separated in 1972 and Kathleen later remarried twice more. Richards' siblings are Kathy Hilton (her older half-sister from her mother's first marriage to Lawrence Avanzino; born 1959) and Kim Richards (born 1964). Nicky and Paris Hilton are her nieces.
Career.
Richards began acting in 1975. She appeared in eighteen episodes of the television series "Little House on the Prairie" as Mr. Edward's adopted daughter, Alicia Sanderson Edwards. Her sister, Kim Richards (of "Witch Mountain" fame and various other very popular Disney films), also appeared once on the series, playing Laura's friend Olga, a shy child with one leg shorter than the other, who gets fitted with a handmade wooden shoe by Laura's father, which finally enables her to run and play normally with the other children.
Throughout the 1970s Richards guest starred in several television series and acted in a few horror films: "The Car", "Eaten Alive", and "Halloween", in which she played Lindsey Wallace, one of the two children whom Laurie Strode babysits. In 1980 she appeared opposite Bette Davis and Lynn-Holly Johnson in the Disney children's horror film "The Watcher in the Woods", playing a terrorized young girl. Most of her 1980s roles were minor, and included made-for-television, direct-to-video, or other video work.
Subsequent roles include Nurse Dori in 21 episodes of the television series "ER" (1998–2006) and Lisa, a supporting character in the film "National Lampoon's Pledge This!". She has also appeared in episodes of her niece Paris Hilton's reality series "The Simple Life" and "My New BFF".
Richards appears in the Bravo reality series "The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills", which the first season aired from October 2010 through February 2011. She and her sister, Kim Richards, are both currently appearing in the show on Bravo.
She appeared in a new thriller film, "Deadly Sibling Rivalry", as Tricia, a woman left inside a freezer in which she dies, by disturbed evil twins Callie/Janna, played by Charisma Carpenter.
Personal life.
In 1988, at age 19, Richards married Guraish Aldjufrie while she was pregnant. Richards gave birth to their daughter, Farrah, but they were divorced in 1990.
Richards met second husband Mauricio Umansky in 1994. Umansky is a mix of Greek and Russian descent. He was born and raised in the Jewish religion in Mexico. Mauricio Umansky married Kyle Richards on February 4, 1996, when she was 5 months pregnant with their daughter Alexia (born June 18, 1996). The couple went on to have two more daughters: Sophia (born 2000) and Portia (born 2008).
Richards, who is of English, Irish and Welsh descent, converted to Judaism when she married Umansky.
Richards announced that she will partner with upscale fashion retailer Alene Too to launch an innovative boutique concept, Kyle by Alene Too. The concept, which opened its first location at Brighton Way and Bedford Drive in Beverly Hills in late 2012, features exciting new fashions, trends and accessories by the world’s top exclusive designers.
