Batman: The Dark Knight Returns is a limited series, later a graphic novel comprising The Dark Knight Returns, The Dark Knight Triumphant, Hunt The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Falls, written and drawn by Frank Miller, originally published by DC Comics under the title Batman: The Dark Knight in 1986. When the issues were released in a collected edition later that year, the story title for the first issue was applied to the series as a whole. "The Dark Knight Returns" tells the story of a 55-year-old Bruce Wayne who comes out of retirement to fight crime, only to face opposition from the Gotham City police force and the United States government.
A sequel (written and illustrated again by Miller), "The Dark Knight Strikes Again", was published in 2001.
Plot.
"The Dark Knight Returns" is set in a dystopian near-future version of Gotham City. No year is specified, though it has been a full decade since the last reported sighting of Batman, the current American President appears to be Ronald Reagan or someone using his image, and the Cold War is ongoing. The author also alludes to the deaths of Bruce Wayne's parents as being on the night of a movie theater showing of Tyrone Power in "The Mark of Zorro", a movie with a release date of November 8, 1940, a time when Bruce was a youth. Virtually all superheroes, with the exception of Superman (who operates covertly), have been banned by the government or otherwise driven away by a populace that envies what they represent and disapproves of them. Bruce Wayne, now 55, has voluntarily retired from crime fighting following the death (under unspecified circumstances) of Jason Todd, the second Robin. In the absence of superheroes, criminals run amok, and in Gotham a new breed of criminals, the Mutants, terrorize Gotham City.
Coming to a ten year realization, Wayne finds that he cannot deny who and what he really is as the rising rampant crime incites Wayne to don the Batman costume once again. Part of this realization is demonstrated when Wayne unconsciously shaves his mustache in the service to the face of the Batman. Batman faces Harvey Dent, who was believed to be cured after Wayne paid for plastic surgery to repair his disfigured face, but his ailment was not physical nor cosmetic but deeply rooted psychologically. Dent holds the city for ransom with a bomb. Batman confronts Dent, whose face is swathed in bandages, and realizes that his old foe, while physically cured, is still Two-Face. The city is saved, but the populace debates whether Batman's brand of vigilantism has any place in society. 
After Batman saves her from a Mutant attack, 13-year-old Carrie Kelley buys herself a knock-off Robin costume and searches for Batman to aid him. She finds Batman at the city dump where he fights the entire army of Mutants. Though Batman defeats the Mutant army, he is defeated in combat against the Mutant leader, but Kelley distracts him long enough for Batman to pacify him and Kelley pulls Batman into the Tank modified Batmobile. Kelley attends to Batman’s wounds as the vehicle drives toward the Batcave. Once home, Batman takes Carrie on as the new Robin despite the objections of his butler Alfred. With the help of retiring Commissioner James Gordon, the Mutants' leader is manipulated by Batman to escape from jail, and Batman beats him in a strategically selected location in front of the assembled gang. The Mutants disband as a result of his humiliation and follow instead the higher animal seen as the Batman and the mutants then form several smaller gangs, one of which, the "Sons of Batman," uses extremely violent methods (up to and including murder) to "purge" Gotham of its criminal element.
Meanwhile, the return of Batman stimulates The Joker to awaken from a years-long catatonic state at Arkham Asylum. With new purpose from the Dark Knight's return, the Joker convinces his psychiatrist Dr. Bartholomew Wolper that he is sane and feels remorse for his crimes. Seeking to discredit Batman, whom he has crusaded against in the media, Wolper appears with the Joker on a late-night talk show. While the police (now led by the anti-vigilante Commissioner Ellen Yindel) attack Batman, the Joker murders everyone in the television studio (including Wolper) and escapes. He finds Selina Kyle, and after finding out what he wants from her gags her, beats her, dresses her in a Wonder Woman costume, and binds her with a gold-covered rope. Batman and Robin free her and track the Joker to a county fair, where he has already murdered many people. Batman defeats Joker in a violent showdown, breaking his neck but stopping just short of killing him with surgical precision. The Joker twists his neck willingly until his spine breaks completely taunting Batman as he dies with the knowledge that he will be charged with a murder he couldn't bring himself to commit. Batman escapes, but not before another confrontation with the Gotham police and a citywide manhunt is now on for the Caped Crusader.
After Superman diverts a Russian nuclear warhead which then detonates in a desert, the United States are hit by an electromagnetic pulse, and descends into chaos during the resulting blackout. In Gotham, the "World's Greatest Detective" immediately deduces an EMP wave has hit the country and in response Batman and Robin turn the remaining Mutants and the Sons of the Batman into a non-lethal fighting force, leading them against looters and ensuring the flow of needed supplies. In the midst of nuclear winter conditions, Gotham becomes the safest city in the United States. The U.S. government sees this as an embarrassment and orders Superman to take Batman down. Oliver Queen (the former Green Arrow) predicts to Wayne that the government lacky Superman and the maverick Batman will have a final confrontation and thus Superman demands of Batman when and where they should meet. Knowing that Batman may in fact die, Wayne symbolically chooses Crime Alley, the place where the Batman was born. Counting on the fact that Superman is still weak from from his near death in the nuclear blast, and that he will limit himself to avoid unnecessary damage. Even as Superman tries to reason with him Batman strikes first. Batman utilizes his own technological inventions and mastery of hand-to-hand combat to great effect, putting up a ferocious fight. During the battle, Superman compromises Batman's war-suit but in the end Batman defeats Superman (using Green Arrow as an accomplice and a kryptonite-tipped arrow which Wayne concocted). However, Batman dies from a heart attack immediately afterward. Alfred destroys the Batcave and Wayne Manor and dies from a fatal stroke. The world now knows that Batman was Bruce Wayne and all the money and stock are gone.
After Bruce's funeral, it is revealed that his death was staged as an elaborate ruse thanks to Wayne's brilliant chemical knowledge that suspended his own life signs. Clark Kent (Superman) attends the funeral and gives Robin a knowing wink after hearing Bruce's heartbeat as he leaves the grave site, suggesting his silent approval of Batman taking his advice and of what will happen next. Some time afterward, Bruce Wayne leads Robin, Green Arrow, and the rest of his followers into the caverns beyond the Batcave and prepares to continue his fight. He acknowledges Superman's advice of being "too loud" as a legend instead of operating secretly. His plan, which will take years of training, is to build an army and to bring sense to a world plagued by something "worse than thieves and murderers". Bruce Wayne shows satisfaction that this will be a "good life – good enough".
Characters.
Even though they are not directly addressed, characterizations of Dr. Ruth, David Letterman, and Ronald Reagan (who was President of the United States at the time) appear.
Background and creation.
In the early 1980s, DC Comics promoted Dick Giordano from his position as Batman group editor to editorial director for the company. In Giordano's words, his chief contribution in this position was "getting people to work for DC who could do the work a little better". This resulted in the recruitment of writer-artist Frank Miller to create "The Dark Knight Returns". Giordano said he worked on the story's plot with Miller, he commented, "The version that was finally done was about his fourth or fifth draft. The basic storyline was the same but there were a lot of detours along the way."
Giordano dropped out of the project halfway through due to disagreements over production deadlines. Giordano said, "Frank wanted to take the time that was needed to get the job done". Comics historian Les Daniels comments that Miller's idea of ignoring deadlines was "the culmination of the quest towards artistic independence". DC published the issues of "The Dark Knight Returns" in packaging that included extra pages, square binding, and glossy paper to highlight the watercolor coloring by colorist Lynn Varley.
Miller has claimed in interviews that inspiration for the plot came from Dirty Harry, perhaps specifically the 1983 film "Sudden Impact", which like DKR focuses on an older Dirty Harry returning to fight crime after a lengthy convalescence. Miller also cites his own increasing age as a factor in the plot.
Reception.
Priced at $2.95 an issue, DC Comics promoted "The Dark Knight Returns" as a "thought-provoking action story". At the time, "Time" saw the series' depiction of a "semi-retired Batman is unsure about his crime-fighting abilities" as an example of trying to appeal to "today's skeptical readers". Despite the then-high cost of the single-issue packaging, "The Dark Knight Returns" sold well.
"The New York Times" gave the 1987 collected release of the series a negative review. Mordecai Richler felt that "The Dark Knight Returns" was not as imaginative as the work of Batman creator Bob Kane. Richler commented, "The stories are convoluted, difficult to follow and crammed with far too much text. The drawings offer a grotesquely muscle-bound Batman and Superman, not the lovable champions of old." He concluded, "If this book is meant for kids, I doubt that they will be pleased. If it is aimed at adults, they are not the sort I want to drink with."
IGN Comics ranked "The Dark Knight Returns" No. 2 on a list of the 25 greatest Batman graphic novels, second only to "", also written (though not drawn) by Miller. The website called "The Dark Knight Returns" "a true masterpiece of storytelling" with "scene after unforgettable scene."
In 2005, "Time" chose the collected edition as one of the 10 best English language graphic novels ever written.
In 2001 and 2002, DC Comics published "The Dark Knight Strikes Again", Miller's sequel to "Batman: The Dark Knight Returns". The sequel, which differs drastically in style from the original, received mixed reviews but was one of DC's biggest selling titles at the time.
Forbidden Planet placed the collected issue on top of their "50 Best of the Best Graphic Novels" list.
In April 2010, Nicolas Slayton from Comics Bulletin ranked "The Dark Knight Returns" 2nd in their Tuesday Top Ten feature's Top 10 Overrated Comic Books, just behind "Watchmen". "There is no central plot to the comic, leaving only a forced fight scene between Superman and Batman as an out of place climax to the story." "Gone are the traits that define Batman," also citing "misuse of the central character."
Writer Matthew K. Manning in the "1980s" chapter of "DC Comics Year By Year A Visual Chronicle" (2010) calls the series "arguably the best Batman story of all time."
DC Multiverse.
In the current DC Multiverse, the events of "The Dark Knight Returns" and its associated titles are designated to occur on Earth-31.
In other media.
Merchandise.
To commemorate the 10th anniversary of the graphic novel, in 1996, DC Direct released a limited edition statue of Robin aiming her slingshot with the guidance of Batman.
A series of action figures based on "The Dark Knight Returns" was released by DC Direct in 2004. Featuring Batman, Robin, Superman, and The Joker, each has a sidewalk display base that connects to the others to form a street corner. Later, a Batman and Joker Gift Set was released including both characters with new paint schemes to reflect earlier points in the story, as well as a 48-page prestige format reprint of "The Dark Knight Returns" #1.
An action figure of Batman as he appears in "The Dark Knight Returns" will be released by Mattel in 2013, as part of their "Batman Unlimited" line of action figures.
Video games.
The Batsuit featured in "The Dark Knight Returns" is available as a DLC (downloadable content) skin for the video game "".
