Jeremy John Irons (born 19 September 1948) is an English actor. After receiving classical training at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, Irons began his acting career on stage in 1969, and has since appeared in many London theatre productions including "The Winter's Tale", "Macbeth", "Much Ado About Nothing", "The Taming of the Shrew", "Godspell" and "Richard II". In 1984, he made his Broadway debut in Tom Stoppard's "The Real Thing" and received a Tony Award for Best Actor.
Irons's first major film role came in the 1981 romantic drama "The French Lieutenant's Woman", for which he received a BAFTA nomination for Best Actor. After starring in such films as "Moonlighting" (1982), "Betrayal" (1983) and "The Mission" (1986), he gained critical acclaim for portraying twin gynaecologists in David Cronenberg's psychological thriller "Dead Ringers" (1988). In 1990, Irons played accused murderer Claus von Bulow in "Reversal of Fortune", and took home multiple awards including an Academy Award for Best Actor. Other notable films have included "The House of the Spirits" (1993), "The Lion King" (1994), "Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995), "Lolita" (1997), "The Man in the Iron Mask" (1998), "The Merchant of Venice" (2004), "Being Julia" (2004), "Kingdom of Heaven" (2005), "Eragon" (2006), "Appaloosa" (2008), and "Margin Call" (2011).
Irons has also made several notable appearances on TV. He earned his first Golden Globe Award nomination for his breakout role in the ITV series "Brideshead Revisited" (1981). In 2006, Irons starred opposite Helen Mirren in the historical miniseries "Elizabeth I", for which he received a Golden Globe Award and an Emmy Award for Best Supporting Actor. Since 2011, he has been starring in the Showtime historical series "The Borgias".
In October 2011, he was nominated Goodwill Ambassador of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Early life.
Irons was born in Cowes, Isle of Wight, the son of Barbara Anne Brereton Brymer (née Sharpe; 1914–1999), a housewife, and Paul Dugan Irons (1913–1983), an accountant. His Dundee-born, paternal great-great-grandfather was one of the first Metropolitan Policemen, and later a Chartist; one of his mother's ancestors had been from County Cork, Ireland, where Irons lives as of at least February 2011. Irons has a brother, Christopher (born 1943), and a sister, Felicity Anne (born 1944). He was educated at the independent Sherborne School in Dorset, (c. 1962–66). He was the drummer and harmonica player (including a rendition of "Stairway to Heaven" on harmonica) in a four-man school band called the Four Pillars of Wisdom. They performed, in a classroom normally used as a physics lab, for the entertainment of boys compulsorily exiled from their houses for two hours on Sunday afternoons. He was also known within Abbey House as half of a comic duo performing skits on Halloween and at end-of-term house suppers.
Acting career.
Early work.
Irons trained as an actor at the Bristol Old Vic Theatre School and later became president of its fundraising appeal. He performed a number of plays, and busked on the streets of Bristol, before appearing on the London stage as John the Baptist and Judas opposite David Essex in "Godspell", which opened at the Roundhouse on 17 November 1971 before transferring to Wyndham's Theatre playing a total of 1,128 performances.
Television.
He made several appearances on British television, including the children's television series "Play Away" and as Franz Liszt in the BBC 1974 series "Notorious Woman". More significantly he starred in the 13-part adaptation of H.E. Bates' novel "Love for Lydia" for London Weekend Television (1977), and attracted attention for his key role as the pipe-smoking German student, a romantic pairing with Judi Dench in Harold Pinter's screenplay adaptation of Aidan Higgins' novel "Langrishe, Go Down" for BBC television (1978).
The role which brought him fame was that of Charles Ryder in the television adaptation of Evelyn Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited" (1981). "Brideshead" reunited him with Anthony Andrews, with whom he had appeared in "The Pallisers" seven years earlier. In the same year he starred in the film "The French Lieutenant's Woman" opposite Meryl Streep.
Almost as a 'lap of honour' after these major successes, in 1982 he played the leading role of an exiled Polish building contractor, working in the Twickenham area of South West London, in Jerzy Skolimowski's independent film "Moonlighting", widely seen on television, a performance which extended his acting range.
In 2005, Irons won both an Emmy award and a Golden Globe award for his supporting role in the TV mini-series, "Elizabeth I". A year later Irons was one of the participants in the third series of the BBC documentary series "Who Do You Think You Are?" In 2008 he played Lord Vetinari in "Terry Pratchett's The Colour of Magic", an adaptation for Sky One.
On 6 November 2008, "TV Guide" reported he would star as photographer Alfred Stieglitz with Joan Allen as painter Georgia O'Keeffe, in a Lifetime Television biopic, "Georgia O'Keeffe" (2009).
Irons also appeared in the documentary for Irish television channel TG4, "Faoi Lan Cheoil" in which he learned to play the fiddle.
On 12 January 2011, Irons was a guest-star in an episode of "" called "Mask". He played Dr. Cap Jackson, a sex therapist. He reprised the role on an episode titled "Totem" that ran on 30 March 2011.
Irons stars in the 2011 U.S. premium cable network Showtime's series "The Borgias", a highly fictionalised account of the Renaissance dynasty of that name. Irons portrays patriarch Rodrigo Borgia, better known to history as Pope Alexander VI.
Film.
Irons made his film debut in "Nijinsky" in 1980. He appeared sporadically in films during the 1980s, including the Cannes Palme d'Or winner "The Mission" in 1986, and in the dual role of twin gynecologists in David Cronenberg's "Dead Ringers" in 1988. Other films include "Danny the Champion of the World" (1989), "Reversal of Fortune" (1990), for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor, "Kafka" (1991), "Damage" (1993), "M. Butterfly" (1993), "The House of the Spirits" (1993) appearing again with Glenn Close and Meryl Streep, "Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995) co-starring Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson, Bernardo Bertolucci's "Stealing Beauty" (1996), the 1997 remake of "Lolita" and as the musketeer Aramis opposite Leonardo DiCaprio in the 1998 film version of "The Man in the Iron Mask".
Other roles include the evil wizard Profion in the film "Dungeons and Dragons" (2000) and Rupert Gould in "Longitude" (2000). He played the Über-Morlock from the film "The Time Machine" (2002). In 2004, Irons played Severus Snape in Comic Relief's "Harry Potter" parody, "Harry Potter and the Secret Chamberpot of Azerbaijan".
In 2005, he appeared in the films "Casanova" opposite Heath Ledger, and Ridley Scott's "Kingdom of Heaven". He has co-starred with John Malkovich in two films; "The Man in the Iron Mask" (1998) and "Eragon" (2006), though they did not have any scenes together in "Eragon".
In 2008, Irons co-starred with Ed Harris and Viggo Mortensen in "Appaloosa", directed by Harris. In 2011, Irons appeared alongside Kevin Spacey in the thriller "Margin Call".
Theatre.
Irons has worked with the Royal Shakespeare Company three times in 1976, 1986–87 and 2010. In 1984, Irons made his New York debut and won a Tony Award for his Broadway performance opposite Glenn Close in "The Real Thing".
After an absence from the London stage for 18 years, in 2006 he co-starred with Patrick Malahide in Christopher Hampton's stage adaptation of Sándor Márai's novel "Embers" at the Duke of York's Theatre.
He made his National Theatre debut playing Harold Macmillan in "Never So Good", a new play by Howard Brenton which opened at the Lyttelton on 19 March 2008.
In 2009 Irons appeared on Broadway opposite Joan Allen in the play "Impressionism". The play ran through 10 May 2009 at the Gerald Schoenfeld Theater.
Other ventures.
Audio.
Irons read the audio book recording of Evelyn Waugh's "Brideshead Revisited", Paulo Coelho's 'The Alchemist', the audio book recording of Vladimir Nabokov's "Lolita" (he had also appeared in the 1997 film version of the novel), and the audio book "James and the Giant Peach" by Roald Dahl.
One of his best known film roles has turned out to be lending his distinctive voice to Scar in "The Lion King" (1994) serving as the main antagonist of the film. Irons has since provided voiceovers for three Disney World attractions. He narrated the "Spaceship Earth" ride, housed in the large geodesic globe at Epcot, from October 1994 to July 2007. He was also the English narrator for the at the Walt Disney Studios Park at Disneyland Paris. He also voiced H.G. Wells in the English version of the former Disney attraction The Timekeeper. He also reprised his role as Scar in "Fantasmic".
He is also one of the readers in the 4x CD boxed set of "The Fairy Tales of Oscar Wilde", produced by Marc Sinden and sold in aid of the Royal Theatrical Fund.
He was originally to star as the Phantom in a 2006 French musical adaptation of Gaston Leroux's novel "The Phantom of the Opera", though the project was cancelled. He will be the narrator for Val Kilmer and Bill Pullman's brand-new Lewis and Clark film from Revolution Studios.
He serves as the English language version of the audio guide for Westminster Abbey in London.
Irons has served as voice-over in two big cat documentary films by National Geographic: "Eye of the Leopard", which was released in 2006, and "The Last Lions", which is a 2011 motion-picture, released on 18 February. He also currently narrates the French-produced documentary series about volcanoes,Life on Fire. The series premiered in the United States on 2 January 2013 on PBS, though the six episodes were previously released in France from 2009 to 2012 with a different, French-speaking narrator.
Music.
In 1985, Irons directed a music video for Carly Simon and her heavily promoted single, "Tired of Being Blonde". In 1994 he had a cameo role in the video for Elastica's hit single "Connection".
Irons has contributed to other musical performances, recording William Walton's "Façade" with Dame Peggy Ashcroft, Stravinsky's The Soldier's Tale conducted by the composer, and in 1987 the songs from Lerner and Loewe's "My Fair Lady" with Dame Kiri Te Kanawa, released on the Decca label. Irons sang "Be Prepared" in the film "The Lion King". He sang a selection of Noël Coward at the 1999 Last Night of the Proms in celebration of the 100th anniversary of Coward's birth. In 2003 he played Fredrik Egerman in a New York revival of Stephen Sondheim's "A Little Night Music", and two years later appeared as King Arthur in Lerner and Loewe's "Camelot" at the Hollywood Bowl. He performed the Bob Dylan song "Make You Feel My Love" on the 2006 charity album "Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars".
In 2009 Irons appeared on the Touchstone album "Wintercoast", recording a narrative introduction to the album. Recording took place in New York City in February 2009 during rehearsals for his Broadway play "Impressionism".
Personal life.
Irons married Julie Hallam 1969 and subsequently divorced. He married Irish actress Sinéad Cusack on March 28, 1978. They have two sons, Sam (b. circa 1978), who works as a photographer, and Maximilian Paul Diarmuid Irons (b. circa 1986), also an actor. Both of Irons' sons have appeared in films with their father – Sam as the eponymous hero in "Danny, Champion of the World" and Max in "Being Julia". Irons' wife and children are Catholic; of himself, he has stated, "I don’t go to church much because I don’t like belonging to a club, and I don’t go to confession or anything like that, I don’t believe in it. But I try to be aware of where I fail and I occasionally go to services. I would hate to be a person who didn’t have a spiritual side because there’s nothing to nourish you in life apart from retail therapy."
Irons owns Kilcoe Castle (which he had painted a rusty pink) in County Cork, Ireland, and has become involved in local politics there. He also has another Irish residence in the Liberties, Dublin. Irons is a patron of the Chiltern Shakespeare Company.
Irons was bestowed an Honorary-Life Membership by the University College Dublin Law Society in September 2008, in honour of his contribution to television, film, audio, music and theatre. Also in 2008, Irons was awarded an Honorary Doctorate by Southampton Solent University.
Activism.
Charity work.
At the 1991 Tony Awards, Irons was one of the few celebrities to wear the recently created red ribbon to support the fight against AIDS, and he was the first celebrity to wear it onscreen. He supports a number of other charities, including the Prison Phoenix Trust, of which he is an active patron.
Politics.
In 1998, Irons and his wife were named in the list of the biggest private financial donors to the Labour Party, a year after their return to government after 18 years in opposition. In 2004, he publicly declared his support for the Countryside Alliance, referring to the hunting ban as an "outrageous assault on civil liberties".
In 2010, Irons starred in a promotional video for "The 1billionhungry project" – a worldwide drive to attract at least one million signatures to a petition calling on international leaders to move hunger to the top of the political agenda.
Alternative medicine.
He has been criticised in the "British Medical Journal" for his fundraising activities in support of "the College of Medicine", an alternative medicine lobby group in the UK linked to Prince Charles.
