Dolly Rebecca Parton (born January 19, 1946) is an American singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, actress, author, and philanthropist, best known for her work in country music.
Beginning her career as a child performer, Parton issued a few modestly successful singles in the mid-1960s, showcasing her distinctive soprano voice. She came to greater prominence in 1967 as a featured performer on singer Porter Wagoner's weekly television program; their first duet single, a cover of Tom Paxton's "The Last Thing on My Mind", was a top-ten hit on the country singles charts, and led to several successful albums before they ended their partnership in 1974. Moving towards mainstream pop music, Parton's 1977 single "Here You Come Again" was a success on both the country and pop charts. A string of pop-country hits followed into the mid-1980s, notably recording a pair of successful albums with Linda Ronstadt and Emmylou Harris, along with the creation of the Dollywood amusement park. In the late 1990s, Parton returned to classic country/bluegrass with a series of acclaimed recordings.
She has composed over 3,000 songs, the best known of which include "I Will Always Love You" (a two-time U.S. country chart-topper for Parton, as well as an international pop hit for Whitney Houston), "Jolene", "Coat of Many Colors","9 to 5", and "My Tennessee Mountain Home". Parton is one of the most successful female country artists of all time, and with an estimated 100 million in record sales, she is also one of the best selling artists of all time in any genre.
As an actress, she starred in the movies "9 to 5", "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas", "Rhinestone", "Steel Magnolias", "Gnomeo & Juliet", "Straight Talk", "Unlikely Angel", and "Joyful Noise".
Early years.
Parton was born in Sevierville, Tennessee, the fourth of twelve children of Robert Lee Parton, a tobacco farmer, and his wife Avie Lee (née Owens). She has described her family as being "dirt poor". She outlined her family's poverty in her early songs "Coat of Many Colors" and "In the Good Old Days (When Times Were Bad)". They lived in a , one-room in Locust Ridge, just north of the Greenbrier Valley, in the Great Smoky Mountains in Sevier County, a predominantly Pentecostal area.
Music played an important role in her early life, and her grandfather was a Pentecostal "holy-roller" preacher.
Career discovery.
Parton started performing as a child, singing on local radio and television programs in the Eastern Tennessee area. By age nine, she was appearing on "The Cas Walker Show" on both WIVK Radio and WBIR-TV in Knoxville, Tennessee. At thirteen, she was recording (the single "Puppy Love") on a small Louisiana label, Goldband Records, and appeared at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville, Tennessee. It was at the Opry that she first met Johnny Cash, who encouraged her to go where her heart took her and not to care what others thought. The day after she graduated from high school in 1964, Parton moved to Nashville taking many traditional elements of folklore and popular music from East Tennessee with her.
Parton's initial success came as a songwriter, having signed with Combine Publishing shortly after her arrival in Nashville; with her frequent songwriting partner, her uncle Bill Owens, she wrote a number of charting singles during this timeframe, including two top ten hits: Bill Phillips' 1966 record "Put it off Until Tomorrow", and Skeeter Davis' 1967 hit "Fuel to the Flame". Her songs were also covered by a number of other artists, including Kitty Wells and Hank Williams Jr during this period.
Parton signed with Monument Records in late 1965, where she was initially pitched as a bubblegum pop singer; she released a string of singles, though the only one that charted, "Happy, Happy Birthday Baby", nonetheless did not crack the Billboard Hot 100.
Though she expressed a desire to record country material, Monument resisted, thinking her unique voice was not suited to the genre. It was only after her composition, "Put It Off Until Tomorrow," as recorded by Bill Phillips (and with Parton, uncredited, on harmony), went to number six on the country music charts in 1966, that the label relented and allowed her to record country. Her first country single, "Dumb Blonde" (one of the few songs during this era, that she recorded but did not write), reached number twenty-four on the country music charts in early 1967, followed the same year with "Something Fishy", which went to number seventeen. The two songs anchored her first full-length album, "Hello, I'm Dolly".
Marriage.
On May 30, 1966, she and Carl Thomas Dean (born in Nashville, Tennessee) were married in Ringgold, Georgia. She had met Dean at the Wishy-Washy Laundromat two years earlier on her first day in Nashville. His first words to her were: "Y'all gonna get sunburnt out there, little lady."
Dean, who runs an asphalt road-surface-paving business in Nashville, has always shunned publicity and rarely accompanies her to any events. According to Parton, he has only ever seen her perform once. However, she has also commented in interviews that, although it appears they do not spend much time together, it is simply that nobody sees him. She also commented on Dean's romantic side claiming that he will often do spontaneous things to surprise her and sometimes even writes her poems.
The couple partly raised several of Parton's younger siblings at their home in Nashville, leading her nieces and nephews to refer to her as "Aunt Granny". She has no children of her own. Parton is also the godmother of actress and singer Miley Cyrus.
On May 30, 2011, they celebrated their 45th anniversary. Later, she said, "We're really proud of our marriage. It's the first for both of us. And the last."
Music career.
1967–75: Country music success.
In 1967, country entertainer Porter Wagoner invited Parton to join his organization, offering her a regular spot on his weekly syndicated television program "The Porter Wagoner Show", as well as in his road show.
As documented in her 1994 autobiography, initially, much of Wagoner's audience was unhappy that Norma Jean, the performer whom Parton had replaced, had left the show, and was reluctant to accept Parton (sometimes chanting loudly for Norma Jean from the audience). With Wagoner's assistance, however, Parton was eventually accepted. Wagoner also convinced his label, RCA Victor, to sign Parton. RCA decided to protect their investment by releasing her first single as a duet with Wagoner. That song, a cover of Tom Paxton's "The Last Thing on My Mind", released in late 1967, reached the country top ten in January 1968, launching a six-year streak of virtually uninterrupted top-ten singles for the pair.
Parton's first solo single for RCA, "Just Because I'm a Woman", was released in the summer of 1968 and was a moderate chart hit, reaching number seventeen. For the remainder of the decade, none of her solo efforts – even "In the Good Old Days (When Times Were Bad)", which later became a standard – were as successful as her duets with Wagoner. The duo was named "Vocal Group of the Year" in 1968 by the Country Music Association, but Parton's solo records were continually ignored. Wagoner and Parton were both frustrated by her lack of solo success, because he had a significant financial stake in her future: as of 1969, he was her co-producer and owned nearly half of Owepar, the publishing company Parton had founded with Bill Owens.
By 1970, both Parton and Wagoner had grown frustrated by her lack of solo chart success, and Porter had her record Jimmie Rodgers' "Mule Skinner Blues", a gimmick that worked. The record shot to number three on the charts, followed closely, in February 1971, by her first number-one single, "Joshua." For the next two years, she had a number of solo hits – including her signature song "Coat of Many Colors" (number four in 1971) – in addition to her duets. Top-twenty singles during this period included "The Right Combination", "Burning the Midnight Oil" (both duets with Porter Wagoner, 1971), "Lost Forever in Your Kiss" (with Wagoner), "Touch Your Woman (1972), "If Teardrops Were Pennies" (with Wagoner), "My Tennessee Mountain Home" and "Travelin' Man" (1973). Though her solo singles and the Wagoner duets were successful, her biggest hit of this period would be "Jolene". Released in late 1973, the song topped the singles chart in February 1974, and reached the lower regions of Billboard's Hot 100 (it eventually also charted in the UK, reaching No. 7 in 1976, representing Parton's first UK success).
Parton and Wagoner performed their last duet concert in April 1974, and she ceased appearing on his TV show in mid-1974, though they remained affiliated, with him helping to produce her records through 1975. The pair continued to release duet albums, their final release being 1975's "Say Forever You'll Be Mine".
In 1974, her song, "I Will Always Love You", written about her professional break from Wagoner, went to number one on the country music charts. Around the same time, Elvis Presley indicated that he wanted to cover the song. Parton was interested until Presley's manager, Colonel Tom Parker, told her that it was standard procedure for the songwriter to sign over half of the publishing rights to any song Elvis recorded. Parton refused, and that decision is credited with helping to make her many millions of dollars in royalties from the song over the years.
Parton had three number-one singles in 1974 ("Jolene", "I Will Always Love You" and "Love is Like a Butterfly"), and a further chart-topper in 1975 with "The Bargain Store".
1976–86: Branching out into pop music.
From 1974 to 1980, she consistently charted in the country Top 10, with no fewer than eight singles reaching number one. Parton had her own syndicated-television variety show, "Dolly!" (1976–1977). During this period, many performers, including Rose Maddox, Kitty Wells, Olivia Newton-John, Emmylou Harris, and Linda Ronstadt, covered her songs, and her siblings Randy and Stella both received recording contracts of their own.
It was also during this period that Parton began to embark on a high-profile crossover campaign, attempting to aim her music in a more mainstream direction and increase her visibility outside of the confines of country music. In 1976, she signed with the Los Angeles public-relations firm Katz-Gallin-Morey, working closely with Sandy Gallin, who served as her personal manager for the next twenty-five years.
With her 1976 album "All I Can Do", co-produced by herself with Porter Wagoner, Parton began taking more of an active role in production, and began specifically aiming her music in a more mainstream, pop direction. Her first entirely self-produced effort, 1977's "New Harvest ... First Gathering", highlighted Parton's pop sensibilities, both in terms of choice of songs - the album contained covers of the pop and R&B classics "My Girl" and "Higher and Higher" – and the album's production. While receiving generally favorable reviews, however, the album did not achieve the crossover success Parton had hoped for. Though it topped the country albums charts, it stalled at No. 71 on the pop albums chart; the album's single, "Light of a Clear Blue Morning" only reached No. 87 on the Hot 100.
After "New Harvest"'s disappointing chart performance, Parton turned to high profile pop producer Gary Klein for her next album. The result, 1977's "Here You Come Again", became her first million-seller, topping the country albums chart and reaching No. 20 on the pop albums chart; the Barry Mann-Cynthia Weil-penned title track topped the country singles chart, and became Parton's first top-ten single on the pop charts (reaching number three). A second single, the double A-sided single "Two Doors Down"/"It's All Wrong, But It's All Right" also topped the country singles chart and crossed over to the pop top twenty. For the remainder of the 1970s and into the early 1980s, many of Parton's subsequent singles charted on both pop and country charts, simultaneously. Her albums during this period were developed specifically for pop-crossover success.
In 1978, Parton won a Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance for her "Here You Come Again" album. She continued to have hits with "Heartbreaker" (1978), "Baby I'm Burning" and "You're the Only One" (both 1979), all of which charted in the pop singles Top 40, and all of which also topped the country-singles chart; 1979's "Sweet Summer Lovin'" became the first Parton single in two years to not top the country singles chart (though it still nonetheless reached the top ten). During this period, Parton's visibility continued to increase, with television appearances in 1977, 1978 and 1979. A highly publicized candid interview on a "Barbara Walters Special" in December 1977 (timed to coincide with "Here You Come Again"'s release) was followed by appearances in 1978 on Cher's ABC television special, and her own joint special with Carol Burnett on CBS, "Carol and Dolly in Nashville". She also served as one of three co-hosts (along with Roy Clark and Glen Campbell) on the CBS special "Fifty Years of Country Music". In 1979, Parton hosted the NBC special "The Seventies: An Explosion of Country Music", performed live at the Ford Theatre in Washington, D.C., and whose audience included President Jimmy Carter.
Parton's commercial success continued to grow during 1980, with three number-one hits in a row: the Donna Summer-written "Starting Over Again", "Old Flames Can't Hold a Candle to You", and "9 to 5", which topped the country and pop charts in early 1981.
With less time to spend songwriting as she focused on a burgeoning film career, during the early 1980s Parton recorded a larger percentage of material from noted pop songwriters, such as Barry Mann and Cynthia Weil, Rupert Holmes, Gary Portnoy and Carole Bayer Sager.
"9 to 5", the theme song to the feature film "9 to 5" (1980) Parton starred in along with Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin, not only reached number one on the country charts, but also, in February 1981, reached number one on the pop and the adult-contemporary charts, giving her a triple-number-one hit. Parton became one of the few female country singers to have a number-one single on the country and pop charts simultaneously. It also received a nomination for an Academy Award for Best Original Song.
Parton's singles continued to appear consistently in the country Top 10: between 1981 and 1985, she had 12 Top 10 hits; half of those were number-one singles. Parton continued to make inroads on the pop charts as well with a re-recorded version of "I Will Always Love You" from the feature film "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" (1982) scraping the Top 50 that year and her duet with Kenny Rogers, "Islands in the Stream" (written by the Bee Gees and produced by Barry Gibb), spent two weeks at number one in 1983. Other chart hits during this period included Parton's chart-topping cover of the 1969 First Edition hit "But You Know I Love You" and "The House of the Rising Sun" (both 1981), "Single Women", "Heartbreak Express" and "Hard Candy Christmas" (1982) and 1983's "Potential New Boyfriend", which was accompanied by one of Parton's first music videos, and which also reached the U.S. dance charts.
She also continued to explore new business and entertainment ventures such as her Dollywood theme park, that opened in 1986 in Pigeon Forge, Tennessee.
By the mid-1980s, her record sales were still relatively strong, with "Save the Last Dance for Me", "Downtown", "Tennessee Homesick Blues" (all 1984); "Real Love" (another duet with Kenny Rogers), "Don't Call It Love" (both 1985); and "Think About Love" (1986) all reaching the country-singles Top 10. ("Tennessee Homesick Blues" and "Think About Love" reached number one. "Real Love" also reached number one on the country-singles chart and also became a modest pop-crossover hit). However, RCA Records did not renew her contract after it expired that year, and she signed with Columbia Records in 1987.
1987–94: Return to country roots.
Along with Emmylou Harris and Linda Ronstadt, she released the decade-in-the-making "Trio" (1987) to critical acclaim. The album strongly revitalized Parton's somewhat stagnant music career, spending five weeks at number one on Billboard's Country Albums chart, selling several million copies and producing four Top 10 country hits including Phil Spector's "To Know Him Is to Love Him", which went to number one. "Trio" won the Grammy Award for Best Country Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal and was nominated for a Grammy Award for Album of the Year. In 1987, she revived her television variety show, "Dolly".
After a further attempt at pop success with 1987's "Rainbow", Parton refocused on recording country material. "White Limozeen" (1989) produced two number-one hits in "Why'd You Come in Here Lookin' Like That" and "Yellow Roses". Although it looked like Parton's career had been revived, it was actually just a brief revival before contemporary country music came in the early 1990s and moved all veteran artists out of the charts.
A duet with Ricky Van Shelton, "Rockin' Years" (1991) reached number one but Parton's greatest commercial fortune of the decade came when Whitney Houston recorded "I Will Always Love You" for the soundtrack of the feature film "The Bodyguard" (1992); both the single and the album were massively successful.
Parton's soundtrack album from her own 1992 film, "Straight Talk," however was less successful, though her 1993 album "Slow Dancing with the Moon" won critical acclaim, and did well on the charts, reaching No. 4 on the country albums charts, and No. 16 on the Billboard 200 albums charts.
She recorded "The Day I Fall in Love" as a duet with James Ingram for the feature film "Beethoven's 2nd" (1993). The songwriters (Sager, Ingram, and Clif Mangess) were nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song and Parton and Ingram performed the song on the awards telecast.
Similar to her earlier collabrative album with Harris and Ronstadt, Parton released "Honky Tonk Angels" in the fall of 1993 with Loretta Lynn and Tammy Wynette. It was certified as Gold Album by the Recording Industry Association of America and helped revive both Wynette's and Lynn's careers.
Also in 1994, Parton contributed the song "You Gotta Be My Baby" to the AIDS benefit album "Red Hot + Country" produced by the Red Hot Organization.
A live acoustic album, "," featuring stripped down versions of some of Parton's hits, as well as a number of traditional songs, was released in late 1994.
1995–present.
Parton's recorded output during the mid- to late-1990s remained steady, though somewhat eclectic.
Her 1995 re-recording of "I Will Always Love You" (performed as a duet with Vince Gill), from her album "Something Special" won the Country Music Association's Vocal Event of the Year Award for Parton and Gill.
The following year, "Treasures", an album of covers of 1960s and '70s hits was released, and featured a diverse collection of material, including songs by Mac Davis, Pete Seeger, Kris Kristofferson, Cat Stevens, Neil Young, and Joni Mitchell. (A number of the acts who wrote or initially popularized the songs appeared on the album). Parton's recording of Stevens' "Peace Train" was later remixed and released as a dance single, reaching Billboard's dance singles chart.
Her 1998 country-rock album "Hungry Again" was made up entirely of her own compositions. Though neither of the album's two singles, "(Why Don't More Women Sing) Honky Tonk Songs" and "Salt in my Tears", charted, videos for both songs received significant airplay on CMT.
A second and more contemporary collaboration with Harris and Ronstadt, "Trio II" (1999), was released and its cover of Neil Young's "After the Gold Rush" won a Grammy Award for Best Country Collaboration with Vocals. Parton was also inducted into the Country Music Hall of Fame in 1999.
She recorded a series of bluegrass-inspired albums, beginning with "The Grass Is Blue" (1999), winning a Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album, and "Little Sparrow" (2001), with its cover of Collective Soul's "Shine" winning a Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance. The third, "Halos & Horns" (2002) included a bluegrass version of the Led Zeppelin classic "Stairway to Heaven".
Parton released "Those Were The Days" (2005), her interpretation of hits from the folk-rock era of the late 1960s through the early 1970s. It featured such classics as John Lennon's "Imagine", Cat Stevens's "Where Do the Children Play?", Tommy James's "Crimson and Clover", and Pete Seeger's anti-war song "Where Have All the Flowers Gone?".
Parton earned her second Academy Award nomination for Best Original Song for "Travelin' Thru," which she wrote specifically for the feature film "Transamerica" (2005). Because of the song's theme of uncritical acceptance of a transgender woman, Parton received death threats. She also returned to number one on the country charts later in 2005 by lending her distinctive harmonies to the Brad Paisley ballad, "When I Get Where I'm Goin'".
In September 2007, Parton released her first single from her own record company, Dolly Records, titled, "Better Get to Livin'," which eventually peaked at number forty-eight on the Billboard's Hot Country Songs chart. It was followed by the studio album, "Backwoods Barbie," which was released February 26, 2008, and reached number two on the country charts. The album's debut at number seventeen on the all-genre Billboard 200 albums chart has been the highest in her career. "Backwoods Barbie" produced four additional singles, including the title track, which was written as part of her score for "9 to 5: The Musical", an adaptation of her feature film "Nine to Five".
After the sudden death of Michael Jackson, whom Parton knew personally, she released a video in which she somberly told of her feelings on Jackson and his death.
On October 27, 2009, Parton released a four-CD box set titled "Dolly" that features 99 songs and spans most of her career. She released her second live DVD and album, "Live From London" in October 2009, which was filmed during her sold out 2008 concerts at London's O2 Arena. She is also working on a dance-oriented album, "Dance with Dolly", which she hopes to release in 2010.
Longtime friend Billy Ray Cyrus, singer of Brother Clyde, released their self-titled debut album on August 10, 2010. Parton is featured on "The Right Time," which she co-wrote with Cyrus and Morris Joseph Tancredi.
She said in 2010 that she would like to start recording a country-dance album in November, and that it should be set for release in 2011. On January 6, 2011, Parton announced her new album would be titled, "Better Day". In February 2011, she announced that she would embark on the Better Day World Tour on July 17, 2011, with shows in northern Europe and the U.S. The album's lead-off single, "Together You and I," was released on May 23, 2011, and "Better Day" was released on June 28, 2011.
In 2011, Parton voiced the character Dolly Gnome in the animated film "Gnomeo and Juliet".
On February 11, 2012, after the sudden death of Whitney Houston, Dolly Parton stated, "Mine is only one of the millions of hearts broken over the death of Whitney Houston. I will always be grateful and in awe of the wonderful performance she did on my song, and I can truly say from the bottom of my heart, "Whitney, I will always love you. You will be missed."
In 2013, Parton joined Lulu Roman (of Hee Haw fame) for a recording of "I Will Always Love You" for Roman's album At Last.
In concert and on tour.
Parton toured extensively from the late 1960s until the early 1990s. In the 1960s and early 1970s, Parton toured as a member of Porter Wagoner's road show, as well as with a number of other country musicians, including George Jones and Linda Ronstadt. Upon leaving Wagoner's organization in 1974, Parton formed her own "Travelin' Family Band", made up largely of siblings, cousins and other family members, and touring with a number of other acts, including Willie Nelson and Mac Davis. In 1976, she disbanded the Travlin' Family Band, in order to form a new band, Gypsy Fever, composed of seasoned musicians who had more of a rock sensibility, in order to support her impending crossover. (One original member of Gypsy Fever, backing vocalist Richard Dennison, has remained with Parton's organization through the early 2010s, serving as a supporting vocalist, as well as the vocal arranger for Parton's band.) With Gypsy Fever, Parton toured as a headline act in 1977, 1978 and 1979, to promote her albums, "New Harvest - First Gathering", "Here You Come Again", "Heartbreaker", and "Great Balls of Fire". In the 1980s, movie roles and other ventures caused Parton to tour less than she had done during the previous decade. In 1982 and into early 1983, she toured to support her "Heartbreak Express" album, but health problems resulted in the cancellation of a number of that tour's dates. (Parton's March 1983 performance at London's Dominion Theatre from this tour was filmed and broadcast as a television special in the U.S.) From 1984 to 1985, she toured alongside Kenny Rogers for the "Real Love Tour". She continued touring in 1986 with the "Think About Love Tour", and 1989 for the "White Limozeen Tour." Plans for a brief tour with Emmylou Harris and Linda Ronstadt to promote their 1987 collaboration "Trio" fell through, due to the three artists' conflicting schedules, as well as Parton's prior commitment to her 1987-88 ABC TV series. Parton's only tour in the 1990s was in support of her "Eagle When She Files" album in 1991 and into1992. In 2002 she returned to the concert stage; she later went on the "Backwoods Barbie Tour" in 2008 promoting "Backwoods Barbie".
Dollywood Foundation Shows.
From the early 1990s through 2001, her concert appearances were primarily limited to one weekend a year at Dollywood to benefit her Dollywood Foundation. The concerts normally followed a theme (similar to a Legends in Concert or, for example, a "fifties-music"- concert). They have also included holiday shows during the Christmas season.
Halos & Horns Tour.
After a decade-long absence from touring, Parton decided to return in 2002 with the Halos & Horns Tour, an 18-city, intimate club tour to promote "Halos & Horns" (2002). House of Blues Entertainment, Inc. produced the tour and it sold out all its U.S. and European dates (her first in two decades).
Hello, I'm Dolly Tour.
She returned to mid-sized-stadium venues in 2004 with her 36-city, U.S. and Canadian Hello, I'm Dolly Tour, a glitzier, more-elaborate stage show than two years earlier. With nearly 140,000 tickets sold, it was the tenth-biggest country tour of the year and grossed more than $6 million.
The Vintage Tour.
In late 2005, Parton completed a 40-city tour with The Vintage Tour promoting her new "Those Were the Days" (2005).
An Evening with Dolly Parton.
Parton scheduled mini concerts in late 2006 throughout the U.S. and Canada as a gear-up to her 17-city, 21-date An Evening with Dolly Parton. Running from March 6 to April 3, 2007, this was her first world tour in many years and her first tour in the United Kingdom since 2002.
The tour sold out in every European city and gained positive reviews. It grossed just over $16 million. The most-noted feature of the shows, despite Parton being 60, was that most in attendance had never seen her in concert before. This, coupled with Parton's European popularity, led to a rapturous reception whenever she took to the stage.
Backwoods Barbie Tour.
In 2008, Parton went on the Backwoods Barbie Tour. It was set to begin in the U.S. (February–April 2008) to coincide with the release of "Backwoods Barbie" (2008), her first mainstream-country album in 17 years. However, because of back problems she postponed all U.S. dates. The tour started March 28, 2008, with 13 U.S. dates, followed by 17 European shows.
She returned to the U.S. with a concert at Humphrey's By The Bay in San Diego, California, on August 1, 2008. She performed her Backwoods Barbie Tour on August 3, 2008, at the Greek Theatre in Los Angeles, California, to a sold-out crowd and standing ovations. From August 1 to November 1, she has scheduled 16 dates on both the east and west coasts of the U.S.
Better Day World Tour.
In 2011, Parton embarked on the Better Day World Tour to promote her 41st studio album, "Better Day" (2011). The tour began on July 17 and ended on December 1. With 49 shows, she visited the United States, Northern Europe, and Australia. The ticket sales were nearly 275,000 and the overall gross was $34 million, making the tour Parton's most successful. This tour was her first to visit Australia in 30 years.
Songwriting.
Parton is a prolific songwriter, having begun by writing country-music songs with strong elements of folk music, based upon her upbringing in humble mountain surroundings, and reflecting her family's evangelical-Christian background. Her songs "Coat of Many Colors", "I Will Always Love You" and "Jolene" have become classics in the field, as have a number of others. As a songwriter, she is also regarded as one of country music's most-gifted storytellers, with many of her narrative songs based on persons and events from her childhood. On November 4, 2003, Dolly Parton was honored as a BMI Icon at the 2003 BMI Country Awards. She has earned over 35 BMI Pop and Country Awards throughout her prolific songwriting career. In 2001, she was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame.
In a 2009 interview with CNN's "Larry King Live", Parton indicated that she had written "at least 3,000" songs, having written seriously since the age of seven. Parton went on to say that she writes something every day, be it a song or an idea.
Compositions in films and television and covers.
Parton's songwriting has been featured prominently in several films.
In addition to the title song for "Nine to Five" (1980), she also recorded a second version of "I Will Always Love You" for "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" (1982). The second version was another number-one country hit and also managed to reach the pop charts going to number 53 in the U.S.
"I Will Always Love You" has been covered by many country artists, including Ronstadt, on "Prisoner In Disguise" (1975); Kenny Rogers, on "Vote for Love" (1996); and LeAnn Rimes, on ' (1997). Whitney Houston performed it on ' (1992) film soundtrack and her version became the best-selling hit ever both written and performed by a female vocalist, with worldwide sales of over twelve million copies. In addition, the song has been translated into Italian and performed by the Welsh opera singer Katherine Jenkins, a fact referred to by Dolly herself in the Birmingham (UK) concert of the 'Backwoods Barbie' Tour.
As a songwriter, Parton has twice been nominated for an Academy Award for Best Original Song, for "9 to 5" (1980) and "Travelin' Thru" (2005). "Travelin' Thru" did win as Best Original Song award at the Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards (2005). The song was also nominated for both the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song (2005) and the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award (also known as the Critics' Choice Awards) for Best Song (2005).
A cover version of "Love Is Like A Butterfly", recorded by singer Clare Torry, was used as the theme music for the British TV show "Butterflies".
"American Idol" appearance.
The music-competition, reality-television show "American Idol" (since 2002) has weekly themes and the April 1–2, 2008, episodes' theme was "Dolly Parton Songs" with the nine then-remaining contestants each singing a Parton composition. Parton participated as a "guest mentor" to the contestants and also performed "Jesus and Gravity" (from "Backwoods Barbie" and released as a single in March 2008) receiving a standing ovation from the studio audience.
"9 to 5: The Musical".
Parton wrote the score (and Patricia Resnick wrote the book) for "", a musical-theatre adaptation of Parton's feature film "Nine to Five" (1980). The musical ran at the Ahmanson Theatre, Los Angeles, California, in Fall 2008.
It opened on Broadway at the Marquis Theatre in New York City, on April 30, 2009, to mixed reviews. The title track of her "Backwoods Barbie" album (2008) was written for the musical's character Doralee. Though her score (as well as the musical debut of actress Allison Janney) was praised, the show struggled and closed on September 6, 2009 after 24 previews and 148 performances. Parton received nominations for Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Music, Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Lyrics as well as a nomination for Tony Award for Best Original Score.
Developing the musical was not an overnight process. According to a broadcast of the public-radio program Studio 360 (October 29, 2005), in October 2005 Parton was in the midst of composing the songs for a Broadway musical-theatre adaptation of the film. In late June 2007, "9 to 5: the Musical" was read for industry presentations. The readings starred Megan Hilty, Allison Janney, Stephanie J. Block, Bebe Neuwirth and Marc Kudisch.
Ambassador Theatre Group announced a 2012 UK tour for "Dolly Parton's ", commencing at Manchester Opera House, on October 12, 2012.
Musician.
Parton possesses a soprano vocal range. She plays the autoharp, banjo, drums, dulcimer, fiddle, guitar, harmonica, flute, pennywhistle and piano. She began composing songs at the age of four, her mother often writing down the music as she heard Parton singing around the house. Parton often describes her talent as having "the gift of rhyme".
Acting career.
During the mid-1970s, Parton wanted to expand her audience base. Although her first attempt, the television variety show "Dolly!" (1976–1977), had high ratings, it lasted only one season, with Parton requesting to be released from her contract because of the stress it was causing her vocal cords. (She later tried a second television variety show, also titled "Dolly" (1987–1988); it also lasted only one season.)
Film.
In her first feature film Parton portrayed a secretary, in a leading role with Jane Fonda and Lily Tomlin in the comedy film "9 to 5" (1980). She received nominations for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy and a Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actress.
Parton also wrote and recorded with the film's title song. It received nominations for an Academy Award for Best Song and a Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song. Released as a single, the song won both the Grammy Award for Best Female Country Vocal Performance and the Grammy Award for Best Country Song. It also reached number one on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart and in was placed number 78 on the "AFI's 100 Years...100 Songs" list released by the American Film Institute in 2004.
"9 to 5" also became a major box office success, grossing over $3.9 million its opening weekend, and over $103 million worldwide. Parton was also named Top Female Box Office Star by the "Motion Picture Herald" in both 1981 and 1982 due to the film's success.
In late 1981, Parton began filming her second film, the musical film "The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas" (1982), co-starring Burt Reynolds and Dom DeLuise. The film earned her a second nomination for a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy. The film was greeted with positive critical reviews and became a commercial success, earning over $69 million worldwide.
After a two-year hiatus from films, Parton was teamed with Sylvester Stallone for "Rhinestone" (1984). A comedy film about a county music star's efforts to mold an unknown into a music sensation, the film was a critical and finanical failure, making just over $21 million on a $28 million budget.
The failure of "Rhinestone" saw the decline of Parton's film career. In 1989, she returned to films with the comedy-drama film "Steel Magnolias" (1989). Based on a play of the same name by Robert Harling, the film co-starred Sally Field, Shirley MacLaine, Daryl Hannah, Olympia Dukakis, and newcomer Julia Roberts. The film was popular with critics and audiences, grossing over $95 million inside the United States.
Parton starred along with James Woods in the comedy film "Straight Talk" in 1992. The film received mixed reviews, and grossed a mild $21 million at the box office. She then tried to launch a television series titled "The Dolly Show", but the project never bore fruit. Parton made a cameo appearance as herself in the comedy film "The Beverly Hillbillies" (1993), an adaptation of the long-running television situation comedy of the same name (1962–1971).
She appeared as an overprotective mother in the comedy film "Frank McKlusky, C.I." (2002), with Dave Sheridan, Cameron Richardson and Randy Quaid. Parton made a cameo appearance in the comedy film "", starring Sandra Bullock. She was featured in "The Book Lady" (2008), a documentary film about her campaign for children's literacy.
Parton had expected to repeat her television role as Hannah's godmother in the musical comedy film "" (2009), but the character was omitted from the final screenplay.
She had a voice role in the comedy family film "Gnomeo & Juliet" (2011), a computer-animated film with gnomes about William Shakespeare's tragedy play "Romeo and Juliet" (16th century).
Parton co-starred with Queen Latifah in the musical film "Joyful Noise" (2012), which finished filming in April 2011. Parton plays a choir director's widow who joins forces with Latifah's character, a mother of two teens, to save the Pacashau, Georgia, gospel choir after the death of her husband. The film was released in theaters on January 13, 2012.
Television.
In addition to her performing appearances on "The Porter Wagoner Show" in the 1960s and into the 1970s; her two self-titled television variety shows in the 1970s and 1980s; and on "American Idol" in 2008 and other guest appearances, Parton has also acted in television roles. In 1979 she received an Emmy award nomination as "Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Variety Program" for her guest appearance in a Cher special.
During the 1980s, she starred in two popular television concert specials: 1983's "Dolly in London", filmed live in London's Dominion Theatre, and "Dolly & Kenny: Real Love", a 1985 concert special with Kenny Rogers, filmed during their joint concert tour. (Parton and Rogers also filmed a popular 1984 holiday special for CBS, and the two teamed up with Willie Nelson in 1989 for another concert special "Something Inside So Strong.")
Parton has appeared as a frequent presenter and performer on a number of awards shows, from the 1960s through the 2010s, and she remains a popular guest on a number of talk shows.
She starred in the television movies "A Smoky Mountain Christmas" (1986); "Wild Texas Wind" (1991); "Unlikely Angel" (1996), portraying an angel sent back to earth following a deadly car crash; and "Blue Valley Songbird" (1999), where her character lives through her music.
Parton has also done voice work for animation for television series, playing herself in the "Alvin and the Chipmunks" (episode "Urban Chipmunk", 1983) and the character Katrina Eloise "Murph" Murphy in "The Magic School Bus" (episode "The Family Holiday Special", 1994).
Parton has guest starred in a number of sitcoms, including a 1990 episode of "Designing Women" (episode "The First Day of the Last Decade of the Entire Twentieth Century") as herself, the guardian movie star of Charlene's baby. She also appeared in the situation comedy series "Reba" (episode "Reba's Rules of Real Estate") portraying a real-estate agency owner, and on "The Simpsons" (episode "Sunday, Cruddy Sunday", 1999). She also appeared as herself in 2000 on the Halloween episode of Bette Midler's sitcom "Bette," and episode 14 of the Fox sitcom "Babes" (which was produced by Sandollar Productions, Parton and Sandy Gallin's joint production company).
She also made cameo appearances on the Disney Channel as "Aunt Dolly" visiting Hannah and her family in the fellow Tennessean Miley Cyrus's series "Hannah Montana" (episodes "Good Golly, Miss Dolly", 2006, "I Will Always Loathe You", 2007, and "Kiss It All Goodbye", 2010). The role came about because of her real-life relationship as Cyrus's godmother. She was nominated for an Outstanding Guest Actress in Comedy Series.
Businesses.
In 1998, Nashville Business ranked her as the wealthiest country-music star.
The Dollywood Company.
Parton invested much of her earnings into business ventures in her native East Tennessee, notably Pigeon Forge. She is a co-owner of The Dollywood Company, which operates the theme park Dollywood (a former Silver Dollar City), a dinner theatre, Dolly Parton's Dixie Stampede, and the waterpark Dollywood's Splash Country, all in Pigeon Forge.
Dollywood is ranked as the 24th-most-popular theme park in the U.S., with about three million visitors annually. The area is a thriving tourist attraction, drawing visitors from large parts of the Southeastern and Midwestern United States. This region, like most areas of Appalachia, had suffered economically for decades; Parton's business investment has helped revitalize the area.
The Dixie Stampede business also has venues in Branson, Missouri, and Myrtle Beach, South Carolina. A former Dixie Stampede location in Orlando, Florida closed in January 2008 after the business's land and building were sold to a developer. Starting in June 2011, the Myrtle beach location became Pirates Voyage Fun, Feast & Adventure; Parton appeared for the opening, and the South Carolina General Assembly declared June 3, 2011, Dolly Parton Day.
On January 19, 2012, Parton's 66th birthday, Gaylord Opryland along with Dolly Parton and her Dollywood Co. announced plans to open a $50 million water and snow park, a fun and family-friendly travel destination that's open each month of the year in Nashville, Tennessee.
Film and television production company.
Parton is a co-owner of Sandollar Productions with Sandy Gallin, her former manager. A film-and-television-production company, it produced the "" (1989), which won an Academy Award for Best Documentary (Feature); the television series "Babes" (1990–1991) and "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" (1997–2003); and the feature films "Father of the Bride" (1991), "Father of the Bride: Part II" (1995) "Straight Talk" (1992) (in which Parton also starred), "Sabrina" (1995), among other shows. In a 2009 interview singer Connie Francis revealed that Dolly had been contacting her for years in an attempt to film the singer's life story. Francis turned down Parton's offers as she was already in negotiations with singer Gloria Estefan to produce the film, a collaboration now ended.
Other businesses.
Briefly from 1987, Parton owned Dockside Plantation, a restaurant in the upscale neighborhood of Hawaii Kai in Honolulu, Hawaii. She also had a "signature line" of wigs from Revlon in the early 1990s. The best-selling style, "Dolly's Own", is still sold by Revlon, albeit under a new style name.
Philanthropic efforts.
Since the mid-1980s, Parton has supported many charitable efforts, particularly in the area of literacy, primarily through her Dollywood Foundation.
Dolly Parton's Imagination Library.
Her literacy program, "Dolly Parton's Imagination Library", a part of the Dollywood Foundation, mails one book per month to each enrolled child from the time of their birth until they enter kindergarten. It began in Sevier County but has now been replicated in 566 counties across 36 U.S. states (as well as in Canada). In December 2007 it expanded to Europe with the South Yorkshire town of Rotherham, United Kingdom, being the first British locality to receive the books. The program distributes more than 2.5 million free books to children annually.
In 2006 Parton published a cookbook "Dolly's Dixie Fixin's: Love, Laughter and Lots of Good Food". The net profits support the Dollywood Foundation.
Other philanthropy.
Dollywood has been noted for bringing jobs and tax revenues to a previously depressed region. Parton has also worked to raise money on behalf of several other causes, including the American Red Cross and a number of HIV/AIDS-related charities.
In December 2006, Parton pledged $500,000 toward a proposed $90-million hospital and cancer center to be constructed in Sevierville in the name of Dr. Robert F. Thomas, the physician who delivered her. She also announced a benefit concert to raise additional funds for the project. The concert played to about 8,000 people. That same year, she and Emmylou Harris allowed their music to be used in a PETA ad campaign that encouraged pet owners to keep their dogs indoors rather than chained outside.
In May 2009, Parton gave the commencement address at the University of Tennessee. Her speech was about her life lessons, and she encouraged the graduates to never stop dreaming.
Awards and honors.
Parton is one of the most-honored female country performers of all time. The Record Industry Association of America has certified 25 of her single or album releases as either Gold Record, Platinum Record or Multi-Platinum Record. She has had 26 songs reach number one on the Billboard country charts, a record for a female artist. She has 42 career top-10 country albums, a record for any artist, and 110 career-charted singles over the past 40 years. All inclusive sales of singles, albums, collaboration records, compilation usage, and paid digital downloads during Parton's career have reportedly topped 100 million records around the world.
She has received eight Grammy Awards (including her 2011 Lifetime Achievement Grammy) and a total of 45 Grammy Award nominations, the most nominations of any female artist in the history of the prestigious awards, a record tied by Beyonce in the nominations for the 55th Grammy Awards. At the American Music Awards she has won three awards, but has received 18 nominations. At the Country Music Association, she has received 10 awards and 42 nominations. At the Academy of Country Music, she has won seven awards and 39 nominations. She is one of only six female artists (including Reba McEntire, Barbara Mandrell, Shania Twain, Loretta Lynn, and Taylor Swift), to win the Country Music Association's highest honor, Entertainer of the Year (1978). She has also been nominated for two Academy Awards and a Tony Award.
She was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for Recording in 1984, located at 6712 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood, California; a star on the Nashville Star Walk for Grammy winners; and a bronze sculpture on the courthouse lawn in Sevierville. She has called that statue of herself in her hometown "the greatest honor," because it came from the people who knew her.
Parton was inducted into the Grand Ole Opry in 1969, and in 1986 was named one of "Ms. Magazine"'s Women of the Year. In 1986, Parton was inducted into the Nashville Songwriters Hall of Fame. In 1999, Parton received country music's highest honor, an induction into the Country Music Hall of Fame. She received an honorary doctorate degree from Carson-Newman College (Jefferson City, Tennessee) in 1990. This was followed by induction into the National Academy of Popular Music/Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2001. In 2002, Parton ranked number four in "CMT's 40 Greatest Women of Country Music."
She was honored in 2003 with a tribute album called "Just Because I'm a Woman: Songs of Dolly Parton". The artists who recorded versions of Parton's songs included Melissa Etheridge ("I Will Always Love You"), Alison Krauss ("9 to 5"), Shania Twain ("Coat of Many Colors"), Me'Shell NdegéOcello ("Two Doors Down"), Norah Jones ("The Grass is Blue"), and Sinéad O'Connor ("Dagger Through the Heart"); Parton herself contributed a rerecording of the title song, originally the title song for her first RCA album in 1968. Parton was awarded the Living Legend Medal by the U.S. Library of Congress on April 14, 2004, for her contributions to the cultural heritage of the United States.
This was followed in 2005 with the National Medal of Arts, the highest honor given by the U.S. government for excellence in the arts and is presented by the U.S. President.
On December 3, 2006, Parton received the Kennedy Center Honors from the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts for her lifetime of contributions to the arts. Other 2006 honorees included Zubin Mehta, Steven Spielberg, Smokey Robinson and Andrew Lloyd Webber. During the show, some of country music's biggest names came to show their admiration. Carrie Underwood performed Parton's hit "Islands in the Stream" with Rogers, Parton's original duet partner. Krauss performed "Jolene" and duetted "Coat of Many Colors" with Twain. McEntire and Reese Witherspoon also came to pay tribute.
On November 16, 2010, Parton accepted the Liseberg Applause Award, the theme park industry's most prestigious honor, on behalf of Dollywood theme park during a ceremony held at IAAPA Attractions Expo 2010 in Orlando.
Hall of Fame Honors.
Philanthropy-related honors.
In 2003, her efforts to preserve the bald eagle through the American Eagle Foundation's sanctuary at Dollywood earned her the Partnership Award from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Parton received the Woodrow Wilson Award for Public Service from the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars of the Smithsonian Institution at a ceremony in Nashville on November 8, 2007.
On May 8, 2009, Parton gave the commencement speech at the commencement ceremony in Knoxville, Tennessee, for the University of Tennessee, Knoxville's College of Arts and Sciences. During the ceremony she received an honorary degree, a doctorate of humane and musical letters, from the university. It was only the second honorary degree given by the university, and in presenting the degree, the university's chancellor, Jimmy G. Cheek, said, "Because of her career not just as a musician and entertainer, but for her role as a cultural ambassador, philanthropist and lifelong advocate for education, it is fitting that she be honored with an honorary degree from the flagship educational institution of her home state."
Image.
Parton has turned down several offers to pose for "Playboy" magazine, although she did appear on the cover of "Playboy"'s October 1978 issue wearing a Playboy bunny outfit, complete with ears (the October 1978 "Playboy" issue also featured Lawrence Grobel's extensive and candid interview with Parton, representing one of her earliest high profile interviews with the mainstream press). The association of breasts with Parton's public image is illustrated in the naming of Dolly the sheep after her, since the sheep was cloned from a cell taken from an adult ewe's mammary gland. When Parton was asked whether she minded being an eponym in this way, she joked, "No, there's no such thing as baa-ad publicity."
She has had plastic surgery. On a 2003 broadcast of "The Oprah Winfrey Show", Winfrey asked what kind of cosmetic surgery Parton had undergone. Parton stated that she felt that cosmetic surgery was imperative in keeping with her famous image, but jokingly admitted, "If I have one more facelift, I'll have a beard!" Parton has repeatedly joked about her physical image and surgeries, saying, "If I see something sagging, bagging, and dragging, I'm going to nip it, suck it and tuck it. Why should I look like an old barn yard dog if I don't have to?" and "It takes a lot of money to look this cheap." Her breasts also garnered mention of her in several songs including "Dolly Parton's Hits" by Bobby Braddock, "" by Kool G Rap and DJ Polo, "Dolly Parton's Tits" by MacLean & MacLean, "Crazy Rap" by Afroman, "Jokes on you" by Fabolous, "Lollipop Remix" by Lil Wayne ft. Kanye West, and "Make Me Proud" by Drake ft. Nicki Minaj.
Press agent Lee Solters represented Parton and has remarked that he knew her "since she was flat-chested".
