The Black Veil Brides are an American rock band based in Hollywood, California. The group is composed of Andy Biersack (lead vocals), Ashley Purdy (bass, backing vocals), Jake Pitts (lead guitar), Jinxx (rhythm guitar, violin) and Christian "CC" Coma (drums). Black Veil Brides are known for their distinct appearance (black makeup and body paint, tight black studded clothing, and long hair), which was inspired by Kiss' and Mötley Crüe's stage persona, as well as numerous other 1980s glam metal acts.
History.
"We Stitch These Wounds" (2009–2011).
In September 2009, using the current name, Black Veil Brides signed with the independent label StandBy Records. The writing process for a tour and a record began immediately. In December 2009, the band embarked on their first US tour, titled "On Leather Wings".
The group's debut album "We Stitch These Wounds" was released July 20, 2010 and sold over 10,000 copies in its first week, ranking at No. 36 on the "Billboard" Top 200 chart, and No. 1 on the "Billboard" Independent chart. In late 2010, Black Veil Brides went on tour with bands The Birthday Massacre, Dommin and Aural Vampire.
Flom then made a deal with Neil Sheehan, founder of StandBy Records, to sign the band over to Lava.
Black Veil Brides supported the Murderdolls in the "God Save The Scream Tour" 2011 and also toured America on the AP Tour from March 18 to May 6. The band continued on to the Vans Warped Tour, which began June 24, 2011 and ended August 14 of the same year. However, on June 18, Andy fell from a pillar while performing and broke his ribs, which caused them to miss the first week of the tour. The band also performed at festivals such as the Download Festival in the UK and Bamboozle. The band also played at the Rock am Ring festival at the Nürburgring motorsport complex in Nürburg, Germany in June 2011. On April 20, it was revealed the band had won Revolver Magazine's Golden Gods Award for Best New Artist, the title for Kerrang!'s Best Newcomers, and were nominated for the title of Kerrang!'s Best International Newcomer.
"Set the World on Fire" and "Rebels" (2011-2012).
The band's second studio album, "Set the World on Fire" was released on June 14, 2011 through Lava Music/Universal Republic Records. The cover art was released in April. The title track from "Set the World on Fire" was planned for use in the movie "Scream 4". Upon learning that the song was not going to be used in the film, the band released a statement and an extended song preview. It was later announced on May 23 that the song was to be featured in the movie "".
A clip of the album's lead single, "Fallen Angels", was released in late April. It was then fully released in the UK on May 1. The US release was pushed from May 3 to May 10 to be given for free with the pre-order of "Set the World on Fire" on iTunes. Because "Fallen Angels" was delayed, the band released a preview of the song "Youth and Whisky" on May 3. The album's next single was The Legacy, with a music video filmed by Patrick Fogarty that premiered on YouTube on June 6, 2011. Their third single from "Set the World on Fire" was "Rebel Love Song", which also had a music video directed by Patrick Fogarty. The video was released on YouTube on October 19. On October 25, the band announced that they had to cancel tour dates for "certain reasons". It was later announced that it was because Andy had broken his nose on the drum set rising platform during a performance. Despite the injury, which was bad enough for people to notice that he was having difficulty breathing and talking, he was determined to finish the show. After a visit from the doctor, he was told to sit back for a few weeks to rest and heal. They announced that they would return to tour for the beginning of the Buried Alive Tour with Avenged Sevenfold, Asking Alexandria, and Hollywood Undead.
It was announced via Andy's Twitter that they would be releasing an EP titled ""Rebels"". They released a trailer on YouTube which shows Andy recording vocals for their cover of the song "Rebel Yell" by Billy Idol, which was to appear on the EP. Another trailer for the EP was released, in which Andy gives a few more details about it. The third and final trailer about the EP was released on November 14, in which Andy goes into detail about the track "Coffin" which was a left over song from the previous album "Set the World on Fire" that was to be released on the EP. In an interview with Chris Droney from Glasswerk National, they hinted that there would be a guest guitarist to appear on the EP, who eventually turned out to be Zakk Wylde (Ozzy Osbourne, Black Label Society), who plays the guitar solo on the cover of the song Unholy, originally performed by Kiss. "Rebels" was eventually released on December 13, 2011.
"Wretched and Divine: The Story of the Wild Ones" (2012–present).
A new Black Veil Brides song, titled "Unbroken," appeared on to the movie "The Avengers" on May 1, 2012, and is the only track released by Black Veil Brides solely on a compilation album.
On June 13, the official music video for the song "Coffin," from the "Rebels" EP, was released.
Regarding the band's next album, guitarists Jinxx and Jake told Chris Droney in an interview for Glasswerk National that the band are constantly writing new music, and that they were planning on recording their next major LP in April 2012. On February 18, Jake tweeted, "Amazing stuff. This next record is going to kick your arses." In a February 2012 interview, Ashley Purdy announced that the band's third studio album is scheduled to be released at the end of 2012.
On May 2, Black Veil Brides had this to announce: "As of today, we have officially began recording our new album which will be released on October 30th!" Andy said in an interview at the Download Festival that "We've got three songs tracked. We've set ourselves a deadline of the end of August to finish it. We've got 20 to 25 songs written and we're narrowing it down now. John Feldmann is producing it. It's going to be more of a punk rock record than anything we've done before. It's Social Distortion meets Metallica." September 4, Andy announced that they had finished recording of the new album: "Well, tracking has officially wrapped for the new record! Still some stuff to finish up but I’m so happy, excited & proud of this album!"
It was announced that the release of their third album will be pushed back from October 30, 2012 to January 2013. On October 8, the album cover art and album name were released; the title of their third album will be "", and pre-orders were launched from iTunes on Halloween, October 31. The cover art for "Wretched and Divine" was painted by Richard Villa, long-time Black Veil Brides cover artist who also painted the cover art for "We Stitch These Wounds", "Set the World on Fire", and "Rebels".
A song from the upcoming album, titled "In The End," has been featured as one of the theme songs for WWE's Hell in a Cell. The band will embark on "The Church of the Wild Ones" North American Tour in support of the album, with further details to be announced.
"In The End" will be the album's lead single, and is now offered as an instant download to everyone who pre-orders the album from iTunes. On October 29, the band announced the official tracklist and release date for the album.
On October 31, a trailer was released, revealing that Black Veil Brides will be releasing a full-length film titled "Legion of the Black" in 2013 in select theaters. The film will be a visual depiction of the story in the upcoming concept album, "Wretched and Divine: The Story of the Wild Ones". The movie screened at "The Silent Movie Theater" in Los Angeles, California on 12/21/2012-12/23/2012. Andy Biersack showed up to surprise fans at the showing, to their delight. 
Band members.
Black Veil Brides was founded in 2006 in Cincinnati, Ohio with members Andy Biersack, Johnny Herold, Nate Shipp, Chris Riesenberg, and Phil Cenedella. They went through various member changes, (at the time of the release of the Knives and Pens music video they only had three members), recorded "We Stitch These Wounds" with Andy Biersack, Jake Pitts, Ashley Purdy, Jinxx, and Sandra Alvarenga in 2010, and came to their current lineup when Sandra Alvarenga left to join the band Modern Day Escape and they put Christian Coma in her place. Andy is the only founding member remaining.
Tours.
Black Veil Brides have constantly toured since 2009, traveled to more than 15 countries, and performed with notable artists such as Avenged Sevenfold, Murderdolls, Hollywood Undead, Asking Alexandria, D.R.U.G.S., and Motionless in White, as well as several others.
Background Information.
Lyrics and Message.
Their lyrics have before dealt with topics aimed at people who feel like outcasts in society. Bass player Ashley said this in an interview about the message the band sends to its listeners: 
Band Name.
Ashley also explains the meaning of the band name "Black Veil Brides": 
Musical influences and style.
Black Veil Brides' music has been described by critics as heavy metal, alternative metal, shock rock, glam metal, hard rock, metalcore, and post-hardcore. The band's influences include: Kiss, Metallica, Avenged Sevenfold, Mötley Crüe, Poison, AFI, Twisted Sister, W.A.S.P., Def Leppard, Skid Row, Social Distortion, Billy Idol, Alice Cooper, Misfits, and Alkaline Trio.
Evolution of style.
Black Veil Brides' style has constantly been changing ever since the group was formed in 2006. When they debuted with "Sex & Hollywood", they had a post-hardcore/hard rock sound. They were mislabeled as emo due to the style they sported and have been criticized for their appearance. However, in an interview Andy Biersack said By the time "We Stitch These Wounds" was released, they had completely changed their member lineup and were playing more towards a melodic metalcore and post-hardcore sound, with harsh screaming in abundance. The addition of guitarist Jake Pitts led to guitar solos in almost every track. With the release of "Set the World on Fire" and "Rebels", their appearance changed to resemble that of bands like KISS and Motley Crue, while their sound dropped the screams in exchange for singing and yells. The band has also just described themselves as simply rock n roll.
