John Paul Cusack (born June 28, 1966) is an American actor, producer, and screenwriter. He has appeared in films such as "Say Anything...", "Grosse Pointe Blank", "High Fidelity", "Con Air", "Being John Malkovich", "1408", and "2012".
Early life.
Cusack was born in Evanston, Illinois, to a Catholic Irish-American family. His mother, Ann Paula "Nancy" (née Carolan), is a former mathematics teacher and political activist. His father, Dick Cusack (1925–2003), was an actor, as are John's siblings, Ann, Joan, Bill, and Susie. His father was also a documentary filmmaker, owned a film production company, and was a friend of activist Philip Berrigan. Cusack spent a year at New York University before dropping out, saying that he had "too much fire in belly".
Career.
Cusack gained fame in the mid-1980s after appearing in teen movies such as "Better Off Dead", "The Sure Thing", "One Crazy Summer", and "Sixteen Candles". Cusack made a cameo in the 1988 music video for "Trip At The Brain" by Suicidal Tendencies. In 1989 he starred as Lloyd Dobler in Cameron Crowe's "Say Anything...". His roles broadened in the late 1980s and early 1990s with more serious-minded fare such as the politically themed "True Colors" and the film noir thriller "The Grifters". 
Cusack experienced box office success with his roles in the dark comedy "Grosse Pointe Blank" and the Jerry Bruckheimer blockbuster "Con Air". In the years since, his range of films has diversified, appearing in roles such as an obsessive puppeteer in "Being John Malkovich", a lovelorn record store owner in "High Fidelity", and a Jewish art dealer mentoring a young Adolf Hitler in "Max". He starred in the horror film "1408", based on Stephen King's short story of the same name. He next appeared as a widowed father in the Iraq War-themed drama "Grace is Gone" and as assassin Brand Hauser in the dark political satire, "War, Inc.", along with Hilary Duff and Marisa Tomei. 
His sister Joan Cusack and close friend Jeremy Piven have appeared in many of his films. The siblings appeared as two geeks in "Sixteen Candles": John as one of Farmer Ted's posse, and Joan as the geek with the neck brace. They also appeared together in "Say Anything", "Grosse Pointe Blank", "High Fidelity", "Cradle Will Rock", "Martian Child", and "War, Inc.". Piven and Cusack play opposite one another in "One Crazy Summer", "Serendipity", "Say Anything", and "Grosse Pointe Blank". Cusack also had a brief cameo, seen from behind but speaking a line of dialogue, in "Broadcast News", in which Joan also appeared. Piven also had roles in "The Grifters" and "Runaway Jury".
Cusack was next seen in Roland Emmerich's disaster film "2012", which was released in theaters November 13, 2009; he played Jackson Curtis, a struggling novelist and limo driver, with his "Identity" and "Martian Child" co-star Amanda Peet. In 2010, Cusack starred in "Hot Tub Time Machine", opposite Rob Corddry, Clark Duke, and Craig Robinson. In the 2012 thriller film "The Raven", Cusack portrayed Edgar Allan Poe.
Personal life.
Cusack has an allegiance to both the Chicago Cubs and the Chicago White Sox, for which, he says, he is "in trouble there for that." He has led the crowd in a performance of "Take Me Out to the Ball Game" at Wrigley Field. He has also been spotted at multiple Chicago Bears games and attended many of the Stanley Cup Finals games in support of the Chicago Blackhawks.
Cusack has trained in kickboxing for over 20 years under former world kickboxing champion Benny Urquidez. He began training under Urquidez in preparation for his role in "Say Anything..." and currently holds the rank of a level 6 black belt in Urquidez's Ukidokan Kickboxing system.
Political views.
Between 2005 and 2009, John Cusack blogged at "The Huffington Post", including an interview with Naomi Klein. He has blogged on his opposition to the war in Iraq and his disdain for the Bush administration, calling its worldview "depressing, corrupt, unlawful, and tragically absurd".
He also appeared in a June 2008 MoveOn.org advertisement, where he made the claim that George W. Bush and John McCain have the same governing priorities. Cusack has also blasted President Barack Obama's administration for its drone policy in the Middle East and its support of the National Defense Authorization Act. In 2012, Cusack became one of the initial supporters of the Freedom of the Press Foundation.
Stalking incident.
In March 2008, police arrested Emily Leatherman outside Cusack's Malibu home for stalking the actor. On October 10, 2008, Leatherman pleaded no contest and received five years probation and mandatory psychiatric counseling, and was ordered to stay away from Cusack, his home and business for the next 10 years.
