Family Affair is an American sitcom that aired on CBS from September 12, 1966 to September 9, 1971. The series explored the trials of well-to-do civil engineer and bachelor Bill Davis (Brian Keith) as he attempted to raise his brother's orphaned children in his luxury New York City apartment. Davis' traditional English gentleman's gentleman, Mr. Giles French (Sebastian Cabot), also had adjustments to make as he became saddled with the responsibility of caring for 15-year-old Cissy (Kathy Garver) and the 6-year-old twins, Jody (Johnny Whitaker) and Buffy (Anissa Jones). 
The show ran for 138 episodes. "Family Affair" was created and produced by Don Fedderson, also known for "My Three Sons" and "The Millionaire".
Storyline.
William "Bill" Davis, originally of Terre Haute, Indiana, is a successful civil engineer who develops major projects all over the world. A wealthy bachelor often dating socialites, he lives in a large apartment at 600 E. 62nd Street in Manhattan (the address given by Mr. French when he registered Buffy and Jody for school), and has a quintessential gentleman's gentleman, Giles French. However, his quiet lifestyle is turned upside-down when his two nieces and nephew move in.
Bill's brother Bob and sister-in-law Mary had died in an automobile accident a year prior to the premiere episode. Their children, teen Cissy and her young twin siblings Buffy and Jody, had been dispersed among relatives in Terre Haute, but none wanted to continue raising the children, so they attempt to give the responsibility to Bill. "Uncle Bill" is not keen on the idea at first, but the children endear themselves to him. First Buffy comes along, followed by Jody, and finally Cissy. Initially mortified by the situation is Mr. French, who effectively becomes the children's nanny, on top of his valet duties. However as time passes they all become a family, albeit an accidental one.
When Sebastian Cabot became ill, Giles's brother, Nigel "Niles" French (John Williams) was introduced, working for the Davis family for nine episodes in 1967 while Giles is said to be in England visiting the Queen. In the last season, Bill hires a part-time housekeeper, Emily Turner (Nancy Walker) to assist Mr. French.
Various other characters were also seen regularly, including several acquaintances of Mr. French who are in service (most notably Miss Faversham (Heather Angel), colleagues of Bill, and friends of Cissy.
Production.
Like Don Fedderson's other program, "My Three Sons", "Family Affair" used a sixty-day production schedule for Brian Keith. All of his scenes for the season would be shot in two thirty-day blocks, while his co-stars would fill in after the actor's work was completed. This enabled Fedderson to harness actors like Keith and Fred MacMurray into television commitments, while still enabling each to make motion pictures. As a result, each season had a single director for each of the thirty-odd scripts.
Due to the popularity of the series with girls, Buffy's doll, “Mrs. Beasley”, which she often carried with her, was marketed as a Mattel talking toy in the United States.
Post-series.
As discussed by Kathy Garver on the final season’s DVD features, the show’s cast suffered several deaths. Anissa Jones died of a drug overdose in 1976 at age 18. Sebastian Cabot died of a stroke in 1977 at age 59. In 1997, two months after the suicide of his daughter, and having lived with cancer for some time, Brian Keith committed suicide by gunshot. In 2002, Gregg Fedderson died of cancer at age 53. Cancer also claimed the lives of Heather Angel in 1986 and Nancy Walker in 1992. John Williams died in 1983 due to a heart condition. Both Phil Ober and John Hubbard, who portrayed Bill Davis' business partner, Ted Gaynor, are also deceased.
DVD releases.
MPI Home Video has released all five seasons of "Family Affair" on DVD in Region 1 by MPI Home Video (under license from the Don Fedderson estate). The DVD sets have the logo for Universal Television Distribution at the end of the closing credits (as successor NBC Universal holds the international television rights), Me-TV has the logos for Paramount Domestic Television and Viacom Enterprises (as successors CBS Television Distribution holds owns the domestic television distribution rights).
Revival series.
A revival of "Family Affair" by Sid and Marty Krofft aired on The WB Television Network from September 12, 2002 to March 13, 2003. This version was produced by Sid & Marty Krofft Pictures, Pariah Films and Turner Television and lasted for 16 episodes (14 of the 16 were aired). It was filmed in the same CBS Studio City lot as was the original series. Although the one-hour pilot had good ratings, the subsequent episodes declined against competition such as "Friends". Johnny Whitaker and Kathy Garver appeared in the Christmas episode.
Appearances in other media.
In the pilot of the television show "The Critic", film critic Jay Sherman reviews the (fictional) movie adaption of the show. In the starring role was Marlon Brando, who was "paid 8 million dollars" for the film.
In 1970, Gold Key Comics, an imprint of Western Publishing, published a comic book adaptation of "Family Affair".
Merchandising efforts centered on Anissa Jones. Several books were published, including
the 1970 hardback "Family Affair: Buffy Finds A Star" by Gladys Baker Bond and "Buffy's Cookbook". There were dolls (Mattel's Talking Buffy, and Mrs. Beasley, Buffy's doll on the show) and various other toys.
A Mrs. Beasley doll, with her glasses missing, appears in the music video for the song "California Tuffy" by the Geraldine Fibbers.
