Steven Vincent "Steve" Buscemi ( ; born December 13, 1957) is an American actor, writer and film director. An associate member of the renowned experimental theater company The Wooster Group, Buscemi has starred and supported in successful Hollywood and indie films including "New York Stories", "Mystery Train", "Reservoir Dogs", "Desperado", "Con Air", "Armageddon", "The Grey Zone", "Ghost World" and "Big Fish"; and the HBO television series "The Sopranos". He is also known for his appearances in many films by the Coen brothers: "Miller's Crossing", "Barton Fink", "The Hudsucker Proxy", "Fargo" and "The Big Lebowski".
Since 2010, he has starred in the critically acclaimed series "Boardwalk Empire", which earned him two Screen Actors Guild Awards, a Golden Globe, and two nominations for an Emmy Award.
He made his directorial debut in 1996, with "Trees Lounge", in which he also starred. Other works include "Animal Factory" (2000), "Lonesome Jim" (2005) and "Interview" (2007). He has also directed numerous episodes of television shows, including; "", "The Sopranos", "Oz", "30 Rock" and "Nurse Jackie".
Early life.
Buscemi was born in Brooklyn, New York, the son of Dorothy (née Wilson), who worked as a hostess at Howard Johnson's, and John Buscemi, a sanitation worker and Korean War veteran. Buscemi's father was of Italian descent; his ancestors were from the town of Menfi in Sicily. Buscemi's mother was of part Irish ancestry. He has three brothers: Jon, Ken, and Michael. Buscemi was raised Roman Catholic.
He graduated in 1975 from Valley Stream Central High School in Valley Stream, New York, a school which he attended with actress Patricia Charbonneau. In high school, Buscemi wrestled for the varsity squad and participated in the drama troupe, at the time directed by Mr. Lynne C. Lappin. Buscemi's 1996 film "Trees Lounge", in which he not only starred but served as screenwriter and director, is set in and was largely shot in his childhood village of Valley Stream. He worked in Alexander's department store in Valley Stream as well.
Buscemi briefly attended Nassau Community College before moving to Manhattan to enroll in the Lee Strasberg Institute. In the early 1980s, Buscemi also worked as a firefighter for four years on FDNY Engine 55. After 9/11, Buscemi returned to Engine 55 and for several days worked 12-hour shifts alongside other firefighters to sift through the rubble from the World Trade Center. In 2003 he also gave a speech supporting higher wages for firefighters at a union rally. 
Career.
Acting.
His first role in a major motion picture was in the 1986 film "Parting Glances", for which his performance in the role of Nick received praise. Other early films include "Slaves of New York" in 1988, and "", a 1990 film with three segments. Buscemi starred in the first segment, playing Bellingham, a college student who orders a mummy and unleashes it on fellow college students played by Christian Slater and Julianne Moore.
During 1990, Buscemi had a couple of additional crime roles. He played the henchman of Laurence Fishburne named Test Tube in Abel Ferrara’s "King of New York." He also played Mink in the Coen Brothers' "Millers Crossing." Although he had to audition twice for this role, it marked the first of six of the Coen Brothers' films in which Buscemi appeared. Before his work with the Coen Brothers, he played a small but important role in Jim Jarmusch's independent anthology film "Mystery Train," released in 1989, for which he received an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Supporting Male.
In 1991, he played the bellboy, Chet, in the Coen Brothers film, "Barton Fink". His first lead role was in 1992, where he played Adolpho Rollo in Alexandre Rockwell's "In the Soup". Then he came to public attention for playing Mr. Pink in Quentin Tarantino’s 1992 film, "Reservoir Dogs," a role that Tarantino wrote for himself.
In 1995, Buscemi played suspected cop-shooter Gordon Pratt in the episode "End Game" at the end of a three-episode arc of "". He also had a role as Phil Hickle, Ellen's father and older Pete's guidance counselor, in "The Adventures of Pete and Pete", as well as guest-starring in "Miami Vice" in 1986. Buscemi was rumored to be considered for the role of The Scarecrow in Joel Schumacher's proposed fifth installment of the first "Batman" franchise, "Batman Triumphant", before Warner Bros. cancelled the project.
Buscemi's other most notable character roles include Garland Greene in "Con Air", Rockhound in "Armageddon", Randall Boggs in "Monsters, Inc.", Donny in "The Big Lebowski", Carl Showalter in "Fargo", Norther Winslow in "Big Fish" and Seymour in "Ghost World", for which he won several awards.
Buscemi often plays characters that are neurotic and paranoid. He has appeared in a number of films by the Coen Brothers, in which his characters tend to die in grisly, prolonged or unexpected manners. He has frequently appeared in Adam Sandler films such as "Airheads", "Billy Madison", "The Wedding Singer", "Big Daddy", "Mr. Deeds", "I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry", and "Grown Ups". He also has worked with Tim Burton, Quentin Tarantino, producer Jerry Bruckheimer, Jim Jarmusch, Robert Rodriguez, and Michael Bay on various occasions.
He has said of his work "I don’t think of myself as having a career. I think of having jobs. When I work, I want to have good jobs. I want to do interesting films. I also want to make a living. You don’t always work on the things that you can put your heart into, so it’s good to work on things that you can get into one hundred percent."
In 2003, Buscemi made a brief celebrity guest appearance as himself on the long-running Fox animated television show "The Simpsons" in the episode "Brake My Wife, Please". Most recently, Buscemi provided the voice for Dwight, a bank robber whom Marge promises to visit in jail if he turns himself in to the authorities. This episode, entitled "I Don't Wanna Know Why the Caged Bird Sings", originally aired on October 14, 2007.
In 2004, Buscemi joined the cast of "The Sopranos" as Tony Soprano's cousin and childhood friend, Tony Blundetto, a role for which he was nominated an Emmy Award. Buscemi had previously contributed to the show as director of the third season episode "Pine Barrens," which was one of the most critically acclaimed episodes of the series, and the fourth season episode "Everybody Hurts." He appeared in the third episode of season 6, as a doorman in the afterlife, which is portrayed as a country club, in Tony Soprano's dream. He returned to direct the episodes "In Camelot", the seventh episode of season five, and "Mr. & Mrs. John Sacrimoni Request...", the fifth episode of season 6.
In 2004, Buscemi appeared in the music video for Joe Strummer's cover of the Bob Marley track "Redemption Song". The video is shot after Strummer's death, and Buscemi appears beside a graffiti portrait of Strummer.
In 2002, Steve contributed to Lou Reed's concept album "The Raven" with the song "Broadway Song", and poems "Old Poe" and "The Cask".
Buscemi currently stars in the HBO series "Boardwalk Empire". He plays Enoch "Nucky" Thompson (based on Enoch L. Johnson), a corrupt Atlantic City politician who rules the town during the Prohibition era. Buscemi won a Golden Globe award for best lead actor in a drama series and hosted NBC's "Saturday Night Live" in 2011.
Directing.
In addition to feature films, he directed episodes of the television shows "", four episodes of "The Sopranos", as well as two episodes of HBO's prison-drama series "Oz", entitled "U.S. Male" and "Cuts Like a Knife". He has also directed two episodes of "30 Rock" ("Retreat to Move Forward" and "Leap Day") and six episodes of Showtime's "Nurse Jackie". In the latter, his brother Michael played the character "God" in several episodes.
While scouting a location for a film, Buscemi visited the Philadelphia Eastern State Penitentiary. He found the building so interesting that he later provided the majority of the narration for the audio tour there.
Personal life.
Buscemi was a New York City fire fighter from 1980 to 1984, with Engine Company No. 55 in the Little Italy section of New York. He showed up at his old firehouse the day after the World Trade Center tragedy in New York to volunteer, working twelve-hour shifts for a week after the terrorist act, and digging through rubble with his old comrades looking for missing firefighters. Buscemi was arrested, along with eleven others, on May 25, 2003 while protesting the closing of his former firehouse.
Buscemi pronounces his name as "Bu-"sem"my", but the correct Sicilian pronunciation is "Bu-"shem"my". He once said about the pronunciation of his name: "I had to go to Sicily to find out I pronounce my name wrong."
In April 2001, while shooting the film "Domestic Disturbance" in Wilmington, North Carolina, Buscemi was slashed and badly scarred on the face while at the Firebelly Lounge, intervening in a bar fight between his friends Vince Vaughn, screenwriter Scott Rosenberg and a local man, who allegedly instigated the brawl.
Buscemi, in an interview with "The Hollywood Reporter", is adamant about not altering his famously misaligned teeth saying "I've had dentists who have wanted to help me out, but I say, 'You know, I won't work again if you fix my teeth."
