Top Chef: Seattle is the tenth season of the American reality television series "Top Chef", airing on Bravo. The season was announced on September 19, 2012, and premiered on November 7, 2012. The competition was initially filmed in Seattle, Washington before moving to Juneau, Alaska and concluding in Los Angeles, California. 21 new contestants and 3 "Top Chef" veterans were selected to compete for the title of "Top Chef" and the $125,000 grand prize. 
"Top Chef: Last Chance Kitchen", the web series introduced in the previous season which puts the eliminated contestants against each other in head-to-head challenges to battle for a chance to re-enter the main competition, also returned. The winner continued to compete in the season finale. In addition, viewers could vote each week for chefs eliminated from the "Last Chance Kitchen" to move on in the "Save a Chef" competition. The winner of the final vote was "saved", and earned a spot in the final round of the "Last Chance Kitchen".
Contestants.
The cast of the tenth season of "Top Chef" initially consisted of 21 contestants. After the qualifying challenges in the first episode, the pool of chefs was narrowed down to 15. Former "Top Chef" competitors Josie Smith-Malave ('), Chris "C.J." Jacobsen ('), and Stefan Richter ("") later joined the competition during the second episode. 
Episodes.
The majority of "Top Chef" episodes consist of two challenges. The Quickfire Challenge is a short, simple challenge designed to test the chefs on their basic culinary skills. In the initial episodes of the season, the Quickfire usually guarantees the winner immunity from being sent home; however, in some episodes, the Quickfire winner is instead given an advantage in the upcoming Elimination Challenge. The winner of the Quickfire is sometimes given an additional reward, including cash prizes. The Elimination Challenge is a more complex challenge created to test the versatility, creativity, and teamwork ability of the chefs. The judges evaluate both the Quickfire and Elimination challenges and announce each week's elimination in a segment called the "Judges' Table". One or more contestants are eliminated in each episode until the finale where one chef is crowned the "Top Chef".
Episode 9: Past Suppers.
Quickfire Challenge: The chefs were tested on their knife skills. Beginning in three teams of three, the contestants had to sharpen dull knives enough to cut cleanly through paper. The two teams to finish the fastest advanced to the next round preparing 50 potatoes using the Tourné cutting method. The members of the winning team continued to the final round, competing against each other to break down the rack of two rabbits. A chef cutting themselves was treated as an automatic disqualification. The winner received a custom chef's knife from master bladesmith Bob Kramer, worth roughly $4,000, and immunity from elimination.
Elimination Challenge: Each chef was tasked with cooking a dish inspired by a memorable moment from a previous season of "Top Chef", but had to prepare a healthier version than the original. The winner received $15,000, and their dish would be used as inspiration for a new "Top Chef" Healthy Choice frozen entrée. In a surprise twist, the bottom two contestants competed head-to-head based on a memorable moment from this season: CJ's elimination in Episode 5.
Episode 16: Finale Part 1.
As a reward for winning Last Chance Kitchen, Kristen re-enters the main competition. In addition, the competition moves to Los Angeles for its final challenges.
Last Chance Kitchen.
The "Last Chance Kitchen" is a web series featuring challenges (available for viewing on BravoTV.com) in which the ousted chefs compete for a chance to get back into the competition. Each week, two or more chefs compete against each other in the "Top Chef" kitchen, with the results judged solely by Tom Colicchio. The winner of each week moves on to face the next eliminated "Top Chef" contestant(s), while the loser is eliminated from the competition for good. However, the winner of "Save a Chef", a competition in which fans vote to save their favorite chef eliminated from the "Last Chance Kitchen", automatically advances to the final round. The champion of the "Last Chance Kitchen" is allowed to re-enter the main competition and compete for the grand prize.
