David John "Dave" Franco (born June 12, 1985) is an American television, film and voice actor. He is best known for his roles on "Scrubs", "21 Jump Street", "Charlie St. Cloud", and "Fright Night". He is the younger brother of James Franco. 
Personal life.
Franco was born in Palo Alto, California, the son of Betsy (née Verne), a poet, author and editor, and Doug Franco (1948-2011), who met as students at Stanford University. His maternal grandmother, Mitzi Levine Verne, runs the Verne Art Gallery, a prominent art gallery in Cleveland. Franco's father was of Portuguese and Swedish descent and Franco's mother is Jewish, a descendant of immigrants from Russia. Dave grew up in California with his two brothers, Tom Franco and James Franco.
Career.
In 2006, Franco made his acting debut on The CW Drama television series "7th Heaven". He has since appeared in television shows such as "Do Not Disturb" and "Young Justice". Franco has also had noticeable roles in films such as "Superbad", "Charlie St. Cloud" and "The Shortcut". 
In May 2008, Franco was cast in The CW teen drama television series "Privileged". The series centered on a live-in tutor for two spoiled heiresses in Palm Beach. Franco was cast in an initial major recurring role. The series premiered on September 9, 2008 to 3.1 million viewers. Ratings continued to slip each week with the series sixth episode reaching 1.837 million viewers. The CW did not renew the series for a second season due to low ratings. 
In August 2009 Variety announced Franco was cast in a regular role for the ninth season of the ABC Sitcom series "Scrubs". Franco portrayed the role of Cole Aaronson, a medical student, whose family paid a large sum of money to Sacred Heart Hospital to receive an internship. Franco went on to appear in all thirteen episodes of the ninth season and received praise from critics for his performance. ABC announced the series would not be renewed for a tenth season therefore Franco would not reprise his role of Cole.
MTV Networks' NextMovie.com named him one of the Breakout Stars to Watch for in 2011. In August 2011 Franco starred in the 3D Horror Comedy film "Fright Night" alongside Colin Farrell and Toni Collette. The film is a remake of the 1985 film of the same name and follows a teenage boy who finds out his neighbor is a vampire. Franco played the role of popular high school student Mark. The film received positive reviews from critics and went on to make over $41 million worldwide. 
In May 2011, Franco was cast in the Columbia Pictures Action Comedy film "21 Jump Street" alongside Jonah Hill and Channing Tatum. The film which is based on the 1987 television series of the same name centers on undercover cops who go back to high school to bring down a synthetic drug ring. Franco played the role of Eric - a high school student and the lead dealer of the drug. Dave's character, Eric has parents who neglect him, which causes him to be the dealer.The film was released in March 2012 to critical acclaim and box office success. Franco has denied rumors he is involved with the planned sequel. 
In September 2011, Franco was cast in the zombie romance film "Warm Bodies", as Perry Kelvin. The film, an adaptation of the best-selling novel "Warm Bodies", followed a romance between a zombie and a human during a zombie apocalypse. Filming took place in Montreal, and the movie was released on February 1, 2013. In April 2012, "Entertainment Tonight" announced Franco was cast alongside Jesse Eisenberg, Mark Ruffalo, Morgan Freeman and Isla Fisher in the ensemble crime thriller film "Now You See Me".
