Ah Boys to Men () is a 2012–2013 Singaporean two-part comedy film produced and directed by Jack Neo, written by Neo and Link Sng and starring Wang Wei Liang, Noah Yap, Joshua Tan and Maxi Lim. It revolves around a group of army recruits in National Service in Singapore. The film consists of two cinematic parts, the first commercially released on November 8, 2012 and the second on February 1, 2013. In conjunction with the Ministry of Defence's 2012 NS45 campaign, "From Fathers to Sons", it is meant to commemorate the 45th anniversary of Singapore's National Service. "Ah Boys to Men" is the first local film to be released in two parts and the first to film in Pulau Tekong.
It is the highest-grossing Singaporean film of all time. Buoyed by audience demand, a third installment has been confirmed.
Plot.
Part one.
Part one of "Ah Boys to Men" opens with the Republic of Singapore apparently being under an immense terrorist attack, with iconic Singaporean landmarks (such as the Merlion and the Esplanade) coming under fire and many civilians killed brutally. It is later revealed that the war was fictitious setting of a war-based role-playing game played by Ken Chow (Joshua Tan), a rich and spoiled child reluctant to enlist into National Service. Ken plans to study abroad with his girlfriend Amy (Qiu Qiu), but his plans are derailed by NS. As Ken leaves the gaming centre, his girlfriend chides him for his childishness. In a bid to prove his bravery, Ken kicks a rubbish bin, to be apprehended by two policemen in the vicinity, as his girlfriend walks away, disappointed and embarrassed. Back home, after being driven back by his father (Richard Low), Ken confides to his parents about his fears of National Service. His overprotective mother (Irene Ang) decides to help him think of ways to defer, but to no avail. Eventually, they are all forced to face the hard truth - there is no going against the law. The Chow family sadly send off Ken on the day of his enlisting. Thereafter, Ken and a few other recruits are assigned to "Ninja Company" (Platoon 2, Section 2) and are sent to their bunk and introduced to their Platoon Sergeant (Tosh Zhang), a portrayal of the tough-nails sergeant stereotype. Whilst waiting for the mandatory haircut, Ken gets to know a few people - "Lobang" (Wang Wei Liang), Aloysius Jing Sia-lan ["Sia-lan" being a reference to a crude Hokkien slang term meaning extreme disgrace] (Maxi Lim) and "I.P. Man" (Noah Yap).
After a two weeks' worth of training, Ken and the other recruits are allowed to book out. A lavish party is thrown to celebrate Ken's return, but his mood is ruined when he is shown a photo of his girlfriend with another man. Ken angrily confronts her and demands that they meet, which she agrees to. She later admits that she has fallen for another man and dumps Ken on the highway. Determined to win her back, Ken devises a plan to escape from Pulau Tekong and send her off, for he feels she is merely just testing him. Ken stops drinking water, in hopes to get a heat stroke, for which he would be sent home for ten days; he takes the extra measure of sleeping under a ceiling-fan after dousing himself in cold water. However, he gets into a situation worse than expected and he is quickly sent off to a hospital after collapsing during training. Ken's father is alerted of his son's critical condition while in a company meeting. He quickly drives off to the hospital, but the shock and strain is too much and suffers a heart attack while driving and violently collides with another vehicle.
Ken wakes up in the next scene, surrounded by his two sisters, in a hospital ward. He realises his foolish actions have caused much trouble for many people and cannot bear to face his father, who has survived the car crash and is recuperating in another ward in the same hospital. Awakened to reality, Ken is finally fit enough to go back to training. The episode ends at this junction, and snippets of the next episode are shown.
Part two.
Ken is quick to adopt a change in personality by becoming an "on-the-ball" recruit, even more so than "Wayang King" Aloysius. Differing viewpoints sour the friendship between Ken and Lobang. Meanwhile, Ken's father has become partially paralyzed because of his stroke but is determined to make a recovery. After coming in first for his 2.4 kilometer run, Aloysius shares that his secret is "no cigarette" and is quick to urge smokers to give up smoking, causing Sergeant Ong and Officer Commanding CPT Tham (Fish Chaar) to propose a cigarette cut. Angry at Aloysius, Lobang and a few other recruits pull a prank on Aloysius by placing a heavy stone in his backpack. After realising what Lobang had done, Aloysius angrily confronts him; this strains the relationship between the duo. Feeling excluded from the group, Aloysius seeks advice from his parents. His father (Chen Tianwen) tells him the best solution is not to do anything and tells a story of a fictitious war between two nations to demonstrate why. Back at Tekong, Recruit IP Man learns about "Real Bullet" Zhen Zidan (Benjamin Mok), an "Ah Beng" who stole his girlfriend Mayoki (Sherraine Low). IP Man first retaliates by pretending to have a better girlfriend and criticises Mayoki for having inferior qualities of a woman. "Real Bullet" hits back by releasing a video of him and Mayoki engaging in an initimate act. IP Man is crestfallen and asks his bunk mates for help. Lobang plots a scheme to attack "Real Bullet" and Mayoki at a car-park by throwing heaps of human excretion mixed with chilli and wasabi at them while they are in the car. They succeed but "Real Bullet"'s gang chases after them after he calls for back-up. The recruits manage to shake the gang off; they celebrate at a restaurant at White Sands later that evening. However, at the restaurant, they are ambushed by more of "Real Bullet"'s gang members, who have managed to track them down. Aloysius, like many others, is quick to run away. Ken, however, seeing Lobang and the others getting beaten, runs back to help, per the principle "leave no man behind". Because Ken saved his life, Lobang vows to stop smoking in return. Later on, after an investigation by the sergeants, Ken and the perpetrators of the earlier scheme carried out that day are punished. Concerned, Ken's parents speak to CPT Tham after learning of what had happened. Ken's father has shown visible signs of improvement and is starting to be able to talk. He thanks the OC for training Ken to become a "real soldier", but is against him being punished for fighting. The OC agrees to make an exception and exclude Ken from punishment. Ken, though, after learning that the others still would be punished, is granted permission to continue his punishment. Now unhappy with Aloysius for abandoning his team mates, Lobang attempts to sabotage him by throwing his magazine but after a comical turn of events, it is Lobang who loses his magazine. However, Aloysius quickly gives his magazine to Lobang during an equipment check and takes the blame. While searching for the missing magazine, the relationship between the two grow better. For an assessment of their leadership potential in the Army, Ken's platoon have to rescue a hostage in a hut in the jungle. The platoon's eccentric assessor (mrbrown) is chased by a large herd of wild hogs halfway into the assignment; the soldiers are quick to come to his rescue.
Following their passing out parade, the recruits reunite with their kins. Ken's father is present and comes to greet Ken; he is finally able to walk steadily without any aid. As the film ends, various recruits' postings are shown — only Lobang made it to Officer Cadet School (OCS).
Themes.
Emotional issues that recruits experience for a long period of time, such as not being able to be that in touch with kins are tackled in part one. It also pokes fun into many infamous incidents related to the Singapore Army by parodying these events.
Part two focused more on the unity of the protagonists as well as tapping more on hot social topics like foreign talent in Singapore. It gave "a stronger story than its predecessor", and had a "more meaty" drama aspect, according to Jack Neo.
Derek Elley of "Film Business Asia" claims that the driving factor of "Ah Boys to Men", National Service, is just a metaphor for the strict life in Singapore.
Production.
Development.
"Ah Boys to Men" is Jack Neo's first military-themed film, as well as his "most ambitious project so far" according to himself. Neo had wanted to shoot an military-themed film since his recruit days after being influenced by Taiwanese army flicks, but could not find the right opportunity. Neo was originally approached by MINDEF to edit footages from the 2010 documentary "Every Singaporean Son" into a film. After much deliberation, Neo decided to not use the footages and instead write a brand new script. The production received the full support from MINDEF to shoot the film; they were provided access to vehicles, equipment and weapons as well as on-site consultants. Neo did not accept financial funding from MINDEF as he wanted to retain full control of the creative process. The film was funded by investors and sponsors, some of which included Toast Box, Bee Cheng Hiang and KPMG.
Research for the film alone took around two and a half months. Neo said the decision to break the film into two parts was made after the distributors told him to keep the films 100 minutes in length, as any longer and it would have been more expensive and difficult to schedule.
With a budget of S$3 million, "Ah Boys to Men" is Singapore's most expensive film.
Casting.
The crew employed a talent scout to find potential cast; casting began in March 2012. Additionally, an audition notice was uploaded on the production company's official website. Neo initially wanted to include regulars like Shawn Lee and Joshua Ang, but ultimately decided not to, so as to give the audience a completely new feel. Approximately 500 auditioned for the lead roles. For this project, Neo wanted to work with bloggers and getai singers to create a new platform for acting. Many prominent businessmen in Singapore, such as Kenny Yap, executive chairman of Qian Hu Corporation, were also invited to make cameo appearances. The film marked the film debut for most of the lead cast.
Crew.
"Ah Boys to Men" was directed by Jack Neo and the script was written by Neo and Link Sng. Neo and Lim Teck served as producers, while Neo's wife Irene Kng, along with Mang, Teck, Tengku Iesta, Tengku Alaudin, Kenny Chua, William Sin, Dominic Inn, Tan Tong Hai, Eric Liang and Sky Li Yunfei, served as executive producers.
Filming.
As part of preparation for the film, the cast members underwent a two-day Basic Military Training familiarisation course, which was, to one of the stars, Tosh Zhang, "as tough as what we really went through during national service." Filming took place mostly in Pulau Tekong (which is used exclusively as a training base for various Singapore Army units and home to the Basic Military Training Centre), making "Ah Boys to Men" the first film to have filmed there. The "unpredictable" weather was a problem the crew encountered while filming at Tekong. 35 days were spent filming there. Other filming locations included Robinson Road, which was used for a major war scene and specially sealed off to the public for a day on August 19, 2012 so as to allow the crew to film; it was the first time it was closed for such reason. Neo was warned beforehand that destruction of the road would cost him to be fined. A certain fight scene set in a restaurant, which involved ten actors, took a night to finish filming. Aerial shots required the use of Spidercams and cameras strapped onto remote control plane. Scenes set in the 1970s were, according to Neo, the hardest to film as the details were hard to perfect. Additionally, Neo had to specially get 1970s-era local army helmets due to MINDEF not having any in stock. Army uniforms set in that era could not be found; Neo instead purchased new sets of uniforms and dyed them until they reached the desired colour. About half a day was spent on set daily; filming in total took seventy days to finish in September 2012.
Effects.
For the opening scenes, in which many landmarks in Singapore were destroyed, computer-generated imagery (CGI) was used to create the explosions. Neo's insistence to use real weapons and pyrotechnics for the shooting of the CGI-war sequences, despite the high cost, was due to him wanting to provide a "new feel" for the audience. The film features Dolby Atmos surround sound, the first South-East Asian film to do so. The visual effects were done by VividTree's Jay Hong.
Music.
Theme song.
The official theme song of "Ah Boys to Men", titled "Recruits' Anthem", was written, composed and performed by Tosh Rock Zhang, a YouTube personality and also one of the cast. Most of the song was written during filming in Pulau Tekong. Initially rejected by director Jack Neo twice, it was first uploaded on YouTube, accompanied with an official music video, prior to the release of the film. Reception to "Recruits' Anthem" was overwhelmingly positive and within a month of its uploading, it grossed 610,000 hits.
Release.
"Ah Boys to Men" is the first Singaporean film to be released in two parts. 
Part one of the film premiered on November 6, 2012 at the Golden Village Multiplex. It was first commercially released in Singapore on November 8, 2012 and it opened in Malaysian cinemas on December 20, 2012. Discussions with film distributors in Hong Kong and mainland China are ongoing.
The trailer for part two was showcased at the Asia TV Forum & Market and ScreenSingapore 2012 from December 4, 2012 to December 7, 2012. Within a week of its upload online, the trailer had already amassed approximately 20 million views. Earlier reports gave the release date for the full film as January 31, 2013 and February 7, 2013. However, the official commercial release date for part two in Singaporean cinemas was later confirmed as February 1, 2013. Part two of "Ah Boys to Men" premiered on January 30, 2013, two days before its commercial release, at the Festive Grand Theatre at Resorts World Sentosa – the first local film to do so.
Marketing.
Pay television rights.
In December 2012, it was announced at the Asia TV Forum & Market and ScreenSingapore 2012 conference that STAR Chinese Movies had acquired pay television rights to "Ah Boys to Men" in certain territories in Southeast Asia, in a deal with Clover Films, one of the film's distributors and production companies, for an undisclosed price.
Merchandise.
The cast and crew of "Ah Boys to Men" will be promoting and selling Camou Products, a variety of army-themed merchandise, all of which are made from old decommissioned. A comic book based on the film's first part, titled "Ah Boys to Men 1" and published by Marshall Cavendish, has been released; the artwork was done by James Teo.
Reception.
Critical response.
Part one.
The first film has received mixed reviews from critics. Derek Elley of "Film Business Asia" graded it at 6 out of 10 marks, praising it for its "superior production values" but noting that it "lost momentum" during the second half. Kwok Kar Peng of "The New Paper" commented on the lengthiness of the film, also expressing his opinion that it seemed like an advertisement for the Singapore Army, but added that it had "its good points". "TODAY" 's Christopher Toh, gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and criticised the over-use of CGI "that makes Doctor Who blush" though he commended the acting skills of the lead cast. Vanessa Tai, also from "TODAY", felt that some of the jokes in the film were "sexist" and concluded that it might create a bad impression for the SAF (Singapore Armed Forces). In response, Neo stated that the "sexist" jokes were existent within the Army and were common. Gary Chua, also from "TODAY", in response to the review by Tai, voiced out his disagreement. He felt that the film had instead done the SAF proud. "F Movie Mag"'s review took issue with its excessive length, as well as its sense of incompleteness, though it also praised the director, as well as the energetic performance of the actors. Travis Wong of inSing.com gave the movie 2 out of 5 stars, criticising the "obnoxious product placement" and the rehashing of past jokes. Hee En Ming of Fridae dubbed "Ah Boys to Men" as "possibly the worst boot camp comedy ever", reserving only negative feedback for it. At the National Day Rally 2012, Prime Minister Lee Hsien Loong complimented Neo on the film.
Part two.
The second installment garnered mixed reviews from critics, similar to its predecessor. In contrast to his review for part one, in which he called it a "misfire", Travis Wong of insing.com called part two a "perfect salute" and gave it 2 stars out of 5. Mervin Tay of "The New Paper" said, among other things, that the second part "has the usual trappings of a Jack Neo movie, but with a context that will resonate with anyone who has been through national service, a rite of passage for all male Singaporeans and their families." "TODAY" Christopher Toh wrote that it "isn't all bad but lacks a big payoff" and gave it 3 stars out of 5. Gabriel Chong of Movie Exclusive gave it 3.5 stars. She said that it was not "a perfect movie by any measure", but that it "still manages to tap onto the perfectly relatable and uniquely Singaporean experience of BMT for a moving portrayal of the bond of brotherhood forged through that unforgettable rite of passage." Writing for "F Movie Mag" was Shawne Wang, who gave it a negative review of 1.5 stars out of a possible 5. She labelled it a "misfire in practically every way". Dylan Tan of "The Business Times" felt that there was no improvement in the plot and it was the "same old drill". A Time Out Singapore reviewer commented that the film was "wrapped up in a heart-warming message". "Channel News Asia" called it an "enjoyable film with problems", giving a score of 3 out of 5 stars and citing the heavy product placement and over-emphasis on details as some of the situations that needed improvement.
Box office.
Domestic.
Part one of "Ah Boys to Men" grossed S$6.18 million dollars domestically. It earned S$234,000 on its opening day and took the number one spot in its opening weekend, earning S$1,509,422 at the box office. It broke the record for the biggest opening weekend for local productions, a record previously held by Neo's earlier film "Ah Long Pte Ltd" (S$1.484 million) in 2008, as well as that for the biggest opening-day box-office result for a local film outside of the Chinese New Year season. The first Asian movie to top the Singapore box office since November 2011, it passed the S$5 million mark on November 29, 2012, the second Singaporean film to do so, and at that point of time became Singapore's second-highest grossing film, overtaking the previous record holder, "Money No Enough 2" (2008), which was also directed by Neo. On December 17, 2012, "Ah Boys to Men" became the highest-grossing Singaporean film, having already took in S$6.03 million, surpassing "Money No Enough" (1998), the previous record holder and another work of Neo's. Neo said in response to the milestone: "I've waited 12 years to be able to make a film that can beat Money No Enough. I'm so glad that the day has finally come." Because of that, Neo said that he and the cast will skinny dip, tentatively in the Singapore River, as he had earlier promised. However, not all of the cast were comfortable with the prospect of skinny dipping. Tosh Zhang said he was a bit reluctant to do so, but would go along, seeing that majority would be doing so. Online box office revenue tracker Box Office Mojo has listed part one as the fifth-highest grossing film of 2012 in Singapore.
Neo has anticipated that the second part would "do much better than the first one" and has also announced his consideration to produce more army-themed films. At a press conference for part two of "Ah Boys to Men", Neo said: "I anticipate that Part 2 will do much better than the first one and I hope that we will hit S$7 million this time."
Part two out-grossed part one in terms of opening weekend earnings; it earned S$1.51 million dollars in its opening weekend, thus breaking the record for the highest box office earnings for local productions, which was previously set by part one in 2012. It took in S$2.7 million over the Chinese New Year weekend period; on February 20, 2013, part two of "Ah Boys to Men" overtook part one in box office takings by grossing S$6.297 million and becoming the highest-grossing Singaporean film. As of February 21, 2013, part two has grossed S$6.446 million.
Home media.
Part one was released in DVD on January 25, 2013. More than 50,000 units of the DVD for part one have been sold.
