Stephen Amell (born May 8, 1981) is a Canadian actor. He stars as the vigilante Oliver Queen/Arrow on the CW network TV series "Arrow". 
Life and career.
Amell was born in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. He is known for playing Adam in the first season of the television series "Dante's Cove"; he was replaced in the second season by Jon Fleming.
Amell, credited as 'Steve Amell,' appeared in three episodes of the fourth season of "Queer as Folk" as the Liberty Ride spinning instructor in 2004.
In 2007, Amell won a Gemini Award for his guest-starring role on "ReGenesis". The same year he was also nominated for a Gemini Award in the Best Ensemble Cast Category for "Rent-a-Goalie".
He had recurring roles in the TV series "Da Kink in My Hair" and "Heartland".
On December 3, 2010 Amell joined the cast of "The Vampire Diaries" as werewolf 'Brady' for season 2. 
Amell starred as Joran van der Sloot in the Lifetime movie "Justice for Natalee Holloway" which originally aired in May 2011.
On October 2, 2011, Season 3 of HBO's TV series "Hung" premiered with Amell starring as busboy-turned-prostitute 'Jason', a younger rival "ho" to Thomas Jane's 'Ray Drecker'. And in 90210 Season 4 Episodes 4 & 5 as Jim.
Amell announced on October 28, 2011 that he had just finished filming the Christmas episode of "New Girl" with Zooey Deschanel and Max Greenfield. He touches on the experience of filming his first "network half hour comedy" in an interview with "Daemon's TV".
On November 9, 2011 that Amell was announced for the recurring role of "Scottie", a paramedic on ABC's primetime medical drama "Private Practice".
In January 2012, Amell was cast as the titular character in the The CW series "Arrow", a re-imagining of the comic-book character Green Arrow. In June of 2012, Amell was cast to play as Wynn Delaney in Believe Pictures' film adaptation of Janette Oke's beloved Canadian West series of novels "When Calls The Heart", which is due to be premiered on The Hallmark Channel in 2013. 
Personal life.
Amell married Cassandra Jean on December 25, 2012 while on a vacation in the Caribbean. Amell is the older cousin of fellow actor Robbie Amell.
Awards.
The Gemini Awards were awarded annually by the Academy of Canadian Cinema & Television. Stephen Amell has received one award from three nominations. The IGN People's Choice Awards were awarded annually by Internet Media website IGN. Stephen Amell was nominated for one award. 
