Paul Stephen Rudd (born April 6, 1969) is an American actor, comedian, and screenwriter. He has primarily appeared in comedies, and is known for his roles in the films "" (2004), "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" (2005), "Knocked Up" (2007), "Forgetting Sarah Marshall" (2008), "I Love You, Man" (2009), "Dinner for Schmucks" (2010), "Our Idiot Brother" (2011), "The Perks of Being a Wallflower" (2012), and "This Is 40" (2012). In television, he appeared on the NBC sitcom "Friends", playing Mike Hannigan, Phoebe Buffay's boyfriend and later husband for the final two seasons, and is commonly featured on the "Tim and Eric" show.
Early life.
Rudd was born in Passaic, New Jersey. His parents, who were raised in London, England, were both Jewish, and were descended from immigrants from Russia and Poland. The family's original surname, "Rudnitzky", was changed by his grandfather to "Rudd". Rudd had a bar mitzvah. His father, Michael, was a historical tour guide who was formerly the vice president of Trans World Airlines (TWA), while his mother, Gloria, was a sales manager at the television station KSMO-TV. When he was ten, Rudd's family moved to Overland Park, Kansas, where he was raised; his family also spent three years living in Anaheim, California, because of his father's occupation. He attended high school at Shawnee Mission West and college at the University of Kansas, where he was a member of the Nu Chapter of Sigma Nu. He spent three months studying Jacobean drama at the British American Drama Academy based in Oxford, U.K. While attending acting school, Rudd worked as a DJ.
Career.
Rudd made his breakout performance in the 1995 film "Clueless". Additional early career credits include "Wet Hot American Summer", "Halloween: The Curse of Michael Myers", "The Cider House Rules", "William Shakespeare's Romeo + Juliet", and "The Object of My Affection". He also garnered recognition with a recurring role on the television sitcom "Friends" as Mike Hannigan, who married Phoebe Buffay. Rudd's Broadway acting credits include "The Last Night of Ballyhoo" (1997), "Twelfth Night" (1998), and "Three Days of Rain" (2006). He guest-starred as a hasbeen 1990s rock star, Desmond Fellows, on the television series, "Veronica Mars", in an episode titled "Debasement Tapes". He voiced the audiobook recordings of John Hodgman's books "The Areas of My Expertise" and "More Information Than You Require". In 2006, he appeared in several episodes of "Reno 911!" as "Guy Gerricault" (pronounced ""jericho""), the coach of a lamaze class, and portrayed a drug lord in the film "". In 2012, he signed to appear on four episodes of NBC's "Parks and Recreation" as Bobby Newport, a candidate for City Council and a rival of Amy Poehler's character Leslie Knope. He won the Critics' Choice Television Award for Best Guest Performer in a Comedy Series on June 18, 2012 for his portrayal as Bobby Newport. He also played FBI Agent Ian Curtis in Benny Chan's 2000 Hong Kong action film "Gen-Y Cops".
Rudd became a full-fledged comedy star with his roles in Judd Apatow pictures "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" (directed by Apatow) and "Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy" (produced by Apatow). In 2007, he starred as frustrated husband Pete in "Knocked Up", his third collaboration with Apatow and Seth Rogen. That year he also starred in both "The Oh in Ohio" and "The Ten", which reunited him with David Wain and Michael Showalter. The former film was a box-office and critical disappointment as was his next starring vehicle, "Over Her Dead Body" with Eva Longoria. He bounced back with a memorable supporting role as Kunu (Hawaiian for "Chuck"), the drug-addled surf instructor in Nicholas Stoller's "Forgetting Sarah Marshall". The film was a hit, as was his next comedy "Role Models", where he and co-star Seann William Scott portrayed energy-drink salesmen forced to perform community service in a child mentoring program. Rudd also made cameo appearances in "", "Year One" and "Night at the Museum".
In 2009, Rudd again appeared with Jason Segel in "I Love You Man". He co-created TV series "Party Down" with John Embom, "Rob Thomas" and Dan Etheridge. He lent his voice to the DreamWorks computer-animated hit movie "Monsters Vs. Aliens". In 2010, he reunited with Steve Carell for the first time since "The 40-Year-Old Virgin" for the Jay Roach-directed comedy "Dinner for Schmucks". In 2012, he had a supporting role in the teen drama "The Perks of Being a Wallflower", playing Mr. Anderson, a teacher of Charlie (Logan Lerman).
Rudd has become one of the most popular and marketable stars of Apatow films and the like, often starring with other regulars like Seth Rogen (four films), Jonah Hill (three films), Leslie Mann (three films), Kristen Wiig (three films), Jason Segel (three films), Steve Carell (four films), Elizabeth Banks (five films), and Joe Lo Truglio (seven films).
Running gags on television.
As part of a running gag during his appearances on "Late Night with Conan O'Brien", "The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien" and "Conan", Rudd has brought a clip from the film "Mac and Me", where the wheelchair-bound Eric (Jade Calegory) flies off a cliff while Mac watches on, instead of showing clips from the actual film he is there to promote. He also has appeared on stage for Conan O'Brien's live tour.
Rudd also has a running gag on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" in which Rudd and Jimmy Fallon appear to be setting up a clip from a film Rudd is appearing in. The clip that follows, however, is a clip from "Late Show with David Letterman" in which Rudd, in an earlier appearance, and David Letterman set up the clip verbatim to how Rudd and Fallon appeared to set up the clip.
Running gags in films.
Paul and Seth Rogen went back and forth with each other in a "You Know How I Know You're Gay?" dialogue in two films - "The 40 Year Old Virgin" (2005) and "Knocked Up" (2007). The scenes were reported to be unscripted.
Personal life.
In 2003, Rudd married Julie Yaeger and the couple have two children: A son, Jack Sullivan (b. 2006), and a daughter, Darby. Rudd frequently travels to Overland Park, Kansas, where he attended high school. He is a fan of Major League Baseball's Kansas City Royals and National Football League's Kansas City Chiefs, for whom he narrated the 2007 HBO special "Hard Knocks". He also frequents University of Kansas basketball games and is a big fan of the Jayhawks.
