Simon Maxwell Helberg (born December 9, 1980) is an American actor and comedian best known for his role as Howard Wolowitz in the sitcom "The Big Bang Theory", currently in its sixth season. He has appeared on the sketch comedy series "MADtv" and is also known for his role as Moist in the Joss Whedon-led web miniseries "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog".
Personal life.
Helberg was born in Los Angeles, California. He is the son of actor Sandy Helberg and casting director Harriet Helberg (née Birnbaum).
Inspired by the film "The Karate Kid", Helberg trained extensively in karate during his childhood and earned a black belt at the age of 10. He was raised in Judaism, "Conservative to Reform but more Reform as time went on." He is 5'4" tall.
Helberg attended middle and high school at the Crossroads School in Santa Monica, California, with Jason Ritter, who later became his roommate at NYU. He attended New York University's Tisch School of the Arts, where he trained at the Atlantic Theater Company.
Helberg is married to actress Jocelyn Towne; they dated for several years before marrying in 2007. They purchased a $3 million 4,179 square foot Hollywood estate from Brooke Mueller, Charlie Sheen's ex-wife. Helberg and Towne had their first child, a daughter Adeline, on May 8, 2012.
Career.
Helberg is one half of the comedy duo Derek & Simon, along with Derek Waters. The two most recently starred together in the web series "Derek & Simon: The Show" on the comedy website Super Deluxe, which they created with comedian Bob Odenkirk. Helberg officially joined the cast of "MADtv" in 2002 as a feature performer. His tenure on "MADtv" was limited to one season as his contract was not renewed.
Helberg appeared in the 2002 feature film "National Lampoon's Van Wilder" as one of the geeky students for whom Van Wilder was throwing a party. He had a minor role in the 2003 movie "Old School." In 2004, he was in two episodes of "Reno 911!": Student Driver in "Raineesha X" and Hooker Buying Son in "Not Without My Mustache." He had a small role in "Quintuplets," episode 6, Get a Job, as a man called Neil working behind the counter at a shoe shop where Paige and Patton were working.
He also played a small role in the film "" as a Jewish record producer. In 2004 he appeared in the film "A Cinderella Story" starring Hilary Duff and Chad Michael Murray; Helberg played the minor role of Terry in George Clooney's 2005 film "Good Night, and Good Luck," where he had one line. In 2005 he had a bit part on "Arrested Development" as Jeff, an employee of the film studio where Maeby worked. From 2006 to 2007, he had a minor supporting role as Alex Dwyer in the drama "Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip." In 2006, he appeared in a series of comical TV commercials for Richard Branson's UK financial services company "Virgin Money." He made a short appearance on "The Soup" on 2011.
He also appeared as the character Moist in "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog," and had a small role in the pilot of the Judd Apatow-produced sitcom "Undeclared." In the 2009 Coen brothers film "A Serious Man" he played junior Rabbi Scott Ginsler. He had a minor role in the Season 4 finale of "The Guild" as one of the Game Masters ("GM").
Helberg began playing Howard Wolowitz in 2007, as a geeky, wannabe "ladies' man" with an eccentric fashion sense, in the comedy series "The Big Bang Theory" and currently acts in this role.
