Candidiasis or thrush is a fungal infection (mycosis) of any of the "Candida" species (all yeasts), of which "Candida albicans" is the most common. Also commonly referred to as a yeast infection, candidiasis is also technically known as candidosis, moniliasis, and oidiomycosis.
Candidiasis encompasses infections that range from , such as oral thrush and vaginitis, to systemic and potentially life-threatening diseases. "Candida" infections of the latter category are also referred to as candidemia and are usually confined to severely immunocompromised persons, such as cancer, transplant, and AIDS patients, as well as nontrauma emergency surgery patients.
Superficial infections of skin and mucosal membranes by "Candida" causing local inflammation and discomfort are common in many human populations. While clearly attributable to the presence of the opportunistic pathogens of the genus "Candida", candidiasis describes a number of different disease syndromes that often differ in their causes and outcomes.
Signs and symptoms.
Symptoms of candidiasis vary depending on the area affected. Most candidial infections result in minimal complications such as redness, itching and discomfort, though complications may be severe or even fatal if left untreated in certain populations. In immunocompetent persons, candidiasis is usually a very localized infection of the skin or mucosal membranes, including the oral cavity (thrush), the pharynx or esophagus, the gastrointestinal tract, the urinary bladder, or the genitalia (vagina, penis).
Candidiasis is a very common cause of vaginal irritation, or vaginitis, and can also occur on the male genitals. In immunocompromised patients, "Candida" infections can affect the esophagus with the potential of becoming systemic, causing a much more serious condition, a fungemia called candidemia.
Thrush is commonly seen in infants. It is not considered abnormal in infants unless it lasts longer than a few weeks.
Infection of the vagina or vulva may cause severe itching, burning, soreness, irritation, and a whitish or whitish-gray cottage cheese-like discharge, often with a curd-like appearance. These symptoms are also present in the more common bacterial vaginosis. In a 2002 study published in the "Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology", only 33% of women who were self-treating for a yeast infection actually had a yeast infection, while most had either bacterial vaginosis or a mixed-type infection. Symptoms of infection of the male genitalia include red, patchy sores near the head of the penis or on the foreskin, severe itching, or a burning sensation. Candidiasis of the penis can also have a white discharge, although uncommon.
Causes.
"Candida" yeasts are generally present in healthy humans, particularly on the skin, but their growth is normally limited by the human immune system, by competition of other microorganisms, such as bacteria occupying the same locations in the human body, and in the case of skin, by the relative dryness of the skin, as "Candida" requires moisture for growth. 
"C. albicans" was isolated from the vaginas of 19% of apparently healthy women, i.e., those who experienced few or no symptoms of infection. External use of detergents or douches or internal disturbances (hormonal or physiological) can perturb the normal vaginal flora, consisting of lactic acid bacteria, such as lactobacilli, and result in an overgrowth of "Candida" cells, causing symptoms of infection, such as local inflammation. Pregnancy and the use of oral contraceptives have been reported as risk factors. Diabetes mellitus and the use of antibacterial antibiotics are also linked to an increased incidence of yeast infections. Diets high in simple carbohydrates have been found to affect rates of oral candidiases, and hormone replacement therapy and infertility treatments may also be predisposing factors. Wearing wet swimwear for long periods
of time is also believed to be a risk factor.
A weakened or undeveloped immune system or metabolic illnesses such as diabetes are significant predisposing factors of candidiasis. Diseases or conditions linked to candidiasis include HIV/AIDS, mononucleosis, cancer treatments, steroids, stress, and nutrient deficiency. Almost 15% of people with weakened immune systems develop a systemic illness caused by "Candida" species. In extreme cases, these superficial infections of the skin or mucous membranes may enter into the bloodstream and cause systemic "Candida" infections.
In penile candidiasis, the causes include sexual intercourse with an infected individual, low immunity, antibiotics, and diabetes. Male genital yeast infections are less common, and incidences of infection are only a fraction of those in women; however, yeast infection on the penis from direct contact via sexual intercourse with an infected partner is not uncommon.
"Candida" species are frequently part of the human body's normal oral and intestinal flora. Treatment with antibiotics can lead to eliminating the yeast's natural competitors for resources, and increase the severity of the condition. Higher prevalence of colonization of "C. albicans" was reported in young individuals with tongue piercing, in comparison to unpierced matched individuals. In the Western Hemisphere, about 75% of females are affected at some time in their lives.
Diagnosis.
Diagnosis of a yeast infection is done either via microscopic examination or culturing.
For identification by light microscopy, a scraping or swab of the affected area is placed on a microscope slide. A single drop of 10% potassium hydroxide (KOH) solution is then added to the specimen. The KOH dissolves the skin cells, but leaves the "Candida" cells intact, permitting visualization of pseudohyphae and budding yeast cells typical of many "Candida" species.
For the culturing method, a sterile swab is rubbed on the infected skin surface. The swab is then streaked on a culture medium. The culture is incubated at 37°C for several days, to allow development of yeast or bacterial colonies. The characteristics (such as morphology and colour) of the colonies may allow initial diagnosis of the organism causing disease symptoms.
Treatment.
In clinical settings, candidiasis is commonly treated with antimycotics; these antifungal drugs, commonly used to treat candidiasis, are topical clotrimazole, topical nystatin, fluconazole, and topical ketoconazole.
For example, a one-time dose of fluconazole (150-mg tablet taken orally) has been reported as being 90% effective in treating a vaginal yeast infection. This dose is only effective for vaginal yeast infections, and other types of yeast infections may require different dosing. In severe infections, amphotericin B, caspofungin, or voriconazole may be used. Local treatment may include vaginal suppositories or medicated douches. Gentian violet can be used for thrush in breastfeeding babies, but when used in large quantities, it can cause mouth and throat ulcerations, and has been linked to mouth cancer in humans and to cancer in the digestive tract of other animals.
Chlorhexidine gluconate oral rinse is not recommended to treat candidiasis, but is effective as prophylaxis; chlorine dioxide rinse was found to have similar "in vitro" effectiveness against "Candida".
"C. albicans" can develop resistance to antimycotic drugs. Recurring infections may be treatable with other antifungal drugs, but resistance to these alternative agents may also develop.
History.
Descriptions of what sounds like oral thrush go back to the time of Hippocrates "circa" 460 - 370 BC.
The genus "Candida" and species "C. albicans" were described by botanist Christine Marie Berkhout in her doctoral thesis at the University of Utrecht in 1923. Over the years, the classification of the genera and species has evolved. Obsolete names for this genus include "Mycotorula" and "Torulopsis". The species has also been known in the past as "Monilia albicans" and "Oidium albicans". The current classification is "nomen conservandum", which means the name is authorized for use by the International Botanical Congress (IBC).
The genus "Candida" includes about 150 different species; however, only a few are known to cause human infections. "C. albicans" is the most significant pathogenic species. Other species pathogenic in humans include "C. tropicalis", "C. glabrata", "C. krusei", "C. parapsilosis", "C. dubliniensis", and "C. lusitaniae".
Society and culture.
Some alternative medicine proponents postulate a widespread occurrence of systemic candidiasis (or candida hypersensitivity syndrome, yeast allergy, fungal type dysbiosis or gastrointestinal candida overgrowth), a medically unrecognised condition. The view was most widely promoted in a book published by Dr. William Crook that hypothesized a variety of common symptoms such as fatigue, PMS, sexual dysfunction, asthma, psoriasis, digestive and urinary problems, multiple sclerosis, and muscle pain could be caused by subclinical infections of "C. albicans". Crook suggested a variety of remedies to treat these symptoms, including dietary modification (commonly referred to as the "rainbow diet"--eating fresh foods and avoiding foods high in vinegar, sugar, or yeast), prescription antifungals, pau d'arco tea, echinacea tea, and colonic irrigation. With the exception of the few dietary studies in the urinary tract infection section, conventional medicine has not used most of these alternatives, since limited scientific evidence proves either their effectiveness or subclinical systemic candidiasis is a viable diagnosis.
In 1990, alternative health vendor "Nature's Way" signed an FTC consent agreement not to misrepresent in advertising any self-diagnostic test concerning yeast conditions or to make any unsubstantiated representation concerning any food or supplement's ability to control yeast conditions, with a fine of $30,000 payable to the National Institutes of Health for research in genuine candidiasis.
