Judge Joseph Dredd is a fictional character whose comic strip in the British science fiction anthology "2000 AD" is the magazine's longest running, having been featured there since its second issue in 1977. Dredd is an American law enforcement officer in a violent city of the future where uniformed Judges combine the powers of police, judge, jury and executioner. Dredd and his fellow Judges are empowered to arrest, sentence, and even execute criminals on the spot. The character was created by writer John Wagner and artist Carlos Ezquerra, although editor Pat Mills also deserves some credit for early development.
Judge Dredd is amongst the UK's best known home-grown comic characters. So great is the character's name recognition that his name is sometimes invoked over similar issues to those explored by the comic series, such as the police state, authoritarianism, and the rule of law. Judge Dredd was named the Seventh Greatest Comic Character by the British magazine "Empire". In 2011, IGN ranked him 35th in the Top 100 Comic Book Heroes.
Publication history.
When Pat Mills was developing "2000 AD" in 1976, he brought in his former writing partner, John Wagner, to develop characters. Wagner had written various "Dirty Harry"-style "tough cop" stories for other titles, and suggested a character who took that concept to its logical extreme, imagining an ultra-violent law-enforcement officer patrolling a future New York City with the power to administer instant justice. Mills had developed a horror strip called "Judge Dread" but abandoned the idea as unsuitable for the new comic; but the name, with the spelling modified to "Dredd" at the suggestion of sub-editor Kelvin Gosnell, was adopted by Wagner for his ultimate lawman.
The task of visualising the character was given to Carlos Ezquerra, a Spanish artist who had worked for Mills before on "Battle Picture Weekly". Wagner gave Ezquerra an advertisement for the film "Death Race 2000", showing the character Frankenstein (played by David Carradine) clad in black leather on a motorbike, as a suggestion for what the character should look like. Ezquerra elaborated on this greatly, adding body-armour, zips and chains, which Wagner initially thought to be over the top. Wagner's initial script was rewritten by Mills and drawn up by Ezquerra, but when the art came back a rethink was necessary. The hardware and cityscapes Ezquerra had drawn were far more futuristic than the near-future setting originally intended, but Mills decided to run with it and set the strip further in the future.
By this stage, Wagner had quit, disillusioned that a proposed buy-out of the new comic by another company (which would have given him and Mills a greater financial stake in the comic) had fallen through. Mills was reluctant to lose "Judge Dredd" and farmed the strip out to a variety of freelance writers, hoping to develop it further. Their scripts were given to a variety of artists as Mills tried to find a strip which would provide a good introduction to the character, all of which meant that "Judge Dredd" would not be ready for the first issue of "2000 AD", launched in February 1977.
The story chosen to introduce the character was submitted by Peter Harris, and extensively re-written by Mills. It was drawn by newcomer Mike McMahon. The strip debuted in "prog" (issue) No. 2, but Ezquerra, angry that another artist had drawn the first published strip, quit and returned to work for "Battle". Wagner soon returned to the character, starting in prog 9. His "Robot Wars" storyline was drawn by a rotating team of artists (including Ezquerra), and marked the point where Dredd became the most popular character in the comic, a position he has rarely relinquished. The character has appeared in almost every issue since, the bulk of the stories written by Wagner (in collaboration with Alan Grant between 1980 and 1988).
Since 1990 Dredd has also headlined his own title, the "Judge Dredd Megazine". With Wagner concentrating his energies there, the "Dredd" strip in "2000 AD" was left to younger writers such as Garth Ennis, Mark Millar, Grant Morrison and John Smith. Their efforts were not popular with fans, and sales fell. Wagner returned to writing the character full-time in 1994.
"Judge Dredd" has also been published in a long-running comic strip (1981–1998) in the "Daily Star", and briefly in "Metro" from January 2004 – 2005. These were usually created by the same teams writing and drawing the main strip and the "Daily Star" strips have been collected into a number of volumes.
Character and appearance.
Joseph Dredd is the most famous of the elite corps of Street Judges that run Mega-City One, charged with the power not only to enforce the law, but also to instantly convict and sentence offenders – and occasionally even execute them. Dredd is armed with a "Lawgiver" pistol (programmed to recognise only his palm-print, and capable of firing six different types of ammunition), a daystick, a knife, and stun/gas grenades. His helmet obscures all of his face, except for his mouth and jaw. He rides a large "Lawmaster" motorbike, which has machineguns, a powerful laser cannon, and full artificial intelligence capable of responding to orders from the Judge and operating itself.
Dredd's entire face is never shown properly in the strip. This custom began as an unofficial guideline, but soon became a rule which artists were required to follow. As John Wagner explained: "It sums up the facelessness of justice − justice has no soul. So it isn't necessary for readers to see Dredd's face, and I don't want you to."
On very rare occasions Dredd's face has been shown in flashbacks to when he was a child, in pictures lacking in detail. In an early story in prog 8, Dredd is forced to remove his helmet and the other characters react as if he is disfigured; but, Dredd's face was covered by a faux censorship sticker. In only one other prog has Dredd's face been on view. In Prog 52, during Dredd's tenure on the Lunar Colonies, he uses a 'face-change' machine to impersonate the crooked lawyer of a gang of bank robbers. 
An aborted idea was to have Dredd as a non-white character. In Carlos Ezquerra's original design he drew Dredd with large lips, "to put a mystery as to his racial background." Not all of the artists who worked on the strip were told. As a result Mike McMahon spent four months drawing Dredd as a black man, while Brian Bolland and Ron Smith drew him as a white man. As the strip was not printed in colour, this went unnoticed and the idea was dropped.
Time passes in the "Judge Dredd" strip in real time, so as a year passes in real life a year goes by in the comic. Thus the first Dredd story, published in 1977, was set in 2099, and stories published in 2013 are set in 2135. Consequently, as former editor Alan McKenzie explains, "every year that goes by Dredd gets a year older – unlike Spider-Man, who has been a university student for the past twenty-five years!" Dredd is over seventy years old, with over fifty years of active service (2079–2134), and for some time characters in the comic have been mentioning that Dredd is not as young and fit as he used to be. This remains a theme of some recent episodes: in prog 1595 (2008) Dredd was diagnosed with benign cancer of the duodenum. It is not known whether there are any long term plans to address this issue (although Mega-City One has cloning and brain transplant technology, for instance). In an interview with "Empire" in 2012 Wagner said: "There could be many ways to end it, but the probability is that I won’t still be around when it happens! I would love to write it, but I can’t see it happening. I’ll leave the script in my will."
Fictional character biography.
Senior Judge Joseph Dredd and his brother Rico Dredd were cloned from the DNA of Chief Judge Fargo, the first chief judge, in 2066. Their growth was artificially accelerated so that they emerged with an apparent physiological age of 5, with all the appropriate knowledge for their age electronically implanted in their brains by computer during gestation. The name Dredd was chosen by the genetic scientist who created them, Morton Judd, to "instill fear in the population."
In 2070, they saw action for the first time during the Atomic Wars, when as cadets they were temporarily assigned the rank of full judge and sent to restore order to the panic-stricken streets. Distinguishing themselves, they were chosen to take part in assaulting the White House when the Justice Department deposed President Booth. They were fast-tracked through the Academy of Law, Joe graduating second in his class in 2079 (Rico came first). Later that year Joe was forced to arrest Rico for murder and corruption.
Joe Dredd excelled as a judge, rapidly gaining promotion to the rank of senior judge. Offered the opportunity to become chief judge in 2101, he declined, preferring to serve on the streets enforcing the law. On several different occasions he saved his city from conquest or complete destruction by powerful enemies, and in 2114, he almost single-handedly saved the world from being destroyed during the Fourth World War.
Although Dredd puts his duty to uphold the law above everything, this devotion is not blind loyalty. On two occasions (in 2099 and 2112), Dredd resigned from the force on points of principle, but both times, he returned to the fold. In 2113, Dredd insisted that the Justice Department gamble its very existence on a referendum to prove its legitimacy as a form of government. In 2116, he risked 20 years' imprisonment with hard labour when he challenged the policy of a chief judge which he was unable to support. In 2129, he threatened to resign to persuade another chief judge to change the city's harsh anti-mutant laws.
After over fifty years of active service, Dredd's career may be drawing to a close. In 2130, he was diagnosed with cancer, though it was said to be operable. In 2132, Dredd was appointed to the Council of Five, Mega-City One's highest governing body, on which he served for two years.
The Judge system.
Street Judges act as police, judge, jury and, if necessary, on-the-spot executioner. Capital punishment in Mega-City One is rarely used, though deaths while resisting arrest are numerous. Numerous writers have used the Judge System to satirize contemporary politics.
Judges, once appointed, can be broadly characterised as "Street Judges" (who patrol the city), and administrative, or office-based, judges. Dredd was once offered the job of Chief Judge, but he refused it, believing that he was needed far more out on the streets. The incorruptibility of the Judges is supposedly maintained by the Special Judicial Squad, although even SJS judges have themselves broken the law on occasion, most notably SJS head Judge Cal who killed the chief judge and usurped his office for himself.
The Judge System has spread throughout the globe, with various super-cities besides Mega-City One possessing some sort of Judge System of law enforcement and government. As such this political model has become the most common form of government on Earth, with only a few small areas practicing traditional civilian rule. There is an international "Judicial Charter" which countries and city states join upon instituting a Judge system.
Dredd's world.
The setting of Judge Dredd is a dystopian future Earth that has been badly damaged by a series of international conflicts; much of the planet has turned to radioactive wasteland, and so populations have tended to aggregate in enormous conurbations known as 'mega-cities'. The world of Judge Dredd is centred on the megalopolis of Mega-City One, on the east coast of North America. Within Mega-City One, extensive automation (including the creation of a caste of intelligent robots) has rendered the majority of the population unemployed. As a consequence, the general population is prone to embracing any fashion or craze that comes along. Mega-City One is surrounded by the inhospitable "Cursed Earth" desert. Much of the remaining world's geography is somewhat vague, although other mega-cities have been referred to and visited in the strip.
Mega-City One's population lives in gigantic tower blocks known as City Blocks, each holding some fifty thousand or so people. Each is named after some historical person or TV character, usually for comic effect. For example, Joe Dredd used to live in the Rowdy Yates Block – Rowdy Yates was a character in the American TV cowboy drama "Rawhide," played by a young Clint Eastwood. Eastwood would later play the lead in "Dirty Harry" – one of the thematic influences by which Judge Dredd was inspired. A number of stories feature rivalries between different blocks, on many occasions breaking into full-scale gun battles between them (most notably in "Block Mania"). The Judges' extreme powers reflect the difficulty of maintaining any order at all in the Mega-City's stifling environment.
Despite its frequent disasters, Mega-City One stretches from around Boston to Charlotte; it stretched further before the Apocalypse War, which saw widespread death and devastation, the south of the city being entirely wiped out. At its height, the city contained a population of about 800 million; after the Apocalypse War, it averaged at 400 million; following Chaos Day in 2134, the city was reduced to 50 million. The story "Origins" revealed that Mega-City One was formed because of growing urban sprawl rather than deliberate design, and by 2051 it was recognised as the world's first mega-city.
There are four other major population centres in Dredd's Northern America. The first is Texas City, stretching across several of the southern former United States and with a different culture to its northern cousin, based on Wild West frontier values. South of the city is Mex-City. Far north is Uranium City. Canada remains a nation, now called Canadia, with scattered communities. Until 2114 Mega-City Two also existed on the West Coast, but was destroyed during the world war known as Judgement Day. 
Nuclear deserts and destruction elsewhere in the world are also extensive. Much of the north Atlantic is severely polluted, and is now known as the "Black Atlantic." An underwater settlement known as Atlantis exists in the Atlantic, half-way along a tunnel from Mega-City One to Brit-Cit (England).
Nuclear desert also stretches across western Europe. The British Isles are Brit-Cit, Cal-Hab (future Scotland), and Murphyville in Ireland, which has become a country-sized theme park re-creating a stereotypical view of traditional Irish life. The continent has Euro-City (eastern France and part of Germany), Ciudad España (eastern Spain), the Ruhr and Berlin Conurbs in Germany, Vatican City, and a scattering of other megacities and city-states. Russia's East-Meg One was destroyed by Dredd in a massive nuclear strike at the climax of the Apocalypse War in 2104. Further east is East-Meg Two, which has other territories under the "Sov Block" banner. Mongolia, lacking a Mega-City or Judge system, has called itself the Mongolian Free State and criminals have flocked there for a safe haven; East-Meg Two performed vicious clearances there in 2125.
In Asia, separated from East-Meg Two by an extensive nuclear desert, are Sino-City One (destroyed during Judgement Day) and Sino-City Two in eastern China, with Hong Tong built in the remains of Hong Kong and partitioned between Sino-Cit and Brit-Cit control. Hondo City lies on the remains of the islands of Japan. Nu-Delhi (previously Indo-Cit and Delhi-City) is in southern India. Between Hondo and Sino-City lie the Radlands of Ji, a nuclear desert full of chaos magic and many violent outlaw gangs and martial arts schools. Into the Blue Pacific cities survive in south-east Australia or "Oz" (the Sydney-Melbourne Conurbation), the Solomon Islands (Solomon City), Tonga (Friendly City), and the New Pacific City; New Zealand is said to exist as well. All of Indonesia's islands are now linked by a network of mutant coral called "The Web;" this network of islands is a lawless hotbed of crime.
The Middle East is without major cities, being either nuclear or natural deserts, and only the mega-city of Luxor, Egypt has survived; the Mediterranean coast is heavily damaged by mutagens. In Africa much of the south is nuclear desert and the Great African Dustbowl has formed in the north-west, but a large number of nation states have survived in one form or another; Simba City (Gabon), New Jerusalem (Ethiopia), Zambian Metropolitan, and Dar es Salaam are the largest cities. Nuclear fallout and pollution appear to have missed Antarctica and the Arctic, causing one mega-city (Antarctic City) to have been constructed there.
The high levels of pollution have created instances of mutation in humans and animals. The mega-cities largely operate on a system of genetic apartheid, making expulsion from the cities the worst punishment possible. Mega-City One ended apartheid in the 2130s, but encourages mutants to move to Cursed Earth townships instead of remaining in the city.
Earth's moon has been colonised, with a series of large domes forming Luna City; another colony, Puerto Luminae, exists but is a lawless, violent hellhole. In addition many deep space colonies have been established. Some are loyal to various mega cities, while many are independent states, and others still face violent insurgencies to gain independence. The multi-national Space Corps battles both insurgencies and external alien threats. The newly discovered planet Hestia (which orbits the Sun near to but at 90 degrees to Earth's orbit) has a colony, there are some references to colonies on Mars such as Viking City, Saturn's moon Titan has a judicial penal colony, and Mega-City One is known to have deep space missile silos on Pluto.
Major Judge Dredd storylines.
There have been a number of Judge Dredd storylines that have either significantly developed the Dredd character or the fictional world background, or which have been "epic" in scale (i.e., have been lengthy multi-part stories, usually at least 20 parts or more, and have had a story of a grand scale). These are listed below. (For a complete list of all stories see here.)
List of stories.
All of the stories from both comics are currently being reprinted in their original order of publication in two series of trade paperbacks. Stories from the regular issues of "2000 AD" and the "Megazine" are collected in a series entitled "Judge Dredd: The Complete Case Files." This series began in 2005. Stories from special holiday issues and annuals appear in "Judge Dredd: The Restricted Files". This four-volume series began in 2010 and concluded in 2012.
Alternative versions.
Shortly before the release of the 1995 movie, three new comic book titles were released, followed by a one-off comic version of the film story.
In other media.
Films.
"Judge Dredd" (1995).
An American film loosely based on the comic strip was released in 1995, starring Sylvester Stallone as Dredd (it was said that Arnold Schwarzenegger was originally requested for the role, but declined because in the original script, Dredd would keep the helmet on during major parts of the film). The film received negative reviews upon its release. It currently holds a 15% rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, with the critical consensus stating that "Director Cannon fails to find the necessary balance to make it work". In deference to its expensive Hollywood star, Dredd's face was shown. In the comic, he very rarely removes his helmet, and even then his real face is never revealed. Also the writers largely omitted the ironic humour of the comic strip, and ignored important aspects of the "Dredd mythology". For example, in the film a "love interest" is developed between Dredd and Judge Hershey, something that is strictly forbidden between Judges (or Judges and anyone else for that matter) in the comic strip. In the United States, the film won several "worst film of the year" awards. Also of interest is the cameo appearance of an ABC Warrior robot bearing a distinct resemblance to Hammerstein.
"Dredd" (2012).
Reliance Entertainment produced "Dredd", which was released in September 2012. It was positively received by critics with Rotten Tomatoes' rating of 77%. It was directed by Pete Travis and written by Alex Garland. Michael S. Murphey (supervising producer on "District 9") was co-producer with Travis. Karl Urban was cast as Judge Dredd and Olivia Thirlby portrayed Judge Anderson. Dredd's costume was radically redesigned for the film, adding armor plates and reducing the size and prominence of the shoulder insignia.
The film was shot in 3-D and filmed in Cape Town and Johannesburg. Funding was secured from Reliance Big Entertainment.
Games.
Videogames.
There have been multiple Judge Dredd games released for various video game consoles and several home computers such as the Sinclair ZX Spectrum and Commodore 64. At one time, an arcade game was being developed by Midway Games, creators of the "Mortal Kombat" series but it was never released. It can however be found on the internet and has three playable levels.
A game loosely based on the first live action film, simply called "Judge Dredd" was developed by Probe Software and released by Acclaim for both the Sega Genesis and the Super Nintendo Entertainment System. Bally also produced a "Judge Dredd" pinball machine based on the comics. In 1997, Acclaim released a "Judge Dredd" arcade game, a rail shooter featuring 3D graphics and full motion video footage shot specifically for the game.
"" was produced by Rebellion Developments and released in early 2003 by Sierra Entertainment for the PC, PlayStation 2, Xbox and Nintendo GameCube. The game sees the return of the Dark Judges when Mega-City One becomes overrun with vampires and the undead. The player takes control of Judge Dredd, with the optional addition of another Human player in Co-operative play. The whole game is played in the style of an FPS (first-person shooter) – with key differences from the standard FPS being the requirement to arrest lawbreakers, and an SJS death squad which will hunt you down should you kill too many civilians. The player can also go up against three friends in the various multiplayer modes which include "Deathmatch", "Team Deathmatch", "Elimination", "Team Elimination", "Informant", "Judges Vs. Perps", "Runner" and more. A novel was based on the game.
A costume set for the PlayStation 3 video game "LittleBigPlanet" was released in May 2009 which contained outfits to dress the game's main character Sackboy as five "2000 AD" characters one of which is Judge Dredd. Dredd's uniform is also used to create the Judge Anderson costume for the Sackpeople.
In 2012, Rebellion released "Judge Dredd Vs. Zombies", a game application for iPhone, Android phones, Windows 8 and Windows Phone.
Roleplaying games.
Games Workshop released a "Judge Dredd" role-playing game in 1985. Mongoose Publishing released games in 2002 and 2009.
On July 17, 2012 Tin Man Games released a "Judge Dredd" themed digital role-playing gamebook titled "Judge Dredd: Countdown Sector 106", available for the iOS operating system.
Boardgames and collectible card games.
Mongoose Publishing have released a miniatures skirmish game of gang warfare based in Mega City 1 called "Gangs of Mega-City One", often referred to as GOMC1. The game features judges being called in when a gang challenges another gang that is too tough to fight. A wide range of miniatures has been released including box sets for an Ape Gang and an Undercity Gang. A Robot Gang was also produced but was released as two blister packs instead of a box set. Only one rules expansion has been released, called "Death on the Streets". The expansion introduced many new rules including usage of the new gangs and the ability to bring Judge Dredd himself into a fight. 
This game went out of print shortly thereafter but was replaced by the "Judge Dredd Miniatures Game", which was published free in many stages as the company sought feedback from fans and players. In 2012, an expansion was released called "Block War!". Miniatures continue to be manufactured at a slow pace.
There was also a short-lived collectible card game called simply "Dredd". In the game players would control a squad of judges and arrest perps. The rules system was innovative and the game was well-received by fans and collectors alike, but various issues unrelated to the game's quality caused its early demise.
Games Workshop produced a boardgame based on the comic strip in 1982. In the game players, who represent judges, attempt to arrest perps that have committed crimes in different location in Mega City One. A key feature of the game is the different action cards that are collected during play; generally these cards are used when trying to arrest perps although some cards can also be played against other players to hinder their progress. The winner of the game is the judge who collected the most points arresting perps. Players could sabotage each others' arrest attempts. Additionally, there were many amusing card combinations such as arresting Judge Death for selling old comics, as the "Old Comic Selling" crime card featured a "2000 AD" cover with Judge Death on it. The game used characters, locations and artwork from the comic but is now out of print.
In 1987, Games Workshop published a second Dredd-inspired boardgame, "Block Mania." In this game for two players, players take on the role of rival neighboring blocks at war. This was a heavier game than the earlier Dredd boardgame, focused on tactical combat, in which players control these residents as they use whatever means they can to vandalize and destroy their opponent's block. Later the same year, Games Workshop released the Mega Mania expansion for the game, allowing the game to be played by up to four players.
Novels.
e-books.
In August 2012 Rebellion announced a new series of e-books under the series title "Judge Dredd: Year One", about Dredd's first year as a judge (the stories in the comic strip having begun in his 20th year when he was already a veteran).
Audio series.
In recent years Big Finish Productions has produced eighteen audio plays featuring "2000 AD" characters. These have mostly featured Judge Dredd although three have also featured Strontium Dog. In these Judge Dredd is played by Toby Longworth and Johnny Alpha, the Strontium Dog is played by Simon Pegg. In July 2009 four further Judge Dredd titles were released under the banner "Crime Chronicles", once more featuring Toby Longworth.
"Note: 3 and 10 are Strontium Dog stories that do not feature Dredd."
In addition, both "The Day the Law Died" and "The Apocalypse War" stories were featured on Mark Goodier's afternoon show on BBC Radio One, and issued separately on dual cassette and double CD. Both titles have since been deleted. "The Apocalypse War" contains plot elements from "Block Mania", as this story set the scene for the main story.
