Nexus 4 ("codename: Mako") is Google's fourth Nexus-branded Android smartphone. The phone was designed with and manufactured by LG Electronics.
The phone is equipped with a 1.5 GHz quad-core Snapdragon S4 Pro processor, 2 GB of RAM, 8 or 16 GB of internal storage, front facing 1.3 megapixel camera and an 8 megapixel rear camera and a micro-SIM card tray. The phone was launched with the new Android 4.2 operating system, titled (as was Android 4.1) "Jelly Bean".
History.
On October 29, 2012, Google announced the Nexus 4 and scheduled its launch for November 13, 2012.
The phone was made available for purchase on the Google Play online store in the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Germany, France, Spain, and Australia. Stock sold out quickly, in some markets within minutes of release. Google and LG had not yet announced when the phone would again be available for ordering, although it was made available in US markets on January 29, 2013.
The Nexus 4 was also made available through industry-standard means, via phone operators and retailers such as the Carphone Warehouse. Starting the following day, November 14, 2012, T-Mobile USA stores would sell the 16 GB model. On Thanksgiving morning, Google linked those customers browsing the Nexus 4 product page over to the online store of T-Mobile.com. Within hours, T-Mobile's online stock was sold out.
Europe, Central and South America, Asia, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and the Middle East were planned to receive Nexus 4 by the end of November 2012 in what Google referred to as "offline availability".
The phone was initially planned to be unavailable in South Korea due to carrier opposition, purportedly over the lack of LTE support. However, an online claim by KT Telecom President Pyo Hyun-myung that he is requesting for the Nexus 4 launch has led to LG's announcement that they are in talks with Google about the issue as of November 22, 2012.
The Nexus 4's extremely low stock numbers, double digit shipping dates, and the product's Google Play page not working caused Boy Genius Report and Phonearena to brand the phone's launch a "failure". The number of sales of the device have been estimated by some users of the XDA Developers forum to be around 370,000 up to December; however, that estimate has been dismissed by LG as being "a lot lower than the actual figure". The phone became available in the Play store again on January 29, 2013, and since then has had no major supply issues. 
On January 30, 2013, several images of a new white version of the Nexus 4 were leaked onto the internet.
On February 7, 2013, it was estimated by users of XDA Developers that sales had surpassed 1 million devices.
Carrier availability.
In addition to the Google Play store, the Nexus 4 is also available through carriers in some markets. It is available in the US through T-Mobile, and it will also be launched in Canada through Videotron, WIND, and Fido.
In the UK, the Nexus 4 is available through O2, Virgin Media, and Three.
Reception.
Reception of the Nexus 4 has been very positive overall. Reviewers were consistently impressed with the Nexus 4's affordable price and impressive specifications. The Independent mentioned how its build quality is "almost second to none", and how its design is "solid" and "attractive". They also complimented its 8 megapixel rear camera, and "huge" 4.7 inch display.
The Guardian also gave the Nexus 4 a very positive review, giving it a rating of five stars, however commented how "lack of expandable storage is worth bearing in mind if you're thinking of upgrading on a contract from, say, a previous Samsung Galaxy S phone, mind. The Galaxy S III still makes a more logical upgrade, even if it's likely to be a little slower to get the latest Android software updates".
Technology website CNET stated how the phone has "a wealth of great software features and a ridiculously low price", and how it is "almost certainly the best Android device around, never mind the best value".
Availability.
One area in which the phone received negative reception was its availability. On the day of release, the entire Nexus 4 stock on the Play Store sold out in under 30 minutes. Critics mentioned how Google and LG were responsible for the severe supply issues, and "the stock outs and the resulting frustrations of the great many who waited in vain during the holidays for the Nexus 4 deliveries that never came". International Business Times expressed concern about how by the time the phone will be back in stock on Google Play, many phones with much better specifications will be available, making it a less sought choice for consumers. LG explained how the supply problems were because "demand via the Play Store has been very high". Online eBay auctioneers took advantage of the supply issues, reselling Nexus 4s at inflated prices, some reaching over £420 ($675) for the 16GB model - an increase of over 50%.
LTE support.
The lack of a usable LTE radio also garnered some criticism. While some more expensive high-end phones are shipping with usable LTE radios, the Nexus 4's LTE radio is not activated and only uses HSPA+ with a theoretical peak speed of 42 Mbps (5.25 MB/s), compared to the 100 Mbit/s (12.5 MB/s) that can theoretically be achieved with LTE. Google noted that it omitted LTE technology in order to reduce size, cost, and power consumption, as well as to see how network technology evolved in the near future. On November 23, 2012, it was confirmed that, through modifying device settings, it was possible for the device to use LTE Band 4 (AWS). The ability to enable LTE was disabled with the release of Android 4.2.2.
Build quality.
Another criticism is that the phone's front and back glass tends to break easily. The front glass breaks around the speaker.
Autonomy.
Battery autonomy was benchmarked as lower in browsing use on 3G when compared to similar but more expensive android devices, or to LTE capable phones.
