Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu, also known as SVSC, is a Telugu film written and directed by Srikanth Addala. The film stars Venkatesh, Mahesh Babu, Anjali and Samantha, with Prakash Raj, Jayasudha and Rohini Hattangadi in supporting roles. The film was produced by Dil Raju under Sri Venkateswara Creations banner. The film is publicized to be the first multi-starrer in Telugu industry in over two decades, though "Eeenadu" starring Kamal Haasan and Venkatesh was a bigger multi-starrer that released in 2009. The film was launched on October 6, 2011 and filming began on January 18, 2012 in Visakhapatnam. The soundtrack of the film, scored by Mickey J Meyer, was released on December 16, 2012. The film was released worldwide on January 11, 2013 to rave reviews from the critics and was declared as a blockbuster at the box office.
Plot.
The film begins in the town of Relangi. In this town there is a man who is fondly known "Relangi Mavayya" (uncle). The middle-class family of Relangi Mavayya has two sons known as Peddodu (elder) (Venkatesh) and Chinnodu (younger) (Mahesh Babu) and a daughter. Relangi Mavayya's sister married a man and had a daughter. After having this daughter, she and her husband passed away leaving the girl, Seetha (Anjali), to live with her uncle, Relangi Mavayya. From her childhood, Seetha has seen Peddodu as her husband, but he never visibly reciprocates her feelings: always referring to her as "osey" and "yem ey?"! Peddodu does not like to change himself to please others and is very introverted. Chinnodu, on the other hand, likes to make others change for himself and will fight for what is right. However, the two brothers are as close as can be. The movie starts off with small incidents happening in the day to day life of the family that helps the viewer understand the tight knit family and its love for each of its members. The main story starts when Venkatesh quits his job because he is told to change his ways and be more friendly and talkative. Meanwhile, Seetha's paternal uncle and family, the rich family referred to as "Vijayawada Manushulu" hears that Relangi Mavayya wants Seetha to marry Pedoddu. However, Seetha's paternal uncle (Rao Ramesh) does not want that to happen. Rao Ramesh, unlike the rest of his family, hates the Relangi family partly due to jealousy and partly due to social and economic status. Since Rao Ramesh's older daughter is getting married, he gives a wedding card to Relangi Mavayya's family out of pure courtesy. Since Relangi Mavayya cannot make it, he sends Chinnodu on his behalf. It is here that Chinoddu sees Geetha (Samantha), Rao Ramesh's younger daughter, and it is love at first sight for both of them. Although they must go their separate ways after the wedding, they exchange phone numbers and speak on a regular basis. While Relangi Mavayya goes out of town to pick up his daughter (Abhinaya), he bumps into the newlyweds (Rao Ramesh's daughter, her husband, and his parents). The boy's parents see Mavayya's daughter and set a pelli choopulu (pre-engagement program) for her and one of their close friends. Although Peddodu does not like the alliance because it came from Vijayawada, Chinnodu convinces him and the wedding is set.
At the wedding, Relangi Mavayya asks Peddodu to stand at the main entrance and greet everyone and for Chinnodu to greet as people sit. The entire Vijayawada family comes and Rao Ramesh has nothing but ill to speak of Relangi Mavayya and his family. When Peddodu hears this, he gets very upset. Chinnodu tries to convince him to put on a brave face for the sake of their sister and parents' happiness just for the night and that they will sort everything out in the morning. However, the brothers have a fight. Although the fight does not last very long, this becomes a source of tension between the two and the rest of the movie is about how they overcome these petty arguments and how they work to help make sure Rao Ramesh does not say anything about their father ever again. 
At last all will be in sad feeling to how all have to understand and go for the future ahead. Then chinnodu starts from the home town to Hyderabad to find a job but he loose due to his attention. In the middle of the controversial their father will meet with an accident to save other person and admitted to the hosipital. The person who saves was his close relatives son then he tell about his goodness save your life. While all things happening site think a solution to make all of them together a way to temple their chinnodu lovers family will also appear their an incident will take place and in that incident all will make understand each other and peddudu call sita and thier marriage will arranged and ended as incomplete.
Production.
Development.
Srikanth Addala, who debuted with "Kotha Bangaru Lokam" (2008), had reportedly worked for two years on the script of this film. The film was initially planned to be made with Pawan Kalyan and Venkatesh, but the former was replaced with Mahesh. Dil Raju confirmed in early January 2012 that Samantha was part of the project and would be paired opposite Mahesh Babu. Mickey J Meyer was roped in to score the music. K. V. Guhan would handle the cinematography, while Anantha Sreeram and Sirivennela Sitaramasastri will be penning the lyrics for the songs.
Casting.
In November 2010, it was reported that director Srikanth Addala and Dil Raju were planning to make a multi-starrer film and that they had approached Venkatesh for one of the main leads. Impressed with the script, Venkatesh agreed to star in the film and suggested Pawan Kalyan for the other role. Initial reports suggested that Pawan agreed to be part of the film and filming would begin in early or mid-2011. But later it was reported that Pawan opted out of the film for unknown reasons. Although Venkatesh was committed to the project, Srikanth was unable to zero in on the other lead role and the film was thought to be shelved. But in June 2011, news about the film once again surfaced when it was reported that Mahesh Babu was keen to do the film when Dil Raju and Srikanth met him while shooting for "Dookudu" at Hyderabad. In July 2011, it was reported that Venkatesh and Mahesh will be part of "Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle chettu" and filming will begin in October 2011. In September 2011, Venkatesh met Mahesh on the sets of "Dookudu" thereby strengthening the claims of them working together. In early October, the film was officially launched and it was reported that Mahesh Babu's "Dookudu" co-star Samantha was cast for the film. At the launch of the movie, it was also revealed that Venkatesh and Mahesh would play brothers in the film and that Prakash Raj was cast for the role of their father in the film. It was reported that the makers of the film were having a tough time in finding an actress to star opposite Venkatesh. It was reported that Trisha Krishnan was cast in the film, who however dismissed the claims. It was later reported that Nayantara was interested in the project, but was not chosen when she reportedly asked 2.5 crore salary. It was also reported that Bhumika Chawla, Anushka Shetty and Sneha were also approached for the role. In mid December 2011, Amala Paul was considered for the role and screen tests were done on her. In late December 2011, Dil Raju announced that Samantha was part of the project, there by putting to rest all the rumors about the actress being replaced. He also announced that she would star opposite Mahesh in the film. In January 2012, it was reported that Amala Paul walked out of the film due to unknown reasons and Dil Raju was considering Telugu-born Tamil actress Anjali for the role. In January 2012, after months of speculation Dil Raju finally announced that Anjali would play the female lead opposite Venkatesh. It was also announced that popular Telugu actress Jayasudha was cast in the role of mother in the film.
In February 2012, news broke out that Prakash Raj walked out of the project due to conflicts with Dil Raju. It was reported that Bollywood actor Anupam Kher was in talks to replace Prakash Raj in the film. This was also later confirmed by Anupam Kher on his Twitter account. In March 2012, it was reported that Tamil actor Nassar was cast for the role. Finally after much speculation, Dil Raju announced that Prakash Raj was still part of the film and clarified that all the reports regarding the rift between him and Prakash Raj were untrue. National Award winning actress Rohini Hattangadi was cast for the grand mother role in the film. Abhinaya was cast as the sister for Venkatesh and Mahesh in the film. It is also revealed that the characters of Venkatesh and Mahesh in the film would not have names, but instead they will be referred to as "Peddodu" (elder) and "Chinnodu" (younger) respectively.
Filming.
In October 2011, during the launch of the film, it was announced that filming would begin from last week of November 2011. After months of delay, filming began near Andhra University campus in Visakhapatnam on January 18, 2012. After wrapping up the Visakhapatnam schedule, the unit moved to Kutralam, Tamil Nadu for the second schedule. Filming was done from February 6, 2012 to February 27 at Kutralam with all of the lead cast taking part in it. Filming resumed in Hyderabad on March 12, 2012 and continued till April 2. During the schedule, filming was done at City Center mall in Banjara Hills, Sanathnagar and Ramoji Film City. On 13 March, while filming at Sanathnagar in Hyderabad, huge crowds turned up to watch the shoot and as the crowds became uncontrollable, the unit was forced to move the shoot to a different location where scenes on Mahesh and Prakash Raj were filmed. Filming resumed at Hyderabad on April 11, 2012. On April 15, the unit shifted from Hyderabad to Ahmedabad and filming took place on the banks of Sabarmati River and the schedule continued there till April 25.
A special house set worth 1 crore was built at Ramoji Film City under the supervision of art director A. S. Prakash, where major part of filming took place. A new schedule began on July 4 in the temple town of Ahobilam. A minor accident took place when the film set that was built in Ahobilam collapsed. It was reported that except for a minor injury to one of the unit member, the film crew was safe and the filming continued in the sets after few hours of delay. After filming at Ahobilam till July 8, the unit moved to Relangi village in West Godavari district. Filming was done in Relangi till July 11, where scenes on Venkatesh and Anjali were canned. Filming was done for couple of days in Bhadrachalam from July 16, 2012.
The entire filming was stopped for over a month due to Samantha's illness and her unavailability. Filming resumed on September 3, 2012 in Sriperumbudur near Chennai. On September 15, the makers of the film announced that they have completed 78 days of filming and still would require 30 days of additional filming to wrap up the entire film. The unit resumed filming on October 2 at Ramanaidu Studios in Hyderabad. On October 27, the final leg of filming began at Ramoji Film City, where a Bhadrachalam temple set was built for the film by the art director. On December 2, the producers announced that except for two songs, the rest of the film's shooting including the talkie part was completed. On December 6, 2012 one of the remaining two songs was filmed on Mahesh Babu and Samantha at Magarpatta in Pune. The last song in the film was filmed from December 18 to December 21 on Venkatesh and Anjali in Kerala. The entire filming of the movie was completed on December 24, 2012.
Post-production.
On 6 October 2012, a pooja event was held to formally commence the dubbing activities of the movie. It was reported that the post-production activities would simultaneously be done in order to complete the film in time for its intended December release. On 23 October 2012, Samantha started dubbing for her role in the film. It was reported that it was her first time dubbing for a Telugu film, as her roles was previously dubbed by singer Chinmayi. The other female lead in the film, Anjali began dubbing for her role on October 30, 2012. Mahesh Babu started dubbing for his role on December 10, 2012. Re-recording for the film was done by popular Telugu composer Mani Sharma. Mahesh Babu completed the voice dubbing for his role on December 31, 2012.
Release.
The film was initially planned to release on September 28, 2012, but was delayed due to Samantha's illness. On September 15, 2012 Dil Raju held a press meet in Hyderabad and announced that the film would release worldwide on December 21, 2012. In November 2012, reports emerged that the film release date was postponed to Sankranthi week in January 2013, but these speculations were dismissed by Dil Raju and stated that the film was still scheduled to release on December 21. However, on December 2, 2012 an official press note was released by the producers stating that the film would release on January 11, 2013. It was reported that SVSC would be the first south Indian film to be screened at the AMC Empire 25 theater in New York. The film was censored and given a 'U' certificate by the CBFC on January 8, 2013. The film was released on January 11, 2013 in over 1500 screens worldwide. The film was released in 85 theaters and 100 screens in Hyderabad. Premiere shows for the film were held at few cities in Andhra Pradesh on the night of January 10, 2013. The film premiered in USA on January 10, 2013 at the AMC Empire 25 theater in Times Square, New York City.
Marketing.
On May 31, 2012 Dil Raju held a press conference at Hyderabad and released a thirty second first look teaser of the film through YouTube to coincide with Mahesh Babu's father, actor Krishna's birthday. The teaser was actively shared through social networking sites upon its release and had also received positive response from the audience. Mahesh through his Twitter account acknowledged the response and thanked the producers of the film. Few days after the teaser release, a preview song from the film was released by Aditya Music. Three first look posters and working stills of the film were released on August 8, 2012. All the three posters had a message signed by Venkatesh that read "Happy birthday to my brother Mahesh Babu". A twelve second teaser was officially released on December 12, 2012 at 12:12 pm. Later that evening, a thirty second teaser was also released by the producer. Both the teasers were dedicated to Venkatesh on the eve of his birthday.
Pre-release revenues.
In March 2012, it was announced that popular film production company "14 Reels Entertainment" had purchased the overseas distribution rights of the film for 6 crores. The film will be released by "14 Reels" through "Ficus Movies" in the overseas. It was reported that it was the highest amount ever paid for overseas rights of a Telugu film. In June 2012, it was reported that the satellite rights of the film were sold to a leading Telugu channel for 8.5 crores. In October 2012, it was reported that the theatrical distribution rights for the film in Krishna district were sold for a record price of 2.75 crores. The theatrical distribution rights for East Godavari district were purchased by "Vintage Creations" for 2.83 crores and the distribution rights for Nellore district were sold to "Srinikethan Films" for 1.85 crores.
Critical reception.
Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu received positive reviews from critics in India. Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars and said "the movie lives up to the tag of being a festive family entertainer" and concluded that "It's a good old fashioned family drama sans the usual masala, so as long as you don't expect fire works you'll not be disappointed". Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu gave the film a positive review calling it a "joy ride" and praising the performances of Prakash Raj, Venkatesh, Mahesh Babu and Anjali. Radhika Rajamani of Rediff gave it 3 out of 5 stars and said "family relationships and values are the main focus in Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu" and "the film is a good old family entertainer, without any violence, of the kind that was popular in the 1950s, '60s, and '70s" and concluded by saying "it seems a little out of date". Reviewer from Indiaglitz.com gave a positive review for the film and called it "a heart-tugging family entertainer". Jeevi of Idlebrain.com gave the film 3.25 of 5 rating and said "SVSC is a different and sensible film to be watched along with the families". Mahesh S Koneru of 123Telugu.com gave a positive review and called it "a beautifully woven tale of human emotions" and he said "The film is a must watch, just to see Venkatesh and Mahesh Babu bond so well on the big screen and finally stated "On the whole, SVSC is a Sankranthi entertainer that you need to watch with your family". Shekhar from Oneindia.in gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and said "the much-hyped movie, which had created huge expectations among the film goers, is really a wonderful flick that suits the image of the superstars and it is a big treat for their fans this Sankranthi". Reviewer from CNN-IBN said "Despite the presence of stars such as Mahesh Babu and Venkatesh, 'Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu' (SVSC) boasts of being a successful multi-starrer throughout by giving equal weightage to both the actors" and added that "The film may or may not inspire one and all, but it will definitely send everybody back home with a smile".
Box office.
The film has collected 25.01 crores net across the globe in four days and 28.66 crores net in five days.
India.
In India, Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu took a good opening upon release. The film collected in Andhra Pradesh on its opening day.
Overseas.
The film was premiered in USA on January 10, 2013 at 89 locations. The film opened to positive response and grossed $304,047 via the premiere shows and set a record among south Indian films. In USA, the film set an opening record for Telugu films by collecting approximately $1.2 million in the first two days.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack for the film was composed by Mickey J Meyer, with lyrics penned by Anantha Sreeram and Sirivennela Sitaramasastri. In June 2012, it was announced that the audio rights of the film were sold to Aditya Music. Promo of the first song penned by Ananth Sreeram and sung by Chitra was released on May 31, 2012. A thirty seconds promo of "Aaraduguluntada" song was released through Red FM 93.5 on December 12, 2012. All the seven promo songs were officially released by Aditya Music through their Facebook page on December 14, 2012. The audio launch of the film was held at Ramanaidu Studios in Nanakramguda, Hyderabad on December 16, 2012 and audio of the film was released on the same day.
Reception.
The triple platinum disc function of the film was held on January 20, 2013 at Shilpakala Vedika, Hyderabad.
