Market segmentation is a marketing strategy that involves dividing a broad target market into subsets of consumers who have common needs, And then be designed and implemented to target these specific customer segments, addressing needs or desires that are believed to be common in this segment, using media that is used by the market segment.
While there may be theoretically 'ideal' market segments, in reality every organization engaged in a market will develop different ways of imagining market segments, and create product differentiation strategies to exploit these segments. Successful market segmentation and corresponding product differentiation strategy can give a firm a commercial advantage, due to the more effective match between target customer and product. 
Basis for segmenting consumer markets.
Geographic segmentation.
The market is segmented according to geographic criteria—nations, states, regions, countries, cities, neighborhoods, or zip codes.
Geo-cluster approach combines demographic data with geographic data to create a more accurate profile of specific 
With respect to region, in rainy regions you can sell things like raincoats, umbrellas and gumboots. In hot regions you can sell summer wear. In cold regions you can sell warm clothes.
Psychographic segmentation.
Psychographics is the science of using psychology and demographics to better understand consumers. Psychographic segmentation: consumers are divided according to their lifestyle, personality, values and social class. Consumers within the same demographic group can exhibit very different psychographic profiles.Consumers who belong to the upper crust of the society prefer products that spells luxury and which upholds their class, status, social standing etc. 
Positive market segmentation.
Market segmenting is dividing the market into groups of individual markets with similar wants or needs that a company divides into distinct groups which have distinct needs, wants, behavior or which might want different products and services. Broadly, markets can be divided according to a number of general criteria, such as by industry or public versus private. Although industrial market segmentation is quite different from consumer market segmentation, both have similar objectives. All of these methods of segmentation are merely proxies for true segments, which don't always fit into convenient demographic boundaries.
This part of the segmentation process consists of drawing up a perceptual map, which highlights rival goods within one's industry according to perceived quality and price. After the perceptual map has been devised, a firm would consider the marketing communications mix best suited to the product in question.
Behavioral segmentation.
In behavioral segmentation, consumers are divided into groups according to their knowledge of, attitude towards, use of or response to a product. It is actually based on the behavior of the consumer.
Occasions.
Segmentation according to occasions is based on the arising of special need and desires in consumers at various occasions. For example, for products that will be used in relation with a certain holiday. Products such as Christmas decorations or Diwali lamps are marketed almost exclusively in the time leading up to the related event, and will not generally be available all year round. Another type of occational market segments are people preparing for their wedding or a funeral, occasions that only occurs a few times in a persons lifetime but happens so often in a large population that it can be considered a market segment.
Benefits.
Segmentation takes place according to benefits sought by the consumer or which the product/service can provide.
Using segmentation in customer retention.
One of the most common indicators of high-risk customers is a drop off in usage of the company's service. For example, in the credit card industry this could be signaled through a customer's decline in spending on his or her card.
This determination boils down to whether the post-retention profit generated from the customer is predicted to be greater than the cost incurred to retain the customer.
For customers who are deemed worthy of saving, it is essential for the company to know which save tactics are most likely to be successful. Tactics commonly used range from providing special customer discounts to sending customers communications that reinforce the value proposition of the given service.
Niche marketing.
A niche is a more narrowly defined customer group who seek a distinct set of benefits.
İdentified by dividing a segment into subsegments,distinct and unique set of needs,requires specialization, and is not likely to attract too many competitors.
Local marketing.
Marketing programs tailored to the needs of local customer groups.
Price discrimination.
Where a monopoly exists, the price of a product is likely to be higher than in a competitive market and the quantity sold less, generating monopoly profits for the seller. These profits can be increased further if the market can be segmented with different prices charged to different segments charging higher prices to those segments willing and able to pay more and charging less to those whose demand is price elastic. The price discriminator might need to create rate fences that will prevent members of a higher price segment from purchasing at the prices available to members of a lower price segment. This behavior is rational on the part of the monopolist, but is often seen by competition authorities as an abuse of a monopoly position, whether or not the monopoly itself is sanctioned. Areas in which this price discrimination is seen range from transportation to pharmaceuticals.
Algorithms and approaches.
Any discrete variable is a segmentation. For instance, customers might be segmented by gender ('Male' or 'Female') or attitudes ('progressive' or 'conservative'). Numeric variables may be discretized to become segmentations, such as age ("<30" or ">=30") or income ("The 99% (AGISheth-Voss, Pieter. Carreras, Ismael. How Informative is Your Segmentation? A simple new metric yields surprising results, Marketing Research, pages 8-13, Winter 2010, American Marketing Association</ref>
