Horsepower (hp) is the name of several units of measurement of power, the rate at which work is done. The most common conversion factor, especially for electrical power, is 1 hp = 746 watts. The term was adopted in the late 18th century by Scottish engineer James Watt to compare the output of steam engines with the power of draft horses. It was later expanded to include the output power of other types of piston engines, as well as turbines, electric motors and other machinery. The definition of the unit varied between geographical regions. Most countries now use the SI unit "watt" for measurement of power. With the implementation of the EU Directive 80/181/EEC on January 1, 2010, the use of horsepower in the EU is only permitted as supplementary unit.
History of the unit.
This was rounded to an even 33,000 ft·lbf/min.
Others recount that Watt determined that a pony could lift an average per minute over a four-hour working shift. Watt then judged a horse was 50% more powerful than a pony and thus arrived at the 33,000 ft·lbf/min figure. 
"Engineering in History" recounts that John Smeaton initially estimated that a horse could produce 22,916 foot-pounds per minute. John Desaguliers had previously suggested 44,000 foot-pounds per minute and Tredgold 27,500 foot-pounds per minute. "Watt found by experiment in 1782 that a 'brewery horse' was able to produce 32,400 foot-pounds per minute." James Watt and Matthew Boulton standardized that figure at 33,000 the next year.
Most observers familiar with horses and their capabilities estimate that Watt was either a bit optimistic or intended to underpromise and overdeliver; few horses can maintain that effort for long. Regardless, comparison with a horse proved to be an enduring marketing tool.
When considering human-powered equipment, a healthy human can produce about 1.2 hp briefly (see orders of magnitude) and sustain about 0.1 hp indefinitely; trained athletes can manage up to about 2.5 hp briefly
and 0.3 hp for a period of several hours.
Horsepower from a horse.
In 1993, R. D. Stevenson and R. J. Wassersug published an article calculating the upper limit to an animal's power output. The peak power over a few seconds has been measured to be as high as 14.9 hp. However, Stevenson and Wassersug observe that for sustained activity, a work rate of about 1 hp per horse is consistent with agricultural advice from both 19th and 20th century sources.
Current definitions.
In certain situations it is necessary to distinguish between the various definitions of horsepower and thus a suffix is added: hp(I) for mechanical (or imperial) horsepower, hp(M) for metric horsepower, hp(S) for boiler (or steam) horsepower and hp(E) for electrical horsepower.
Hydraulic horsepower is equivalent to mechanical horsepower. The formula given above is for conversion to mechanical horsepower from the factors acting on a hydraulic system.
Mechanical horsepower.
Or given that 1 hp = 550 ft·lbf/s, 1 ft = 0.3048 m, 1 lbf ≈ 4.448 N, 1 J = 1 N·m, 1 W = 1 J/s: 1 hp = 746 W
Metric horsepower (PS, cv, hk, pk, ks, ch).
The various units used to indicate this definition ("PS", "cv", "hk", "pk", "ks" and "ch") all translate to "horse power" in English, so it is common to see these values referred to as "horsepower" or "hp" in the press releases or media coverage of the German, French, Italian, and Japanese automobile companies. British manufacturers often intermix metric horsepower and mechanical horsepower depending on the origin of the engine in question. Sometimes the metric horsepower rating of an engine is conservative enough so that the same figure can be used for both 80/1269/EEC with metric hp and SAE J1349 with imperial hp.
DIN 66036 defines one metric horsepower as the power to raise a mass of 75 kilograms against the earth's gravitational force over a distance of one metre in one second; this is equivalent to 735.49875 W or 98.6% of an imperial mechanical horsepower.
In 1972, the PS was rendered obsolete by EEC directives, when it was replaced by the kilowatt as the official power measuring unit. It is still in use for commercial and advertising purposes, in addition to the kW rating, as many customers are still not familiar with the use of kilowatts for engines.
Other names for the metric horsepower are the Dutch "paardenkracht" (pk), the French "chevaux" (ch), the Swedish "hästkraft" (hk), the Finnish "hevosvoima" (hv), the Norwegian and Danish "hestekraft" (hk), the Hungarian "lóerő" (LE), the Czech "koňská síla" and Slovak "konská sila" (k or ks), the Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian "konjska snaga" (KS),the Bulgarian "Конска сила", the Macedonian "Коњска сила" (KC), the Polish "koń mechaniczny" and Slovenian "konjska moč" (KM) and the Romanian "cal-putere" (CP) which all equal the German "Pferdestärke" (PS).
CV.
In addition, the capital form "CV" is used in Italy and France as a unit for tax horsepower, short for, respectively, "cavalli vapore" and "chevaux vapeur" ("steam horses"). CV is a non-linear rating of a motor vehicle for tax purposes. The CV rating, or fiscal power, is formula_2, where "P" is the maximum power in kilowatts and "U" is the amount of CO2 emitted in grams per kilometre. The term for CO2 measurements has only been included in the definition since 1998, so older ratings in CV are not directly comparable. The fiscal power has found its way into naming of automobile models, such as the popular Citroën deux-chevaux. The cheval-vapeur (ch) unit should not be confused with the French cheval fiscal (CV).
In the 19th century, the French had their own unit, which they used instead of the CV or horsepower. It was called the poncelet and was abbreviated "p".
Boiler horsepower.
One boiler horsepower unit, or BHP, is equal to a boiler thermal output of , which is the energy rate needed to evaporate of water at in one hour. The unit is not current outside of North America.
The term was originally developed at the Philadelphia Centennial Exhibition in 1876, where the best steam engines of that period were tested. The average steam consumption of those engines (per output horsepower) was determined to be the evaporation of 30 lb/h of water, based on feedwater at , and saturated steam generated at gauge pressure. This original definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of . In 1884, the ASME redefined the boiler horsepower as the thermal output equal to the evaporation of 34.5 lb/h of water "from and at" 212 °F. This considerably simplified boiler testing, and provided more accurate comparisons of the boilers at that time. This revised definition is equivalent to a boiler heat output of . Present industrial practice is to define "boiler horsepower" as a boiler thermal output equal to , which is very close to the original and revised definitions.
The amount of power that can be obtained by a steam engine or steam turbine based on "boiler horsepower" varies so widely that use of the term is entirely obsolete for these purposes. The term makes no distinction as to the steam pressure or temperature which is produced (both of which significantly influence engine/turbine output); it merely defines a thermal output of a boiler. Smaller steam engines often require several "boiler horsepower" to make one horsepower, and modern steam turbines can make power with as little as about 0.15 hp (boiler) thermal output per actual horsepower developed.
Electrical horsepower.
The horsepower used for electrical machines is defined as exactly 746 W. The nameplates on electrical motors show their power output, not their power input
Relationship with torque.
Where formula_4 is power, formula_5 is torque, and formula_6 is rotations per minute.
The constant 5252 is the truncated value of (33,000 ft·lbf/min)/(2π rad/rev).
Where formula_4 is power, formula_5 is torque, and formula_6 is rotations per minute. The constant 63,025 is the truncated value of (33,000 ft·lbf/min) × (12 in/ft)/(2π rad/rev).
See torque.
Drawbar horsepower.
Drawbar horsepower (dbhp) is the power a railway locomotive has available to haul a train or an agricultural tractor to pull an implement. This is a measured figure rather than a calculated one. A special railway car called a dynamometer car coupled behind the locomotive keeps a continuous record of the drawbar pull exerted, and the speed. From these, the power generated can be calculated. To determine the maximum power available, a controllable load is required; it is normally a second locomotive with its brakes applied, in addition to a static load.
Example: How much power is needed to pull a drawbar load of 2,025 pounds-force at 5 miles per hour?
