Lana Wachowski (born Laurence Wachowski; June 21, 1965) and Andrew Paul "Andy" Wachowski (born December 29, 1967), known together professionally as The Wachowskis, and formerly as the Wachowski Brothers, are Polish-American film directors, screenwriters, and producers.
They made their directing debut in 1996 with "Bound", and reached fame with their second film "The Matrix" (1999), for which they won the Saturn Award for Best Director. They wrote and directed its two sequels "The Matrix Reloaded" and "The Matrix Revolutions" (both in 2003), and were heavily involved in the writing and production of other works in the franchise.
Following the commercial success of the "Matrix" series, they wrote and produced the 2006 film "V for Vendetta" (an adaptation of the comic of the same name by Alan Moore), and in 2008 released the film "Speed Racer". Their most recent film, "Cloud Atlas", based on the novel of the same name by David Mitchell and co-written and co-directed by Tom Tykwer, was released on October 26, 2012.
Early life.
Lana Wachowski, formerly Laurence Wachowski (known as "Larry"), was born in Chicago in 1965; Andy Wachowski was born in 1967. Their mother, Lynne ( Luckinbill), was a nurse and painter whose brother is actor Laurence Luckinbill. Their father, Ron Wachowski, was a businessman of Polish descent. Raised by a hardcore atheist father and an ex-Catholic turned Shamanist mother, the duo once described their religious beliefs as non-denominational. According to actor Bernard White, Lana once told him that while they were raised Catholic, she was influenced heavily by the sacred Hindu texts like the Bhagavad Gita and the Ramayana. Lana and Andy have two sisters, named Julie and Laura. They went to Kellogg Elementary School in Chicago's Beverly area, and graduated from Whitney Young High School, known for its performing arts and science curriculum, in 1983 and 1986, respectively. Growing up in what Andy has described as a middle to upper-middle white Southside Irish neighborhood, the other kids were being hard on them, due to their Polish descent, lower income bracket, public school attendance and being raised by an atheist father and artist mother. According to Lana they were "the family that no one liked", and she was beaten up every day she came home from school. This made the family members bond together and Lana and Andy grew up by playing together. Lana found an escape route from the real world in books. Former students recall them playing Dungeons & Dragons and working in the school's theater and TV program. Andy then attended Emerson College in Boston, while Lana went to Bard College in New York. Both dropped out before graduating and ran a carpentry business in Chicago while creating comic books.
Owned companies.
During "The Matrix Reloaded", "The Matrix Revolutions", "Animatrix" and "Enter the Matrix" production, the Wachowskis created "EON Entertainment" (not to be confused with Eon Productions), their production company to coordinate and direct all involved partners. It's also where the films were edited together, after the various FX vendors sent their finished work. "EON"'s internal VFX team, "ESC", did a number of visual effect shots for the two Matrix sequels and coordinated the other vendors. "ESC" was shut down in summer 2004. "EON Entertainment" hasn't made any headlines since the "Matrix" sequels were released, and has been likely disbanded as "Anarchos Productions" (credited in "Cloud Atlas" as "Anarchos Pictures") is their production company that has been billed for all their films starting with "V for Vendetta", but "EON" is still being mentioned at the production credits of their latest film, "Cloud Atlas".
"Kinowerks", is their postproduction and effects studio, based on Ravenswood, Chicago. It has been acclaimed for its green-friendly design. Roger Ebert was invited to watch a restored print of "The Godfather" in the "Kinowerks" facilities and met the Wachowskis, but he was oblivious to the fact the studio belonged to them. Chicago Tribune's Christopher Pirelli has interviewed the Wachowskis in the facility but was instructed to keep its exact location a secret, as the filmmakers want to avoid having fans showing up on the front door.
Prior to working in the film industry, the Wachowskis wrote comic books for Marvel Comics' Razorline imprint, namely "Ectokid" (created by horror novelist Clive Barker) in 1993 as well as writing for Epic Comics' "Clive Barker's Hellraiser" and "Clive Barker's Nightbreed" comic series.
Future films.
In 2009 the Wachowskis were producing for Madhouse an animated film based on their comic book company's Shaolin Cowboy, titled "Shaolin Cowboy in The Tomb of Doom". The feature is co-directed by the comic book's creator Geof Darrow and a Japanese director. When the American financiers backed out, the film was left half-finished and in need of $3 million. Geof does not believe that the required amount of money to finish it, will be found.
Warner Bros. has expressed interest in "Hood", a modern adaptation of the Robin Hood legend, which the Wachowskis wrote and plan to direct. They also wrote an Iraq war-set gay romance conspiracy thriller titled "CN-9" (or "Cobalt Neural 9"); however, the project failed to find financing. However the siblings are still keen to make it, even if it has to be made in a different form than film.
"Jupiter Ascending", an original science fiction screenplay by the Wachowskis, is set to be made into a film by Warner Bros. Pictures. The film will be directed and produced by the Wachowskis. It will star Channing Tatum and Mila Kunis, while John Gaeta will work on visual effects again after "The Matrix" and "Speed Racer". It is scheduled to start shooting in early 2013, with an anticipated release date sometime in 2014. It is scheduled to be released in 3-D and IMAX 3D.
The siblings are also shopping around a concept for a TV series dubbed "Sense8" that they have developed with "Ninja Assassin" collaborator J. Michael Straczynski. In their pursuit of the concept the Wachowskis have penned three spec scripts which are said to resemble their unique storytelling style seen in "The Matrix" films, and they plan to direct at least a few episodes of the series, should it be made. Producer Marc Rosen of Georgeville Television (GTTV), describes the project as ""an idea so big in size and scale that it doesn't make sense to try it as a pilot. The only way to let the filmmakers realize their vision on something like this is to do multiple episodes.""
Style.
The siblings admit to a love for telling multipart stories. "Because we grew up on comic books and the Tolkien trilogy, one of the things we're interested in is bringing serial fiction to cinema," Lana has said. Andy puts his desire to shake up viewers a bit more bluntly: "We think movies are fairly boring and predictable. We want to screw with audiences' expectations." In terms of themes that run through their body of work, Lana has cited "the inexplicable nature of the universe in constant dialogue with our own consciousness and our consciousness actually affect[ing the inexplicable nature of the universe.", "interconnectivity and about truth beneath the surface" and "the paradox of choice and choicelesness". The Wachowskis cited the art of comic book artist Geoff Darrow as an influence on the look of The Matrix. Also, they stated that "Ghost in the Shell", "Ninja Scroll", and "Akira" as anime that inspired them. "in anime, one thing that they do that we tried to bring to our film was a juxtaposition of time and space in action beats."
The Wachowskis cited Stanley Kubrick's "" as one of their main inspirations for "Cloud Atlas". They first saw the film when they were seven and ten respectively.
Gaming.
Lana and Andy are self-proclaimed gamers. As teens they spent their weekends in the attic playing "Dungeons & Dragons". They liken the process of the playing parties imagining the same virtual space to the process of filmmaking. Along with some of their friends they wrote a 350-page role-playing game of their own, called "High Adventure". The rights to it are available for publishing.
On the video game front, they had been exchanging letters with Hideo Kojima and finally met him during a Famitsu interview in late 1999. "Metal Gear Solid" was the first video game they played after finishing work on "The Matrix". Candidates for an adaptation of the first "Matrix" movie to video game form included Kojima, Bungie and Shiny Entertainment whose "Messiah" PC game impressed them. Shiny's David Perry who ultimately had his company develop and collaborate with them on the "Enter the Matrix" and "" video games was impressed with their familiarity with the medium which was a big plus during development. The Wachowskis owned both a PlayStation 2 and Xbox video game console and played several games such as "Splinter Cell" and "Halo 2" and in the case of the latter they finished it even before Perry did. Reportedly during a "Halo" deathmatch they destroyed their Xbox.
Personal life.
Rumors that Lana Wachowski, then still presenting as male, was transitioning from male to female spread in the early 2000s, though neither sibling had spoken directly on the subject. In 2003 Gothamist.com suggested that "the "Matrix" films could be read with a sadomasochistic subtext with the news of Larry's companionship with a dominatrix seen with Lana at film premieres." According to Rovi, Lana completed her transition after "Speed Racer" (2008). "The Hollywood Reporter" and the "New York Times" have referred to the Wachowskis as "Andy and Lana (formerly Larry) Wachowski", and Deadline.com has referred to the duo as "Andy and Lana Wachowski." On some documents she appears as Laurenca Wachowski. In July 2012, Lana made her first public appearance after transitioning, in a video discussing the creative process behind "Cloud Atlas".
In October 2012 Lana received the Human Rights Campaign's Visibility Award. In her acceptance speech she revealed that she had considered committing suicide once in her youth. Lana's acceptance speech was one of the longest public appearances that either of the notoriously reclusive siblings has ever given. She began by explaining that while she and her brother had not publicly commented on her transitioning during the past decade of rumors about it, this was not because she was ashamed of it, nor had she kept it a secret from her family and friends. Rather, Lana had not commented about her transitioning due to a general shyness about the news media that both she and her brother Andy possess. Comparing it to losing one's virginity as an event which only happens once and is irreversible, the Wachowskis had tried to stay out of the public eye and avoided giving interviews due to fear of losing their personal privacy, fearing that they would never be able to go to a public restaurant again without being noticed and harassed as celebrities.
Lana is a vegetarian.
Andy has been married to Alisa Blasingame since 1991.
At Fantastic Fest 2012's screening of "Cloud Atlas", Andy Wachowski joked that the duo was now called "Wachowski Starship"; news outlets mistakenly reported it as a serious statement.
