Julianne Moore (born Julie Anne Smith; December 3, 1960) is a British-American actress and a children's book author. She has been nominated for four Academy Awards, three BAFTA Awards and has won two Emmy Awards, one Golden Globe Award and one Screen Actors Guild Award.
Moore began her acting career in 1983 with minor roles, before joining the cast of the soap opera "As the World Turns", for which she won a Daytime Emmy Award in 1988. She began to appear in supporting roles in films during the early 1990s, in films such as "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle" (1992) and "Short Cuts" (1993). By the middle of the decade, she had graduated to starring roles in "Nine Months" and "Assassins" (both 1995), and her performance in "Boogie Nights" (1997) brought her widespread attention and her first Academy Award nomination.
Her success continued with such films as "The Big Lebowski" (1998), "Magnolia" (1999), "Hannibal" (2001), and "The Forgotten" (2004). She also received three more Academy Award nominations for her performances in "The End of the Affair" (1999), "Far From Heaven" and "The Hours" (both 2002). Her most recent notable roles include "The Kids Are All Right" (2010), "Crazy, Stupid, Love." (2011), and the HBO film "Game Change" (2012), in which she portrayed Sarah Palin.
Early life.
Moore was born Julie Anne Smith on December 3, 1960, at the Fort Bragg army base in North Carolina. Her father, Peter Moore Smith, was a paratrooper in the American army, and later a colonel and military judge. Her mother, Anne McNeil McLean (née Love), was a psychiatrist and social worker who emigrated from Scotland to the United States as a child. Moore has a younger sister, Valerie, and a younger brother, novelist Peter Moore Smith III. She considers herself half Scottish, 
and applied for British citizenship in 2011 to honor her deceased mother (Moore has stated that "it would have meant the world to her").
Moore frequently moved around the country as a child, due to her father's profession. She was close to her family as a result, but has said she never had the feeling of coming from one particular place. The family lived in multiple locations, including Alabama, Georgia, Texas, Panama, Nebraska, Alaska, New York, and Virginia, and Moore attended nine different schools. Moving regularly made her an insecure child, and she struggled to establish friendships, but Moore has remarked that an itinerant lifestyle was beneficial to her future career: "What you learn from moving through different cultures is that behavior changes, but people are essentially the same, so you learn—how do I behave here, what do I do, what are the rules, how do people dress, how do people talk?" 
When Moore was 16, the family moved to Frankfurt, Germany, where she attended Frankfurt American High School. She was an avid reader, and it was this hobby that led her to begin acting at the school—"it was an extension of reading", she has said. She appeared in several plays, including "Tartuffe" and "Medea", and upon the encouragement of her English teacher she chose to pursue a theatrical career. Moore's parents supported her decision, but asked that she train at university "so that if it didn't work out, I'd have a college degree, I'd have a rescue plan." She was accepted to Boston University, and graduated with a BFA in Theatre in 1983.
Acting career.
Early roles.
Moore moved to New York City after graduating, and worked as a waitress while auditioning for roles. She first appeared on television screens in 1984, in an episode of "The Edge of Night". In 1985, Moore was cast in the soap opera "As the World Turns", playing the dual roles of half-sisters Frannie and Sabrina Hughes. It proved an important learning experience for the actress, who looks back on the job fondly. Moore appeared in the show until 1988, when she won a Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Ingenue in a Drama Series. In 1987, she played Indira West in the CBS miniseries "I'll Take Manhattan". In 1988, once she had left "As the World Turns", Moore turned to the stage to play Ophelia in a Guthrie Theatre production of "Hamlet".
From 1989 to 1991, Moore appeared in the television movies "Money, Power, Murder", "The Last to Go", and "Cast a Deadly Spell". Her feature debut was a small role in 1990's "", which Moore has described as "terrible". Her visibility increased in 1992 when she had her first substantial feature film role as the savvy realtor Marlene Craven in Curtis Hanson's thriller "The Hand That Rocks the Cradle". The film was a US box office number one, and Moore caught the attention of several critics with her performance. She followed it the same year with the comedy "The Gun in Betty Lou's Handbag". Moore continued to play supporting roles throughout 1993, firstly appearing in the notorious Madonna flop "Body of Evidence", which she has called "a big mistake", and then in the romantic comedy "Benny and Joon" with Johnny Depp. Moore also appeared briefly in one of the year's biggest hits, the Harrison Ford thriller "The Fugitive".
Rise to prominence.
At the end of 1993, Moore appeared in Robert Altman's ensemble drama "Short Cuts". It was Altman who had first given Moore an appreciation for cinema, when she saw his film "3 Women" (1977) at college. Playing artist Marian Wyman was an experience she found "totally terrifying – every famous person was in that movie and I was a total unknown", but it proved to be Moore's breakout role. "Variety" magazine described Moore as "arresting", and noted that her monologue, delivered naked from the waist down, would be "no doubt be the most discussed scene" of the film. The moment has since become famous. "Short Cuts" was critically acclaimed, and received awards for Best Ensemble Cast at the Venice Film Festival and the Golden Globe Awards. Moore received an individual nomination for Best Supporting Female at the Independent Spirit Awards.
"Short Cuts" was one of a trio of successive film appearances that boosted Moore's reputation. It was followed in 1994 with "Vanya on 42nd Street"—French director Louis Malle's final picture, which filmed Andre Gregory's workshop theatre production of "Uncle Vanya". Moore had been involved in the intimate production, in which she played Yelena, for four years. Her performance won the Boston Society of Film Critics award for Best Actress. Moore was then given her first leading role, playing an unhappy suburban housewife who develops multiple chemical sensitivity in Todd Haynes' low-budget film "Safe" (1995). She had to lose a substantial amount of weight for the role, which made her ill and she vowed never to change her body for a film again. In their review, "Empire" magazine writes that the film "first established [Moore's] credentials as perhaps the finest actress of her generation". Film historian David Thompson later described it as "one of the most arresting, original and accomplished films of the 1990s", and the performance earned Moore an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Actress. Reflecting on these three roles, Moore has said, "They all came out at once, and I suddenly had this profile. It was amazing."
Moore's next appearance was a supporting role in the comedy-drama "Roommates" (1995). Her following film, "Nine Months" (1995), was crucial in establishing her as a leading lady in Hollywood. The romantic comedy, directed by Chris Columbus and co-starring Hugh Grant, was poorly reviewed but a box office success. It remains one of her highest grossing films. Moore then appeared alongside Sylvester Stallone and Antonio Banderas in the thriller "Assassins", her fourth and final release for 1995. Her only appearance of 1996 was as the artist Dora Maar in the Merchant Ivory film "Surviving Picasso". The following year, Moore was cast by Steven Spielberg to star as paleontologist Dr. Sarah Harding in ""—the sequel to his 1993 blockbuster "Jurassic Park". Spielberg had seen Moore play a doctor in "The Fugitive" four years earlier, which inspired him to cast her in the role. She later said she "enjoyed herself tremendously" making the film. "The Lost World" was an immensely popular release, finishing as one of the ten highest grossing films in history to that point. It was pivotal in making Moore a sought-after actress: "Suddenly I had a commercial film career", she has said. "The Myth of Fingerprints" was her second appearance of 1997, where she met her future husband in director Bart Freundlich.
International recognition.
The late 1990s and early 2000s saw Moore achieve significant industry recognition. Her first Academy Award nomination came for the critically acclaimed "Boogie Nights" (1997), which centers on a group of individuals working in the 1970s pornography industry. Director Paul Thomas Anderson was not a well known figure before its production, with only one feature credit to his name, but Moore agreed to the film after being impressed with his script. The ensemble piece features Moore as Amber Waves, a leading porn actress and mother-figure who longs to be reunited with her real son. Martyn Glanville of the BBC commented that the role required both a confidence and vulnerability, and was impressed with Moore's effort. "Time Out" called the performance "superb", while Janet Maslin of "The New York Times" found it "wonderful". Critic Mick LaSalle singled out Moore for praise in his "San Francisco Chronicle" review, adding that she gave the film "its twisted heart". Alongside her Oscar nomination for Best Supporting Actress, Moore was nominated at the Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild awards. The performance won her awards from the National Society of Film Critics, the Florida Film Critics, the Los Angeles Film Critics, and the Satellite Awards.
Moore followed her success in "Boogie Nights" with a role in the Coen brothers' dark comedy "The Big Lebowski" (1998). The film was not a hit at the time of release but has since become a cult classic. Moore plays Maude Leboswki, a feminist artist and daughter of the eponymous character who becomes involved with "The Dude" (Jeff Bridges, the film's star). At the end of 1998, Moore had a flop with Gus Van Sant's "Psycho", a remake of the classic Alfred Hitchcock film of the same name. Moore played Lila Crane in the film, which received poor reviews and is described by "The Guardian" as one of her "pointless" outings. The review in "Boxoffice" magazine regretted that "a group of enormously talented people wasted several months of their lives" on the film.
After reuniting with Robert Altman for the dark comedy "Cookie's Fortune" (1999), Moore starred in "An Ideal Husband"—Oliver Parker's adaptation of the Oscar Wilde play. Set in London at the end of the 19th century, Moore's performance of Mrs. Laura Cheverly earned her a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress in a Musical or Comedy. She was also nominated in the Drama category that year for her work in "The End of the Affair" (1999). Based on the novel by Graham Greene, Moore played opposite Ralph Fiennes as an adulterous wife in 1940s Britain. Critic Michael Sragow was full of praise for her work, writing that her performance was "the critical element that makes film necessary viewing." Moore received her second Academy Award nomination for the role, her first for Best Actress, as well as nominations at the British Academy (BAFTA) and Screen Actors Guild (SAG) awards. In between these two releases, Moore was also seen in "A Map of the World", supporting Sigourney Weaver.
Moore's fifth and final film of 1999 was "Magnolia", a "giant mosaic" chronicling the lives of multiple characters over one day in Los Angeles. Paul Thomas Anderson, in his follow-up to "Boogie Nights", wrote a role specifically for Moore. His primary objective was to "see her explode", and he cast her as a morphine-addicted wife. Anderson's direction for Moore was to "just go nuts". The performance earned her a SAG Award nomination. Moore was subsequently named Best Supporting Actress of 1999 by the National Board of Review, in recognition of her three performances in "Magnolia", "An Ideal Husband", and "A Map of the World".
The year 2000 saw only one appearance from Moore, a small role in the comedy "The Ladies Man". In early 2001, she appeared as Agent Clarice Starling in "Hannibal", a sequel to the Oscar winning film "The Silence of the Lambs". Several actresses vied for the role after Jodie Foster, the original Starling, declined it. Director Ridley Scott eventually cast Moore over Angelina Jolie, Cate Blanchett, Gillian Anderson, and Helen Hunt. The change in actress received considerable attention from the press. Moore was excited to be given the part but claimed she was not trying to upstage Foster: "Jodie was magnificent ... It's an honor to be asked to repeat something after she's done it. But I'm not going to be able to do what she did. There's just no way." It was another blockbuster release for Moore, earning $58 million in its opening weekend and finishing as the tenth highest-grossing film of the year. In three more 2001 releases, Moore starred with David Duchovny in the science-fiction comedy "Evolution", appeared in her husband's dramatic film "World Traveler", and acted with Kevin Spacey, Judi Dench, and Cate Blanchett in "The Shipping News". All three films were poorly received.
A film critic wrote in 2002 that Moore was at "the pinnacle of her career". At the 75th Academy Awards she was nominated in both the Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress categories, becoming the ninth performer in history to be nominated for two awards in the same year. The Best Actress nomination came for "Far From Heaven", which "Guardian" journalist Oliver Burkeman calls her defining film. Moore plays Cathy Whitaker, a 1950s housewife whose world is shaken when her husband (Dennis Quaid) reveals he is gay. The role was written specifically for her by Todd Haynes, the first time the pair had worked together since "Safe", and Moore described it as "a very, very personal project." David Rooney of "Variety" praised Moore's "beautifully gauged performance" of a desperate woman "buckling under social pressures and putting on a brave face". Manohla Dargis of the "Los Angeles Times" wrote, "what Moore does with her role is so beyond the parameters of what we call great acting that it nearly defies categorization." The role won Moore the Best Actress award from 19 different organisations, including the Venice Film Festival and the National Board of Review.
Moore's second Oscar nomination that year came for "The Hours", which she co-starred in with Nicole Kidman and Meryl Streep. She again played a troubled 1950s housewife, prompting Kenneth Turan to write that she was "essentially reprising her "Far From Heaven" role". Moore said it was an "unfortunate coincidence" that the similar roles came at the same time, and that the characters were "really different kinds of people". Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" called the performance "wrenching", while Peter Bradshaw of "The Guardian" praised a "superbly controlled, humane performance". "The Hours" was nominated for nine Academy Awards, including Best Picture. Moore also received BAFTA and SAG Award nominations for Best Supporting Actress, and was jointly awarded the Silver Bear for Best Actress with Kidman and Streep.
2003–2009.
The year following Moore's success in "Far From Heaven" and "The Hours" did not see any new releases from the actress. She returned to cinema screens in 2004. There was no success in her first two ventures of the year: "Marie and Bruce", a dark comedy co-starring Matthew Broderick, failed to find an audience. "Laws of Attraction" pitted her opposite Pierce Brosnan in a courtroom-based romantic comedy, and was panned by critics. Commercial success returned to Moore with "The Forgotten", a psychological thriller in which she plays a mother who is told her dead son never existed. Although the film was unpopular with critics, it opened as the US box office number one. 
In 2005, Moore worked with her husband for the third time in the comedy "Trust the Man", and starred in the true story of a 1950s housewife, "The Prize Winner of Defiance, Ohio". Her first release of 2006 was "Freedomland", a mystery co-starring Samuel L. Jackson. The response was overwhelmingly negative but her follow-up, Alfonso Cuarón's "Children of Men" (2006), was highly acclaimed. Moore had a supporting role in the dystopian drama, playing the leader of an activist group. It is one of the best reviewed films of her career, and was named by Peter Travers as the second best film of the decade.
In November 2006, Moore made her Broadway debut in the world premiere of David Hare's play "The Vertical Hour". The production was directed by Sam Mendes and co-starred Bill Nighy. Moore played the role of Nadia, a former war correspondent who finds her views on the 2003 invasion of Iraq challenged. Ben Brantley of "The New York Times" was unenthusiastic about the production, and described Moore as miscast. David Rooney of "Variety" criticized Moore's "lack of stage technique", adding that she appeared "stiffly self-conscious". Michael Billington of "The Guardian" said Nadia was the play's main flaw, but that this was "in no way the fault of Julianne Moore, who gives a fine performance." Moore later confessed that she found Broadway performing difficult and had not connected with the medium, but was glad to have experimented with it. The play closed in March 2007 after 117 performances. 
Moore played an FBI agent for the second time in "Next" (2007), a science-fiction action film co-starring Nicolas Cage and Jessica Biel. Based on a short story by Philip K. Dick, the response from critics was highly negative. Manhola Dargis wrote, "Ms. Moore seems terribly unhappy to be here, and it’s no wonder." She followed it with "Savage Grace" (2007), the true story of Barbara Daly Baekeland—a high-society mother whose Oedipal relationship with her son ended in murder. Moore was fascinated by the role, but the film was considered controversial for its explicit depiction of incest. She told an interviewer, "Obviously you do have some trepidation about that kind of stuff, but it’s not being celebrated. This is presented as a tragedy." "Savage Grace" had a limited release, and received predominantly negative reviews. Peter Bradshaw, however, called it a "coldly brilliant and tremendously acted movie."
"I'm Not There" (2007) saw Moore work with Todd Haynes for the third time. The film explores the life of Bob Dylan, with Moore playing a character based on Joan Baez. In 2008, she starred with Mark Ruffalo in "Blindness", a dystopian thriller from director Fernando Meirelles. The film was a commercial failure. Moore was not seen on screens again until late 2009, with three new releases. She had a supporting role in "The Private Lives of Pippa Lee", and then starred in the erotic thriller "Chloe" with Amanda Seyfried and Liam Neeson. Shortly afterwards, she appeared in the well-received drama "A Single Man". Set in 1960s Los Angeles, the film stars Colin Firth as a homosexual professor who wishes to end his life. Moore plays his best friend, "a ­fellow English expat and semi-alcoholic ­divorcee". Writer-director Tom Ford created the character with her in mind. Leslie Felperin of "Variety" commented that it was Moore's best role in "some time", and was impressed by the "extraordinary emotional nuance" of the performance. "A Single Man" was named one of the 10 best films of the year by the American Film Institute, and Moore received a fifth Golden Globe nomination for her work. 
2010s.
Moore returned to television for the first time in 18 years when she took a guest role in the fourth season of "30 Rock". She appeared in five episodes of the Emmy-winning comedy, playing Nancy Donovan, a love interest for Alec Baldwin's character Jack Donaghy. She later appeared in the series finale in January 2013. Moore also returned to "As the World Turns", making a cameo appearance as Frannie Hughes when the show was cancelled in 2010.
Moore next appeared in the comedy-drama "The Kids Are All Right", co-starring Annette Bening and Mark Ruffalo; Moore was instrumental in getting the film made and in getting Bening involved. The film was both a critical and commercial success, garnering acting and production nominations from the Gotham Awards, the Independent Spirit Awards and the Academy Awards, as well as winning the Golden Globe Award for "Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy". Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" commented, "Moore and Bening are superb actors here, evoking a marriage of more than 20 years, and all of its shadings and secrets, idealism and compromise", and the "Los Angeles Times" review said, "Moore is fearless" and "plays every note perfectly." For this role, Moore received her sixth Golden Globe Award nomination and a BAFTA nomination.
In July 2011, Moore appeared in the comedy "Crazy, Stupid, Love.", co-starring Steve Carell and Ryan Gosling, which was successful commercially and received favorable reviews, with The Globe and Mail commenting, "some genuinely impressive acting breaks out. The accomplished Moore is an obvious candidate and, even in a confined role, she delivers – here a nervous look, there a tender gesture." In the HBO drama "Game Change", Julianne Moore portrayed 2008 vice-presidential nominee Sarah Palin. The television movie earned HBO its biggest audience for an in-house production in eight years. Moore received rave reviews for her "flawless performance", with the "San Francisco Chronicle" calling her portrayal of Palin "both complex and entirely credible. Yes, the hair, makeup and costumes contribute mightily to transforming Moore, but the nuance she brings to the performance is simply astounding." The role won Moore a Golden Globe, Emmy, Satellite Award, and SAG Award. 
Moore has seven upcoming film projects. In October 2013, she will be seen as Margaret White in "Carrie", an adaptation of Stephen King's horror novel. The same month will see the release of "The Seventh Son" based on the book series "The Wardstone Chronicles", in which Moore will star as the "most dangerous 1700s witch" Mother Malkin. She will also be seen in "The English Teacher", "What Maisie Knew", which received acclaim at the Toronto Film Festival, Joseph Gordon Levitt's directorial debut "Don Jon's Addiction", "Imagine" and "Non-Stop".
Writing.
In October 2007, Moore made her literary debut with the publication of "Freckleface Strawberry", a children's book illustrated by LeUyen Pham. The story of a girl who wishes to be rid of her freckles but eventually accepts them, Moore decided to write the book when her young son began to dislike aspects of his appearance. She was reminded of her own childhood, when she was teased for having freckles and called "Freckleface Strawberry" by other children. Expanding on this experience and the moral of the book, Moore says, "for the next 20 years or so, you can be obsessed by your big feet or your big teeth or your crazy hair – before you come out on the other end and say, 'I may not like parts of how I look, but there's not a whole lot I can do about it.' " In April 2009, Moore and Pham followed up with a second children's book titled "Freckleface Strawberry and the Dodgeball Bully". A musical based on Moore's book, "Frecklface Strawberry the Musical", was written by Rose Caiola and Gary Kupper. It opened in New York in October 2010.
Personal life.
Moore met her first husband, actor and stage director John Gould Rubin, in 1984. They married on 3 May 1986, when she was 25. Moore separated from Rubin in 1993, which she has called the biggest decision of her life. "I got married too early and I really didn't want to be there", she has since explained. Their divorce was finalized in August 1995, and the pair are no longer in contact. 
In 1996, Moore began a relationship with Bart Freundlich, her director on "The Myth of Fingerprints". He was 26 and she was 35. The couple have a son, Caleb (born December 1997) and a daughter, Liv Helen (born April 2002). They wed on 23 August 2003, and live in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Manhattan. Moore says, "We have a very solid family life, and it is the most satisfying thing I have ever done." She tries to keep her family close when working, and picks material that is practical for her as a parent. "Just like every other working parent", she says, "I'm trying to figure out: 'How do I work, how am I available for soccer games, how can I make sure that I'm home when everybody's doing their homework?'"
Moore is politically liberal, and supported Barack Obama at the 2008 Presidential Election. She is a pro-choice activist, and sits on the board of advocates for Planned Parenthood. Since 2002, she has been involved with the TS Alliance to raise awareness of tuberous sclerosis and is an Artist Ambassador for Save the Children's programs in the United States. In 2012, Moore joined Moms Clean Air Force, to help call on parents to join in the fight against toxic air pollution. Moore actively supports same-sex marriage.
Selected filmography.
The above selection is based on Moore's most acclaimed films and highest grossing films.
