Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles is an American cartoon series by the Nickelodeon Animation Studio in the franchise of the same name, premiered on September 29, 2012, on Nickelodeon. On October 2, 2012, Nickelodeon renewed the series for a second season with 26 episodes. A new official trailer was released on June 21, 2012, and aired on Nickelodeon the following Saturday. The trailer reveals the turtle's new voices, the animation, and that the theme song of the new show will be a remixed/remade version of the original theme song from the 1987 cartoon. Michelangelo's new catchphrase is "Booyakasha" instead of "Cowabunga". Raphael also has an un-mutated pet turtle named Spike. Nickelodeon has ordered two seasons, both of which will have 26 episodes. Season 1 premiered on September 29, 2012. The premiere date for Season 2 has not yet been announced.
Plot.
When ninjutsu master Hamato Yoshi and his four pet turtles are exposed to mutagen (a chemical from another world that transforms anyone who comes in contact with it into mutant creatures), they undergo major physical transformations: Hamato Yoshi becomes a humanoid rat under the name of Splinter and the turtles become human/turtle hybrids. Splinter retreats to the New York City sewers, where he raises the four turtles as his sons and imparts to them his knowledge of ninjutsu.
After venturing to the surface for the first time, the teenage Turtles discover an alien race called the Kraang is planning to take over New York City with their plans involving the same mutagen that created the Ninja Turtles. The Turtles befriend the teenage April O'Neil when she and her father Kirby have been abducted by the Kraang alongside some other captive scientists. While Kirby remains a prisoner of the Kraang, April becomes an ally of the Turtles as they help her to find out where the Kraang have taken her father.
The Turtles also learn that the Shredder is leading the Foot Clan into tracking down Splinter and his sons to put an end to their clan.
Viacom purchase.
On October 21, 2009, a press release was made indicating that Viacom had bought the complete rights of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles franchise from Peter Laird for $60 million, and would be developing a CGI animated TV series for its Nickelodeon family of channels for broadcast in 2012. A feature film, to be released by Paramount Pictures (also a division of Viacom), is slated for 2014.
Jason Biggs voices Leonardo and Rob Paulsen voices Donatello. In June 2011, it was confirmed that Sean Astin is playing Raphael and Greg Cipes is Michelangelo. In August 2011, it was revealed that Mae Whitman will be the voice for April O'Neil. In April 2012, it was announced that Phil LaMarr will be playing the role of Baxter Stockman and Nolan North will be playing a race of aliens known as the Kraang. Actress Kelly Hu confirmed her role as Karai in May 2012. Corey Feldman, who voiced Donatello in two of the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles feature films, will be appearing in an as-yet unspecified role. Recurring TMNT character Casey Jones is slated to appear in the second season of the series.
Production art was leaked on the Nickelodeon website before it was taken down. The images showed the designs of all four Turtles, Shredder, Splinter, a teenage April O'Neil and the Kraang, an alien race that combines elements of both Krang and the Utroms. A trailer for the series was released on June 21, 2012, on Nickelodeon USA.
Merchandise.
Playmates Toys created a new line of "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" consumer products to go along with the show. The Lego Group made a LEGO theme of "Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" in 2013. A video game is planned to be made based on the series released in 2013.
Broadcast.
"Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles" premiered on Nickelodeon in the United States and on YTV in Canada on September 29, 2012. In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the series premiered on October 1, 2012 on Nickelodeon and Nicktoons. The series also premiered on October 8, 2012 on Nickelodeon Australia & New Zealand. A sneak premiere aired on September 28.
Reception.
IGN has given the episodes of the show positive reviews, with an average rating of 8.4/10 for the first 13 episodes. and ten out of thirteen episodes have been given the "Editor's Choice" title. "The Gauntlet" received the highest review of 9.1/10. The series premiered in the U.S. to 3.9 million viewers.
