A birthstone (or "birthday stone") is a gemstone, usually in the form of personal jewelry and most often in the form of a ring. Each stone is traditionally associated with various qualities that symbolize the month of birth in the Gregorian calendar.
History of birthstones.
Western custom.
The first century Jewish historian Josephus proclaimed a connection between the twelve stones in Aaron's breastplate, the twelve months of the year, and the twelve signs of the zodiac. Translations and interpretations of the passage in Exodus regarding the breastplate have varied widely, however, with Josephus himself giving two different lists for the twelve stones (Kunz argues that Josephus saw the breastplate of the Second Temple, not the one described in Exodus). St. Jerome, referencing Josephus, said the Foundation Stones of the New Jerusalem (Revelation 21:19–20) would be appropriate for Christians to use. In the eight and ninth century religious treaties were written associating a particular stone with an apostle, as Revelation stated their name would be inscribed on the Foundation Stones, and his virtue. Practice became to keep twelve stones and wear one a month. Wearing a single birthstone is only a few centuries old, although modern authorities differ on dates: Kunz places the custom in eighteenth century Poland, while the Gemological Institute of America starts it in Germany in the 1560s.
Modern lists of birthstones have little to do with either the breastplate or the Foundation Stones of Christianity. Tastes, customs and confusing translations have distanced them from their historical origins, with one author calling the 1912 Kansas list "nothing but a piece of unfounded salesmanship."
Traditional birthstones.
Ancient traditional birthstones are society-based birthstones. The table below contains many stones which are popular choices, often reflecting Polish tradition.
The Gregorian calendar has poems matching each month with its birthstone. These are traditional stones of English-speaking societies. Tiffany & Co. published these poems "of unknown author" for the first time in a pamphlet in 1870.
Modern birthstones.
In 1912, in an effort to standardize birthstones, the (American) National Association of Jewelers met in Kansas and officially adopted a list. The Jewelry Industry Council of America updated the list in 1952 by adding alexandrite to June and citrine to November; specifying "pink" tourmaline for October; replacing December's lapis with zircon; and switching the primary/alternate gems in March. The most recent change occurred in October of 2002, with the addition of tanzanite as a December birthstone. Britain's National Association of Goldsmiths created their own standardized list of birthstones in 1937.
Eastern custom.
A Hindu text from 1879, "Mani Mala", lists gems for each month.
Birthstones by cultures.
Blue topaz is listed as an alternate birthstone for December in some modern lists.
Zodiacal.
Early civilizations, such as those in India and Babylon, have attributed gemstones with magical properties and especially to their relationship with the signs of the zodiac. Over time, astrologers assigned gems of certain colors to the twelve signs of the zodiac to help people influence the planets in their favor.
