Pearl Harbor is a 2001 American epic war film directed by Michael Bay, produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and written by Randall Wallace. It features a large ensemble cast, including Ben Affleck, Josh Hartnett, Kate Beckinsale, Cuba Gooding, Jr., Tom Sizemore, Jon Voight, Colm Feore and Alec Baldwin.
"Pearl Harbor" is a dramatic reimagining of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor and the subsequent Doolittle Raid. Some special prints were made from the color negatives using the recently re-introduced Technicolor dye imbibition printing process. Despite negative reviews from critics, "Pearl Harbor" became a major box office success, earning $449,220,945 at the world wide box office and won the Academy Award for Best Sound Editing.
Plot.
In Tennessee 1923, two young boys, Rafe McCauley and Danny Walker, are playing together in an old beat up biplane, pretending to fight the German bandits in World War I. After Rafe's father lands his biplane and leaves, Danny and Rafe both climb into the plane and Rafe accidentally starts it, giving the boys their first experience at flight. Soon afterward, Danny's father comes to take him home, and beats Danny. Telling Danny he is of no account. Rafe hits Danny's father with a two by four and calls him a dirty German. Danny's father reacts by telling the boys he fought the Germans in France and hopes the two boys never have to see what he saw. He then walks into the wheat fields, and Danny tells Rafe that he is his best friend, before joining his father.
18 years later, in January 1941, Danny and Rafe are both First Lieutenants under the commandment of Major Doolittle. The two men get into trouble when they use the Air Corps P-40s to play a game called chicken. Afterwards, Doolittle gives Rafe the news that he has been accepted into the Eagle Squadron (an outfit for American pilots to fight in the war). 
While on a train ride to New York, a nurse named Evelyn tells three other nurses (Sandra Betty Martha and Barbera) the story of how she had met Rafe four weeks earlier after passing his medical exam, even though Rafe had trouble with reading. The two had begun a relationship and Evelyn was looking forward to seeing Rafe in the city that night. At the train station, Rafe tells Evelyn to pick a hand, when she does he reveals a folded crane which he had made on the train ride. After asking him what is in his other hand, Rafe reveals another folded crane, and tells her it is. While dancing at a night club, Rafe takes Evelyn for a boat ride on New York harbor. And when they get to the hotel, he tells her he has volunteered for the Eagle Squadron. After giving him her scarf, Evelyn and Rafe say goodbye and Rafe leaves in a cab.
He lies to Danny, telling him that Doolittle had assigned him to the Eagle Squadron. The next day, Danny and Rafe say goodbye. At first, it seems that Evelyn will not come, but as Rafe takes his seat on the train, he sees her through the window. Before she can see him, she leaves, and Rafe tells the man across the aisle that she loves him. The soldiers and nurses are transferred to Pearl Harbor in Oahu and Evelyn and Rafe continue their romance through letters. While fighting in the Battle of Britain, after shooting down many Nazi planes Rafe is shot down over in the English Channel and presumed killed in action. Danny gives Evelyn the news and she becomes greatly depressed.
Three months later, Evelyn runs into Danny at a movie theatre, after they both leave after they see a news reel of British planes being shot down into the English Channel, and they both go to eat dinner at the Black Cat Cafe. The camera then shows a group of nurses and pilots (Red Billy Betty and Barbera). Red proposes to Betty, and she accepts. The camera then returns to Evelyn and Danny reminiscing about Rafe. Evelyn then leaves, and Danny returns to her house to return her hankerchief, but ends up asking her if he can come by sometime. She tells him maybe, and the two say goodnight. When Evelyn returns to bed Danny calls himself an idiot. 
The next day, Evelyn gets relationship advice from Betty, and she decides to give Danny a chance. A few days later, on November 2, while testing machine guns, Danny spots Evelyn coming towards the hangar and tells his friends that he is finally falling for her. They respond by telling him to go for it. Evelyn and Danny talk, and before she is about to leave, Danny asks her if she has ever seen Pearl Harbor at sunset and she says yes, but he finishes by asking if she's seen it from the air. Danny then takes Evelyn for a plane ride above Waikkiki, and afterwards the two shag in the parachute hangar. The next day, Evelyn attempts to break it off with Danny but he convinces her to stay with him, and the two begin a relationship of their own.
On the night of December 5, 1941. While working at the hospital, Evelyn is surprised to discover Rafe outside, and after a passionate kiss, Rafe asks Evelyn if they are still together, she responds by saying, "I don't know where I am." Danny comes soon afterward holding a telegram from Western Union stating that Rafe is in fact alive. Rafe realizes that Danny and Evelyn are together, and feeling hurt and betrayed, leaves. The next night, Rafe and Danny get into a fight at the Hula Bar. When the police arrive, the two drive away and after talking, the two eventually fall asleep. The next morning, on December 7, 1941, the Japanese military begin bombing Pearl Harbor. The two drive away in search of a still standing airfield, while Evelyn and the other nurses make a mad dash for the hospital. While treating the wounded, a man brings Evelyn the body of a women which turns out to be Betty. After shooting down seven Japanese Zeroes, Danny and Rafe return to the hospital where a bedraggled Evelyn draws blood from the two men for the hundreds of wounded men and women. But is interrupted when a man comes in and asks Danny and Rafe to assist in rescuing men from the harbor. Afterwards, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt declares a state of war on the Empire of Japan.
In the aftermath, Rafe, Danny, Evelyn, Red, Anthony, Barbara, and Sandra attend a memorial service to honor their now dead friend Betty. Later, Danny and Rafe are assigned to fly to California once again under the commandment of Major Doolittle. Before he leaves, Evelyn visits Rafe to talk to him and after arguing, Evelyn tells Rafe that she is pregnant with Danny's child. She tells him that she doesn't want Danny to know, asks him not to tell, and also tells him that she is going to give her whole heart to Danny, but she will never stop loving Rafe, and that she will never look at another sunset without thinking of Rafe.
Upon their arrival in California, Danny and Rafe are both promoted to captain and being awarded the silver star award. They are also told that they will be going on a top secret mission to bomb Tokyo, and are also told to leave their hula shirts at home. While sitting at a beach bonfire, Rafe pleads to Danny to not go on the mission, that he has nothing to prove. But Danny decides to go anyway. After training, the raiders are sent towards Japan by ship and in April, the ship was attacked by the Japanese and the raiders fly on their B-25 Mitchell Medium bombers towards Tokyo. After a successful bombing, the raiders crash landed on Japanese-occupied territory in China on a rice patty. The Japanese Army have the members of Rafe's plane pinned down and when they are about to get shot, Danny's plane flys over and shoots the Japanese forces, before crashing. 
Rafe runs to Danny's side and attempts to pull a sharp piece of metal from Danny's neck, but are once again attacked by Japanese patrols. Rafe is hit over the head by a two by four, and Danny is tied to an ox yoke. Rafe picks up a pistol and shoots some of the Japanese, and is about to get shot when Danny hits the Japanese with the ox yoke. The remaining Patrols shoot Danny, and the other pilots Red and Gooz kill off the remaining Japanese forces. Holding a dying Danny in his arms, Rafe tells Danny that he can't die because he is going to be a father, but Danny replies by saying, "no you are", before finally dying in Rafes arms. The remaining pilots are rescued by the Chinese, and when returning home, a pregnant Evelyn sees Rafe getting off the plane, and is hopeful that Danny is alive, until she sees Rafe carrying his coffin. 
In the aftermath, both Evelyn and Rafe are awarded medals. Evelyn's voice narrates that Dorie Miller was the first black man to be awarded the Navy Cross, but would not be the last. Rafe meets President Roosevelt, and he and Evelyn are discharged from the army. A few years later, now with a son, named Danny after his biological father, Rafe and Evelyn, now married, are visiting Danny's grave with their son. Rafe then takes Danny for a ride in the old biplane, and Rafe and Danny are shown flying off towards the sunset.
Production.
The proposed budget of $208 million that Bay and Bruckheimer wanted was an area of contention with Disney executives, since a great deal of the budget was to be expended on production aspects. More inflammatory was the effort to change the original film rating from an R to PG-13. Bay wanted to graphically portray the horrors of war and was not interested in primarily marketing the final product to a teen and young adult audience. Budget fights continued throughout the planning of the film with Bay "walking" on several occasions with the final $135 million budget that was "green lighted", the largest in Hollywood history at the time.
In order to recreate the atmosphere of pre-war Pearl Harbor, the producers had the advantage of staging the film in Hawaii and using the current Naval facilities. Many active duty military members stationed in Hawaii and members of the local population served as extras during filming there, although for the sake of expediency and due to the present use of the Pearl Harbor Naval Base, the set at Rosarito Beach in the Mexican state of Baja California was utilized for scale model work. Formerly serving as the set for "Titanic" (1997), Rosarito served as the ideal location to recreate the death throes of the battleships in the Pearl Harbor attack. A large-scale model of the bow section of the "USS Oklahoma" mounted on a gimbal produced an authentic rolling and submerging of the doomed warship. Production Engineer Nigel Phelps realized that the sequence of the ship, rolling out of the water and slapping down would involve one of the "biggest set elements" to be staged. Matched with computer generated imagery, the action had to reflect precision and accuracy throughout. In addition, to emulate the ocean, a massive, stadium-like "bowl" was filled with water. The bowl was built in Honolulu, Hawaii and cost nearly $8 million. Today the bowl is used for training for scuba diving and deep water fishing tournaments.
The First trailer was released in 2000 and was shown alongside screenings of "Cast Away", with another trailer getting released in Spring 2001 and was shown before "".
Reception.
Box office.
"Pearl Harbor" grossed $200 million at the domestic box office and $450 million worldwide. The film was ranked the sixth highest-earning picture of 2001. It is also the third highest-grossing romantic drama film of all time.
Critical reception.
Despite the box office success, the critical response to "Pearl Harbor" at the time of its release tended toward mixed to negative, and the film earned only a 25% approval rating according to review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 166 reviews with an average rating of 4.4/10, making it Bay's second worst reviewed movie to date, next to "" and behind "Bad Boys II". On Metacritic, the film has a score of 44 out of 100 based on 35 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews." While it earned praise for its technical achievements, the screenplay and acting were popular targets for critics.
Roger Ebert gave the film one and a half stars and wrote, "The film has been directed without grace, vision, originality, and although you may walk out quoting lines of dialogue, it will not be because you admire them" and criticized its liberties with historical facts: "There is no sense of history, strategy or context; according to this movie, Japan attacked Pearl Harbor because America cut off its oil supply, and they were down to an 18-month reserve. Would going to war restore the fuel sources? Did they perhaps also have imperialist designs? Movie doesn't say". Michael Bay responded to Ebert's criticism of his film: "He commented on TV that bombs don't fall like that. Does he actually think we didn't research every nook and cranny of how armor-piercing bombs fell? He's watched too many movies. He thinks they all fall flat — armor-piercing bombs fall straight down, that's the way it was designed! But he's on the air pontificating and giving the wrong information. That's insulting!"
On a similar refrain, A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" wrote, "Nearly every line of the script drops from the actors' mouths with the leaden clank of exposition, timed with bad sitcom beats". "USA Today" gave the film two out of four stars and wrote, "Ships, planes and water combust and collide in "Pearl Harbor", but nothing else does in one of the wimpiest wartime romances ever filmed."
In his review for the "Washington Post", Desson Howe wrote, "although this Walt Disney movie is based, inspired and even partially informed by a real event referred to as Pearl Harbor, the movie is actually based on the movies "Top Gun", "Titanic" and "Saving Private Ryan". Don't get confused." Peter Travers of "Rolling Stone" magazine wrote, "Affleck, Hartnett and Beckinsale - a British actress without a single worthy line to wrap her credible American accent around - are attractive actors, but they can't animate this moldy romantic triangle". "Time" magazine's Richard Schickel criticized the film's love triangle: "It requires a lot of patience for an audience to sit through the dithering. They're nice kids and all that, but they don't exactly claw madly at one another. It's as if they know that someday they're going to be part of "the Greatest Generation" and don't want to offend Tom Brokaw. Besides, megahistory and personal history never integrate here".
"Entertainment Weekly" was more positive, giving the film a "B-" rating, and Owen Gleiberman praised the Pearl Harbor attack sequence: "Bay's staging is spectacular but also honorable in its scary, hurtling exactitude ... There are startling point-of-view shots of torpedoes dropping into the water and speeding toward their targets, and though Bay visualizes it all with a minimum of graphic carnage, he invites us to register the terror of the men standing helplessly on deck, the horrifying split-second deliverance as bodies go flying and explosions reduce entire battleships to liquid walls of collapsing metal".
In his review for "The New York Observer", Andrew Sarris wrote, "here is the ironic twist in my acceptance of "Pearl Harbor"-the parts I liked most are the parts before and after the digital destruction of Pearl Harbor by the Japanese carrier planes" and felt that ""Pearl Harbor" is not so much about World War II as it is about movies about World War II. And what's wrong with that?"
Historical inaccuracy.
Like many historical dramas, "Pearl Harbor" provoked debate about the artistic license taken by its producers and director. National Geographic Channel produced a documentary called "Beyond the Movie: Pearl Harbor" which covers some of the ways that "the film's final cut didn't reflect all the attacks' facts, or represent them all accurately."
Many Pearl Harbor survivors dismissed the film as grossly inaccurate and pure Hollywood. Historian Lawrence Suid's review is particularly detailed in the major factual misrepresentations of the film and the impact of them, even in an entertainment film. Historical inaccuracies found in the film include the early childhood scenes depicting a Stearman biplane crop duster in 1923, as the aircraft was not accurate for the period and the first commercial crop-dusting company did not begin operation until 1924, with the U.S. Department of Agriculture not purchasing its first cotton-dusting plane until 16 April 1926.
The inclusion of Affleck's character in the Eagle Squadron was another jarring aspect as serving U.S. airmen were prohibited from doing so, though some American civilians did join the RAF. Countless other technical lapses such as painting the Japanese Zero fighters green for effect even though Bay knew that was inaccurate, but liked the way the aircraft looked so that audiences could differentiate the "good guys from the bad guys" was another aspect that rankled film critics.
The greatest criticism came when actual historical events were altered for dramatic purposes. For example, Admiral Kimmel was not on a golf course on the morning of the attack (he was planning to meet General Short for a regular game, but cancelled as news of the attack came in), nor was he notified of the Japanese embassy leaving Washington, D.C., prior to the attack. The first official notification of the attack was received by General Short several hours after the attack had ended. The report of attacking an enemy midget submarine, in real life, did not reach him until after the bombs began falling.
Critics decried the use of fictional replacements for real people, declaring that "Pearl Harbor" was an "abuse of artistic license." The roles that the two male leads played by Affleck and Hartnett have in the attack sequence are analogous to the real historical deeds of U.S. Army Air Forces Second Lieutenants George Welch and Kenneth M. Taylor, who took to the skies during the Japanese attack and, together, claimed six Japanese aircraft and a few probables. Taylor, who died in November 2006, previously declared the film adaptation "a piece of trash... over-sensationalized and distorted." Additionally, the combat scenes between the P-40s and the Zeros would not have been fought at wave-top height or with the aircraft darting around various obstacles as seen in the movie as such tactics would have been suicidal for both participants.
Attacks against Battleship Row and Pearl Harbor have been further dramatized. The movie depicts the four other battleships that survived the attack with severe damage, , , , and being sunk and rendered irreparable. These ships managed to escape further damage during the attack, although "Tennessee" herself was seen trapped in a listing manner during the attack, and "Nevada" being beached after the attack. was not depicted.
There are some minor inaccuracies with the portrayal of Dorie Miller. In the film, Petty Officer Second Class Miller comforts Captain Mervyn S. Bennion who has been mortally wounded by a torpedo that strikes the , and is with him when he dies. Miller is depicted as delivering the Captain's last orders to the ship's executive officer, and then mans a twin .50 caliber Browning anti-aircraft machine gun. In actuality, Petty Officer Third Class Miller was first ordered to carry injured sailors to places of greater safety, and later ordered to go assist the Captain. The Captain refused to leave his post on the bridge and continued to direct the battle until he died of his wounds just before the ship was abandoned. Ensign Victor Delano actually comforted the Captain in his final moments. Miller was then ordered to help load a machine gun, but assumed control of the unmanned weapon instead. Delano showed Miller how to fire the weapon, saying later that Miller did not even "know how to shoot a gun." In the movie, as in real life, Miller shot down at least one enemy plane before he ran out of ammo and was ordered to abandon ship with the rest of the ship's crew. Miller was also depicted as a member of USS "Arizona"s crew during which he represented them in a boxing match. Miller was in fact assigned to the USS "West Virginia" and was their heavyweight boxing champion. He did not represent the USS "Arizona". 
A scene in New York involved the backdrop of the in her commercial colors but by 1940, had actually been repainted grey, for refit completion to serve as a troopship already serving the Royal Navy, mainly in the Atlantic and Indian oceans.
"Pearl Harbor" was also criticized for the way it, "distinguished Americans from Japanese, including the wearing of black clothes, the lack of a social life, family or friends, and the devotion to warring, juxtaposing these with the portraits of Americans".
Awards and nominations.
At the 2001 Academy Awards, "Pearl Harbor" was nominated for four awards, winning one for Best Sound Editing. Its other nominations were for Best Sound Mixing (Greg P. Russell, Peter J. Devlin and Kevin O'Connell), Best Visual Effects, and Best Original Song for "There You'll Be".
At the Golden Globe awards, "Pearl Harbor" was nominated for Best Original Score and also for Best Original Song, "There You'll Be".
At the 2002 MTV Movie Awards, "Pearl Harbor" won for Best Action Sequence. 
Worst Picture, Worst Director, Worst Actor (Ben Affleck), Worst Screenplay, Worst Screen Couple (Beckinsale with Affleck or Hartnett) and Worst Remake or Sequel (presumably of the 1970 film "Tora! Tora! Tora!"); but lost to Tom Green's "Freddy Got Fingered" in all but the latter category, wherein it lost to Tim Burton's version of "Planet of the Apes".
At the 2002 World Stunt Awards, "Pearl Harbor" was nominated for the Taurus Award, Best Aerial Work.
Popular culture.
The soundtrack for the 2004 film "" contains a song entitled "End of an Act" whose lyrics describe the emotion of longing for someone as well as panning the hapless "Pearl Harbor". The song's chorus recounts, "Pearl Harbor sucked, and I miss you" equating the singer's longing to how much "Michael Bay missed the mark when he made Pearl Harbor" which is "an awful lot, girl". The ballad contains other common criticisms of the film, concluding with the rhetorical question "Why does Michael Bay get to keep on making movies?"
Satirical newspaper "The Onion" commemorated the 10th anniversary of "Pearl Harbor"s release with an article comparing what is viewed as the poor quality of the film to what is viewed as the terror of the actual Pearl Harbor attacks.
Home media.
A Commemorative 60th Anniversary Edition was released on December 4, 2001. The feature was spread across two videotapes in letterbox format, and tape two also included "Unsung Heroes of Pearl Harbor", a 50-minute documentary on little-known heroes of the attack, and a Faith Hill music video.
Around the same time a two-disc DVD of the Commemorative 60th Anniversary Edition was released. This release included the feature on disc one, and on disc two, "Journey to the Screen", a 47-minute documentary on the monumental production of the film, "Unsung Heroes of Pearl Harbor", the Faith Hill music video and theatrical trailers.
A Pearl Harbor DVD gift set that includes the Commemorative Edition two-disc set, National Geographic's "Beyond the Movie" feature and a dual-sided map was released concurrently on December 4, 2001.
A deluxe "Vista Series" edition of the film was released on July 2, 2002. It contained an R-rated director's cut of the film, with numerous commentaries from the cast and crew alongside a few "easter eggs". The director's cut of the film included the reinsertion of graphic carnage during the central attack (including shots of eviscerated bodies being torn apart by strafing, blood, flying limbs and so forth); small alterations and additions to existing scenes; Doolittle addressing the pilots before the raid; and the replacement of the campfire scene with a scene of Doolittle speaking personally to Rafe and Danny about the value of friendship. It runs at 184 minutes compared to the 183 minutes of the theatrical cut.
This elaborate package, which "DVDtalk.com" called "the most extensive set released only one film" includes four discs of film and bonus features, a replication of Roosevelt's speech, collectible promotional postcards and a carrying case that resembles a historic photo album. The bonus features include all the features included in the commemorative edition, plus additional footage. There are three audio commentaries: 1) Director and film historian, 2) Cast and 3) Crew. Other features include: "The Surprise Attack", a multi-angle breakdown of the film's most exciting sequence (30 minutes), which includes multiple video tracks (such as previsualization and final edit) and commentaries from veterans/ Also included is the "Pearl Harbor Historic Timeline", a set-top interactive feature produced by documentarian Charles Kiselyak (68 minutes). The "Soldier's Boot Camp" follows the actors as they take preparation for their roles to an extreme (30 minutes)), "One Hour Over Tokyo" and "The Unsung Heroes of Pearl Harbor", two History Channel documentaries along with "Super-8 Montage", a collection of unseen Super-8 footage shot for potential use in the movie by Michael Bay's assistant, Mark Palansky; "Deconstructing Destruction", an in-depth conversation with Michael Bay and Eric Brevig (of Industrial Light and Magic) about the special effects in the movie and "Nurse Ruth Erickson interview" complete the extra features component.
On December 19, 2006, a 65th Anniversary Commemorative Edition high-definition Blu-ray Disc was released.
Soundtrack.
Pearl Harbor soundtrack album, on Warner Bros. Records was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score (lost to the score of "Moulin Rouge!"). The original score was composed by Hans Zimmer. The song "There You'll Be" was nominated for the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Original Song.
