Susan Abigail Tomalin (born October 4, 1946), known professionally as Susan Sarandon, is an American actress. She has worked in movies and television since 1969, and won an Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance in the 1995 film "Dead Man Walking". She had also been nominated for the award for four films before that and has received other recognition for her work. She is also noted for her social and political activism for a variety of liberal causes.
Early life.
Susan Abigail Tomalin was born in Jackson Heights, Queens, New York City. She is the first of nine children born to Lenora Marie (née Criscione) and Phillip Leslie Tomalin, who worked as an advertising executive, television producer, and nightclub singer during the big band era. Her father was of English, Irish, and Welsh ancestry, his English ancestors being from Hackney in London. On her mother's side, she is of Italian descent, with ancestors from the regions of Tuscany and Sicily. Sarandon was raised Roman Catholic, and attended Roman Catholic schools. She grew up in Edison, New Jersey, where she graduated from Edison High School in 1964. She then attended The Catholic University of America, from 1964 to 1968, where she began dating actor Chris Sarandon. They were married in 1967.
Career.
In 1969, Sarandon went to a casting call for the motion picture "Joe", with her then-husband Chris Sarandon. Although he did not get a part, she was given a major co-starring role in the film, which was released in 1970. Between the years 1970 and 1972, Sarandon appeared on the soap operas "A World Apart" and "Search for Tomorrow", playing the roles of Patrice Kahlman and Sarah Fairbanks, respectively. On film, she acted in "The Apprentice" and Mario Monicelli's "Lady Liberty" (both 1971), appearing with Sophia Loren in the latter film.
In 1974, Sarandon co-starred in "The Front Page" with the comedy duo Jack Lemmon and Walter Matthau, and played Anthony Perkins' neglected wife in "Lovin' Molly". In 1975, she starred as Janet in the cult favorite musical "The Rocky Horror Picture Show". That same year, she starred opposite Robert Redford in "The Great Waldo Pepper". In "Pretty Baby" (1978), Sarandon and Brooke Shields played a pair of mother and daughter prostitutes.
Sarandon received her first Academy Award nomination as Best Actress for her performance in "Atlantic City" (1980). In 1983, she appeared in Tony Scott's "The Hunger", which generated controversy due to her lesbian love scene with Catherine Deneuve. In 1987, Sarandon played the role of Jane in the dark comedy/fantasy film "The Witches of Eastwick", opposite Jack Nicholson. One of her biggest commercial successes came in 1988 when she starred in "Bull Durham". In 1989, Sarandon co-starred with Marlon Brando in "A Dry White Season", followed by "White Palace" (1990) with James Spader.
In the early 1990s, Sarandon received three more Academy Award nominations for her roles in "Thelma & Louise" (1991), "Lorenzo's Oil" (1992) and "The Client" (1994). In 1995, she won the award for "Dead Man Walking".
In 1994, Sarandon was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.
Additional performances in film include "King of the Gypsies" (1978), "Tempest" (1982), "Compromising Positions" (1985), "Little Women" (1994), "Stepmom" (1998), "Anywhere but Here" (1999), "Cradle Will Rock" (1999), "The Banger Sisters" (2002), "Shall We Dance" (2004), "Alfie" (2004), "Romance & Cigarettes" (2005), "Elizabethtown" (2005) and "Enchanted" (2007).
Sarandon has appeared in two episodes of "The Simpsons", once as herself ("Bart Has Two Mommies") and another as a ballet teacher, "Homer vs. Patty and Selma". She has made appearances on comedies such as "Friends", "Malcolm in the Middle", "Mad TV", "Saturday Night Live", "Chappelle's Show", "30 Rock", and "Rescue Me".
Sarandon has contributed the narration to some two dozen documentary films, many of which dealt with social and political issues; in addition, she has served as the presenter on many installments of the PBS documentary series, "Independent Lens". In 1999–2000, she hosted and presented "Mythos", a series of lectures by the late American mythology professor Joseph Campbell. Sarandon also participates as a member of the Jury for the NYICFF, a local New York City Film Festival that is dedicated to screening films made for children between the ages of 3 and 18.
Sarandon joined the cast of the adaptation of "The Lovely Bones", opposite Rachel Weisz, and appeared with her daughter, Eva Amurri, in "Middle of Nowhere"; both of the films were filmed in 2007.
In June 2010, Sarandon joined the cast of the HBO pilot "The Miraculous Year", in the role of Patty Atwood, a Broadway director/choreographer. The pilot was not picked up.
In 2012, Sarandon's audiobook performance of Carson McCullers' "The Member of the Wedding" was released at Audible.com.
Sarandon was the voice actor for the character of Granny Rags, an eccentric and sinister old lady, in the stealth/action video game "Dishonored", released in 2012.
Personal life.
In 1964, Sarandon began dating actor Chris Sarandon. The couple married on September 16, 1967. In 1978, following their separation, Sarandon stated "I no longer believe in marriage" in an interview with "Cosmopolitan" magazine. Their divorce was finalized in 1979, and she retained Sarandon as her stage name.
Following her marital separation, Sarandon had a two-year relationship with director Louis Malle, who directed her in "Pretty Baby" and "Atlantic City".
In the mid-1980s, Sarandon dated Italian filmmaker Franco Amurri. She gave birth to their daughter, actress Eva Amurri, on March 15, 1985.
From 1988 to 2009, Sarandon was in a relationship with actor Tim Robbins, whom she met while they were filming "Bull Durham". They have two sons — Jack Henry (born 1989) and Miles Guthrie (born 1992).
In 2006, Sarandon and ten of her relatives (including her then-partner Tim Robbins and her son Miles) travelled to Wales to trace her family's Welsh genealogy. Their journey was documented by the BBC Wales programme, "Coming Home: Susan Sarandon". Much of the same research and content was also featured in the American version of "Who Do You Think You Are?". In 2006, she also received the "Ragusani nel mondo" prize, since her Sicilian roots are in Ragusa, Italy.
Sarandon is the co-owner of New York table tennis club SPiN, and its Toronto branch SPiN Toronto.
Activism.
Sarandon is noted for her active support of progressive and left-liberal political causes, ranging from donations made to organizations such as EMILY's List, to participating in a 1983 delegation to Nicaragua sponsored by MADRE, an organization that promotes "social, environmental and economic justice." Sarandon has also expressed support for various human rights causes that are similar philosophically to ideas found among the Christian left.
In 1995, Sarandon was one of many Hollywood actors, directors and writers who were interviewed for the documentary "The Celluloid Closet," which looked at how Hollywood films have depicted homosexuality. In 1999, she was appointed UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador. In that capacity, she has actively supported the organization's global advocacy, as well as the work of the Canadian UNICEF Committee.
During the 2000 election, Sarandon supported Ralph Nader's run for President, serving as a co-chair of the National Steering Committee of Nader 2000.
During the 2004 election campaign, she withheld support for Nader's bid, being among several "Nader 2000 Leaders" who signed a petition that urged voters to vote for Democratic Party candidate John Kerry. After the 2004 election, Sarandon called for US elections to be monitored by international entities.
Sarandon and Robbins both took an early stance against the 2003 invasion of Iraq, with Sarandon stating that she was firmly against the concept of the war as a pre-emptive strike. Prior to a 2003 protest sponsored by the United for Peace and Justice coalition, she said that many Americans "do not want to risk their children or the children of Iraq". Sarandon was one of the first to appear in a series of political ads sponsored by TrueMajority, an organization established by Ben & Jerry's Ice Cream founder Ben Cohen. Also in 2003, Sarandon appeared in a "Love is Love is Love" commercial, which promoted the acceptance of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender individuals.
In 2004, Sarandon served on the advisory committee for the group 2004 Racism Watch. She hosted a section of the Live 8 concert in Edinburgh, Scotland, in 2005. In 2006, she was one of eight women selected to carry in the Olympic flag at the Opening Ceremony of the 2006 Olympic Winter Games, in Turin, Italy.
Along with anti-war activist Cindy Sheehan, Sarandon took part in a 2006 Mother's Day protest, which was sponsored by Code Pink; she has expressed interest in portraying Sheehan in a film. In January 2007, she appeared with Robbins and Jane Fonda at an anti-war rally in Washington, D.C. in support of a Congressional measure to withdraw U.S. forces from Iraq.
In the 2008 U.S. presidential election, Sarandon and Tim Robbins campaigned for John Edwards in the New Hampshire communities of Hampton, Bedford and Dover. When asked at We Vote '08 Kickoff Party "What would Jesus do this primary season", Sarandon said, "I think Jesus would be very supportive of John Edwards."
On March 12, 2011, Sarandon spoke before a crowd in Madison, Wisconsin during a protest of Governor Scott Walker and his "Budget Repair Bill".
On September 27, 2011, Sarandon spoke to reporters and other interested parties at the Occupy Wall Street protest in New York City.
After using the term "Nazi" in describing Pope Benedict XVI on October 15, 2011, she drew umbrage not only from Roman Catholic authorities, but also the Anti-Defamation League, which called on Sarandon to apologize.
It has been noted that Sarandon is often at odds with her mother, Leonora Tomalin, in regard to her political beliefs as Tomalin is a staunch Republican, a supporter of George W. Bush and the Iraq War.
Recognition.
In 2006, Sarandon received the Action Against Hunger Humanitarian Award. She was honored for her work as a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador, an advocate for victims of hunger and HIV/AIDS and a spokesperson for Heifer International.
In 2010, Sarandon was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame.
