Jane Marie Lynch (born July 14, 1960) is an American actress, singer, and comedian. She received a Primetime Emmy Award, Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, TCA Award, Satellite Award, and People's Choice Award for her portrayal of Sue Sylvester in the FOX musical comedy series "Glee". Lynch also received the first annual PlanetOut.com Short Movie Award, Florida Film Critics Circle Award, and Ft. Lauderdale International Film Festival Jury Award. 
She gained fame in Christopher Guest's improv mockumentary pictures such as "Best in Show". Other notable awards she has won for the series include the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series, TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Comedy, Satellite Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries, or Television Film, and the People's Choice Award for Favorite TV Comedy Actress. Her television cameos include an appearance in the Nickelodeon situation comedy "iCarly" and the Showtime dark comedy series "Weeds". Lynch had a recurring role in the Warner Bros. situation comedy "Two and a Half Men" and also has had notable roles in numerous mainstream comedies, such as "", "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", "Role Models", and "The Three Stooges".
Early life.
Lynch was born and raised in Dolton, Illinois, the daughter of a homemaker-secretary mother, Eileen (née Carney), and a banker father, Frank Lynch. Her father was of Irish descent and her mother was of Irish and Swedish ancestry. She was raised in a Catholic family and attended Thornridge High School. She received her bachelor's degree in theater from Illinois State University and her MFA in theater from Cornell University.
Career.
Jane lynch has many roles in many shows in films like I-carly, an American kids show about a girl who becomes famous in the Internet world by showing an Internet show. Jane plays sams mother. She has also just voiced a role in Disneyland new animation'wreck it Ralph' as the commander and leader of heroes duty a 'retro' game
Early work.
Lynch spent fifteen years in Chicago, acting in the Steppenwolf Theatre Company, and, at the time of her audition, was one of only two women picked to join The Second City comedy troupe. She then continued to hone her comical and improvisational skills at Annoyance Theater, playing Carol Brady in the theater's "The Real Live Brady Bunch". Andy Richter played Mike Brady in the New York shows. He and Lynch became very good friends.
Films.
Lynch got her start in films in 1988, playing a small role in the film "Vice Versa". In 1993, she had a secondary role as a doctor alongside Harrison Ford in "The Fugitive".
During the 1990s, she made numerous television commercials, including one for Frosted Flakes for an adult audience, directed by Christopher Guest. A few years later, Guest would remember Lynch, as he cast actors for his dog show mockumentary, "Best in Show" (2000). Lynch played Christy Cummings, a butch lesbian personal dog handler to trophy wife Sheri Ann Cabot (Jennifer Coolidge). Since then, she has been a staple part of Guest's casts, appearing in the director's "A Mighty Wind" (2003) as porn actress-turned-folk singer Laurie Bohner and in "For Your Consideration" (2006) as an entertainment reporter.
Audiences and critics took notice of Lynch for her turn in Judd Apatow's "The 40-Year-Old Virgin". She told "Fresh Airs Terry Gross the role was originally intended for a man but, at the urging of Steve Carell's wife Nancy Walls, was offered to Lynch instead. Since then, she has had supporting roles in a series of films including "Role Models", ', "Alvin & the Chipmunks", ', "Space Chimps", "The Rocker", "The Hammer", "Another Cinderella Story", ', and "Spring Breakdown".
In "Adventures of Power", a critically acclaimed comedy about air-drumming released in 2008, Lynch reunited with her former co-star Michael McKean (from "For Your Consideration") in the role of Aunt Joanie and starring alongside Ari Gold, Adrian Grenier, Chiu Chi Ling, and Shoshannah Stern. Similar to her contribution as Sue Sylvester on the Fox musical comedy-drama series Glee, Lynch's role as the encouraging Aunt Joanie to Power, a young musician who plays the air drums because he never had access to musical instruments, promotes the initiative to support music education.
In "Julie and Julia", she played the role of Dorothy McWilliams, Julia Child's sister. "Entertainment Weekly" dedicated an article on their website toward the possibility of her performance receiving an Academy Award nomination.
Television.
Lynch has appeared in television roles for over a decade, including work in "L.A. Law", "Judging Amy", "The West Wing", "7th Heaven", "Desperate Housewives", "Friends", Dawson's Creek, "Felicity", "Arrested Development", "Lovespring International", "Two and a Half Men", "Weeds", "Boston Legal", "The L Word", "Criminal Minds", "Help Me Help You", "Gilmore Girls", "The New Adventures of Old Christine", "Psych", "Monk", and "Party Down". She also starred with John Hannah and William Fichtner in 2002's "MDs" and has appeared in the crime drama "Criminal Minds" as Spencer Reid's schizophrenic mother.
Beginning 2009, Lynch appeared on the Fox series "Glee". She won glowing reviews for her role as the aggressive cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester. Mary McNamara of the "LA Times" wrote, "Lynch alone makes Glee worth watching." Before her work with "Glee", she was a series regular on the Starz comedy "Party Down". Though the series was renewed for a second season, Lynch would not be returning, due to her work on "Glee". 
In addition to her current work on "Glee", Lynch continues to pursue other projects. Lynch hosted "Saturday Night Live" on October 9, 2010; the news of her hosting was accidentally broken to her by her "Glee" boss, Ryan Murphy, by text message. Lynch also guest starred on the Nickelodeon show "iCarly" as Pam Puckett, Sam Puckett's mother, in the episode "iSam's Mom".
Other work.
Lynch wrote and starred in the award-winning play "Oh Sister, My Sister". Originally produced in 1998, the play kicked off the "Lesbians in Theater" program at the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center in 2004.
She starred in Comcast's XFinity ads, mainly with two different laptops and two different colored Persian cats. She also stars in LG Corp.'s Text Ed campaign to educate drivers about the dangers of texting while driving.
Lynch's first experience hosting an awards show was in 2010 when she hosted the 2010 VH1 DoSomething Awards. It was announced that she will be hosting the 2011 VH1 DoSomething Awards, airing on VH1 on August 18. Lynch hosted the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards on September 18, 2011, only the third woman in Emmy history to host the awards show solo. According to September 19's "Hollywood Reporter" Lynch hosting the Emmys did not help ratings, as viewing was down 8% year over year and eight million fewer people watched the Emmys as watched Michael Vick's return to Atlanta on Sunday Night Football on NBC (21.5 million for Eagles-Falcons, 13.5 million for the Emmys).
"Happy Accidents" was released Fall 2011 by Hyperion Voice. Lynch was inspired to write the book after reflecting upon the successes of her past year and wishing she could have told her more anxious, younger self to not worry as much. The memoir also includes detail about her years as an alcoholic and her success in battling this addiction. Lynch is openly lesbian, and married Lara Embry in 2010. A self-proclaimed animal lover, Lynch has two dogs and a cat. She has recorded a PSA for PETA encouraging the adoption of shelter animals. On February 23, 2012, it was announced that she would be the commencement speaker for Smith College's class of 2012 where she received an honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts. 
In March 2012, Lynch was featured with Martin Sheen, Jamie Lee Curtis, Chris Colfer and Brad Pitt in a performance of Dustin Lance Black's play, 8 — a staged reenactment of the federal trial that overturned California's Prop 8 ban on same-sex marriage — as Maggie Gallagher. The production was held at the Wilshire Ebell Theatre and broadcast on YouTube to raise money for the American Foundation for Equal Rights.
Personal life.
Lynch is openly a lesbian; in 2005, she was named one of POWER UP's "10 Amazing Gay Women in Showbiz." In 2010, Lynch married clinical psychologist Lara Embry, Ph.D., who has two daughters aged eight and ten.
