Philippe Coutinho Correia (; born 12 June 1992) is a Brazilian footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for Liverpool.
Club career.
Vasco da Gama.
Coutinho started his footballing career as part of Vasco da Gama's youth system and was bought by Italian Serie A giants Internazionale in 2008, at the age of 16, for €4 million. Coutinho stayed at Vasco on loan until his 18th birthday, becoming a first team player for the Brazilian side despite his very young age.
Internazionale.
Coutinho's move to Internazionale became effective on July 2010, after he turned 18, with new head coach Rafael Benítez and chairman Massimo Moratti being quoted saying that "Coutinho is the future of Inter".
He made his official debut in an Internazionale jersey as a substitute during the "Nerazzurri"'s 2–0 defeat at the hands of Atlético Madrid in the 2010 UEFA Super Cup final on 27 August 2010. After dropping out of selection in the starting line up, he returned and proved crucial in the 3–2 win over Bayern Munich in Germany as he provided a beautiful ball for Samuel Eto'o after running at the defense, followed by Eto'o setting up Wesley Sneijder for the second Inter goal; a game which Internazionale would go onto win and progress to the Quarter Finals of the Champions League on the away goals rule. On 8 May 2011, he scored his first goal for Internazionale from a free-kick that curled above the wall and into the net in a game that Internazionale won 3–1 at home against Fiorentina. His second goal for Inter came in a match against Cagliari on 19 November 2011 where Coutinho picked up a through ball from his teammate Alvarez to place the ball into the bottom left corner of the net to make it 2–0 to Internazionale. He further became involved and staked a claim for his spot when he provided an assist during a game against Fiorentina and was heavily involved in the second goal.
Espanyol (loan).
On 30 January 2012, Coutinho joined Catalan side RCD Espanyol on loan until the end of the 2011–12 season. Coutinho made his first appearance for RCD Espanyol on 4 February 2012 in a 3–3 draw in Bilbao. He scored his first goal for the Catalan side in the ninth minute of a game held on 11 March in a 5–1 victory against Rayo Vallecano. He scored his second goal in the 21st minute of the same game. He continued his fine form as he scored a sublime volley against Racing Santander and a well placed free kick against Malaga. On 18 May 2012, Coutinho made his return to Inter and began training immediately upon arrival to the Angelo Moratti Traing Facility. He was included in 20-men squad for a friendly tour to Indonesia. Those 20 players were without international duty.
Liverpool.
On 26 January 2013, Liverpool reportedly agreed a £8.5m fee with Internazionale for Coutinho, pending a medical exam and a work permit from the Home Office as he did not have enough international appearances to qualify automatically. Southampton had also expressed an interest in Coutinho, who had played under Southampton manager Mauricio Pochettino at Espanyol, but Coutinho said he preferred to join Liverpool. On 30 January, Liverpool confirmed the signing of Coutinho on a long-term contract after he was successful in his work permit application, and was given the number 10 shirt. Upon joining Liverpool, Coutinho's move was welcomed by countryman Lucas Leiva, who insisted he would help Coutinho to adapt to life in England. He made his debut on 11 February 2013, replacing Stewart Downing in the 78th minute of a 2-0 defeat against West Brom at Anfield. Less than a week later, on 17 February he scored his first goal for Liverpool on his full debut in a 5-0 victory over Swansea City, 16 seconds into the second half.
International career.
A key player in the Brazilian squad that won the 2009 South American Under-17 Football Championship, Coutinho made his first senior appearance in a Brazil shirt on 7 October 2010 in a friendly match against Iran.
