Shreya Ghoshal (born March 12, 1984) is an Indian singer. Best known as a playback singer in Hindi films, she also sings in other Indian languages including Assamese, Bengali, Bhojpuri, Gujarati, Kannada, Marathi, Oriya, Malayalam, Tamil, Telugu and Nepali.
Ghoshal's career began when she won the Sa Re Ga Ma Pa contest as an adult. Her Bollywood playback singing career began with "Devdas", for which she received National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer along with Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer and Filmfare RD Burman Award for New Music Talent. Since then, she has received many other awards. Ghoshal was also honored from the U.S. state of Ohio, wherein governor Ted Strickland declared June 26 as "Shreya Ghoshal Day".
Early life.
Ghoshal was born to a Bengali Hindu family in Baharampur, West Bengal. She grew up in Rawatbhata, a small town near Kota, Rajasthan. Her father, Biswajeet Ghoshal, is a nuclear power plant engineer and works for the Nuclear Power Corporation of India, and her mother is a literature post-graduate.
At the age of four, Ghoshal accompanied her mother on the harmonium. She got training in Hindustani classical music by Maheshchandra Sharma in Kota.
As a child, she won the children's special episode of the Sa Re Ga Ma (now Sa Re Ga Ma Pa) contest on Zee TV. Kalyanji, who also judged the competition, convinced her parents to move to Mumbai. She was trained by Kalyanji for 18 months and she continued her classical music training with Mukta Bhide in Mumbai.
She studied at Atomic Energy Central School in Rawatbhata and Anushaktinagar, Mumbai. For graduation she enrolled at SIES College.
Career.
As a singer.
Ghoshal caught the attention of director Sanjay Leela Bhansali when she participated in "Sa Re Ga Ma Pa" for a second time, this time as an adult. In 2000, Bhansali offered her the opportunity to be the voice of "Paro", the lead female character of the film "Devdas", that was portrayed by Aishwarya Rai. Ghoshal sang five songs in the film. Her performance won the Filmfare Award for Best Female Playback Singer, as well as Filmfare's RD Burman Award for New Music Talent. She also won the National Film Award for the song "Bairi Piya".
She has received State Film Awards from Malayalam and Tamil industries and Filmfare awards in Hindi, Malayalam, Bengali, Kannada, Tamil and Telugu industries. She debuted in South through the song "Yen Chellam" in Vasantha Balan's Tamil film "Album" and she received stupendous success after singing "Munbe Vaa" from "Sillunu Oru Kaadhal" under composer A. R. Rahman. She debuted in Malayalam through a studio album of composer Alphons Joseph and later gave voice to his song "Vida Parayukayano" from "Big B". Her songs in Malayalam film "Anwar" became hits in Kerala and topped many charts for weeks. In 2010, Ghoshal sang for the English independent film "When Harry Tries to Marry".
As a judge.
Ghoshal was a judge for "Star Voice Of India-Chhote Ustaad" with singer Kunal Ganjawala and composer Pritam. She was one of the three judges in "X Factor India" with Sonu Nigam and Sanjay Leela Bhansali. She was a captain on singing show "Music Ka Maha Muqqabla" along with Shankar Mahadevan, Shaan, Himesh Reshammiya, Mohit Chauhan and Mika Singh. In 2012, Ghoshal appeared as the celebrity judge for Josco Indian Voice (season 1) on Malayalam channel Mazhavil Manorama, along with Sreenivas and Sujatha Mohan.
On screen.
In 2003, Ghoshal made an on-screen appearance in the film "Saaya", singing "Har Taraf". In 2011, she appearaed on TV in advertisements for jewellery store Joyalukkas in 5 languages (Hindi, Malayalam, Kannada, Tamil, Telugu.)
Awards.
Ghoshal has been recognised with multiple awards and nominations for her work in music. She won the National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer four times, the second most by any singer. She has won five Filmfare Awards, from 15 nominations, and seven Filmfare Awards South from 20 nominations. She has received state film awards for best singer from Kerala and Tamil Nadu governments. In addition, she has received numerous best singer awards at IIFA Awards, Zee Cine Awards, Screen Awards, Apsara Awards and Mirchi Music Awards among others. In 2010, she was honoured with the prestigious Swaralaya Yesudas Award. Ghoshal was also honored from the U.S. state of Ohio, wherein governor Ted Strickland declared June 26 as "Shreya Ghoshal Day".
Discography.
In addition to the numerous songs she rendered to Indian films in various languages, she has released many solo studio albums. Her earlier albums are in Bengali language and was released by Sagarika from 1998 to 2006.
