Taran Hourie Killam (born April 1, 1982) is an American actor and comedian best known for his television work on shows such as "The Amanda Show", "Scrubs", "Wild 'N Out", "MADtv", "Stuck in the Suburbs" and currently on "Saturday Night Live".
Early life.
Killam was born in Culver City, California and was raised in Big Bear City, California. He graduated from the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts. His great-uncle was actor Robert Stack.
Career.
Early career.
In 1994, Killam made his first film appearance as an adolescent in "". Killam was also featured on Nickelodeon's "The Amanda Show" starring Amanda Bynes. He played Spalding, a boy who had a huge crush on Moody, in "Moody's Point."
Killam joined the cast of "MADtv" as a featured player during its 7th season in 2001–2002. Joining the "MADtv" cast at age 19, Killam was the youngest cast member to ever join the sketch program. He was also a regular cast member on the third and fourth seasons of Nick Cannon's "Wild 'N Out". In 2005, Killam co-starred in the television pilot "Nobody's Watching", which never aired on network TV, however the pilot gained popularity after it was leaked online and they continued making webisodes from 2006–2007.
Killam co-starred in the 2004 Disney Channel Original Movie "Stuck in the Suburbs". After "MADtv", Killam appeared on TV shows such as "How I Met Your Mother", "Jake in Progress", "Still Standing", "Boston Public", "Drake & Josh", "Do Over",
"Roswell" and "Judging Amy". He had also appeared on "Scrubs" and "" as Jimmy (the Overly Touchy Orderly). Killam appeared as a contestant on the episode of "The Price Is Right" which aired on December 7, 2006. The episode was re-aired on July 19, 2007.
He has also been in "Just Married", "Big Fat Liar", "Anderson's Cross", and "My Best Friend's Girl".
Killam was a member of the Los Angeles-based improvisational and sketch comedy troupe The Groundlings. He retired from the Main Company in 2012.
"Saturday Night Live".
On September 25, 2010, Killam joined the cast of "Saturday Night Live" for the 36th season, making Killam the second Nickelodeon veteran after Kenan Thompson to join "SNL", and the second "SNL" cast member who was previously a cast member on its former rival sketch show "MADtv" (after Jeff Richards). In his first season on the show Killam's impressions included Michael Cera, Chris Pine, Pee Wee Herman, John Galliano, Dominique Strauss-Kahn, and Eminem.
In 2011, he appeared in "Community" episode "Regional Holiday Music" as Mr. Radison (Mr. Rad), a parody of Will Schuester from "Glee". In 2012 he appeared in "iCarly" episode "I Meet The First Lady" as a Secret Service Agent.
Killam is expected to star in the upcoming comedy film "The Heat" starring Sandra Bullock and Melissa McCarthy.
Killam Does Robyn.
In December 2011, Killam on Saturday Night Live at 4:30am on a writing night when Katy Perry and Robyn were guests decided to replicate move for move the Robyn video 'Call Your Girlfriend' in a small writer's room and post it to Youtube. With Killam dressed at Robyn in the video, and doing the dance moves, the video immediately went viral. 
The late night antics quickly became an Internet phenomenon and garnered Killam significant media and public attention.
When interviewed by Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, Killam states he did not have a former connection with the song until Robyn came to SNL as a guest. 
Killam's character Mokiki.
On November 10, 2012, Killam appeared (with Kenan Thompson and Anne Hathaway) in a segment entitled "The Legend of Mokiki and the Sloppy Swish." Mokiki was a laboratory test subject who now wanders Manhattan performing a shuffling move known as the "Sloppy Swish." The shuffling not-quite-dance proves contagious, and Anne Hathaway plays a woman who falls in love with his daring oddity. Kenan Thompson narrates the "legend" in a sing-song rhyme, explaining, in part, 
Some say he comes from Norway, some say he is a spiritHis police report will tell the truth, if you wish to hear it.His real name's Thomas Furke, used to be a lab test dummySubmitting to experiments to make a little money...Mokiki does the Sloppy SwishHis venom's a side effect from his experiments!Mokiki does the Sloppy SwishIt makes his dance LITERALLY contagious! 
In the sketch, Taran Killam wears a long blond wig tied up into a topknot; he wears dark Capri pants and an apparently "Asian" shirt (splotched with black, orange, and brown, with a sash) and is shown sloppy-shuffling across Manhattan, ignoring the personal space of people who are walking the streets or who are enjoying picnics. Anne Hathaway's character follows him, and she at last confronts him on a bench. She confesses her love, and Mokiki spews green liquid over her face. They become a couple and have a baby (which is portrayed by a doll).
The sketch quickly became an Internet phenomenon and garnered Killam significant media and public attention. Mike Ryan of "The Huffington Post" wrote, "It is one of the most bizarre things to ever air on "SNL", yet, the next day, everyone was talking about the Sloppy Swish. (I swear that I am not making this up: I've already been invited to a Sloppy Swish-themed karaoke party.)"
Ryan interviewed Killam about the sketch and received some informative answers. Killam told him: "The Swish move came first before the idea of a sketch about it. And it was always just sort of a creepy, weird dance move to make people laugh... I would say it probably started in college." Ryan said, "I'm already seeing many, many comparisons to Gangnam Style." Killam cheerfully replied, "Yeah! So, it's sort of nice that even though we didn't ever necessarily call that specifically, that kind of registered with people. Because there was certainly a thought during the process writing the sketch, but I don't want to claim that was the inspiration. It was just that my favorite things -- my favorite kind of humor -- are dumb, weird things that aren't really commentary on anything."
"Mashable" wrote, ""Mokiki does the Sloppy Swish. It makes his dance literally contagious"! Remember that. "Saturday Night Live"'s latest digital short introduces us to Mokiki, a medical lab test patient turned dance machine, who roams New York City performing the Sloppy Swish... a crazy-looking dance move already catching popularity online. Don't be surprised if Sloppy Swish reaches the viral proportions of Psy's horse-riding prance from 'Gangnam Style.'" A reviewer at iDesignTimes wrote, "Mokiki's "Sloppy Swish" dance was the real star of the most recent "Saturday Night Live", not celebrity guest host Anne Hathaway. Narrated by Kenan Thompson, the music video sketch stars Taran Killam as a freaky medical lab patient turned zombified dancer and Hathaway as a girl who falls for him." He added, among other comments, "A number of reporters and bloggers have also compared Mokiki's Sloppy Swish dance video with PSY's Gangnam Style."
Personal life.
After several years of dating, Killam and Canadian actress Cobie Smulders became engaged in January 2009. They married on September 8, 2012 in Solvang, California. The couple has a daughter, Shaelyn Cado Killam (born May 14, 2009).
