Curb Your Enthusiasm is an American comedy television series produced and broadcast by HBO, which premiered on October 15, 2000. As of 2012, it has completed 80 episodes over eight seasons. The series was created by "Seinfeld" co-creator Larry David, who stars as a fictionalized version of himself. The series follows David in his life as a semiretired television writer and producer in Los Angeles and later New York City. Also starring are Cheryl Hines as David's wife, Cheryl, Jeff Garlin as David's manager, Jeff, and Susie Essman as Jeff's wife, Susie. "Curb Your Enthusiasm" often features guest stars, and many of these appearances are by celebrities playing versions of themselves fictionalized to varying degrees.
The plots and subplots of the episodes are established in an outline written by David and the dialogue is largely improvised by the actors (a technique known as retroscripting). As with "Seinfeld", the subject matter in "Curb Your Enthusiasm" often involves the minutiae of daily life, and plots often revolve around Larry David's many faux pas and his problems with certain social conventions and expectations, as well as his annoyance with other people's behavior. The character has a hard time letting such annoyances go unexpressed, which often leads him into awkward situations.
The series was developed from a 1999 one-hour special, "Larry David: Curb Your Enthusiasm", which David and HBO originally envisioned as a one-time project. The special was shot as a mockumentary, where the characters were aware of the presence of cameras and a crew. The series itself is not a mock documentary but is shot in a somewhat similar cinéma vérité-like style. "Curb Your Enthusiasm" has received high critical acclaim, and has grown in popularity since its debut. It has been nominated for 38 Primetime Emmy Awards, and Robert B. Weide received an Emmy for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for the episode "Krazee Eyez Killa". The show won the 2002 Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy.
Concept.
The series stars Larry David as an extreme fictionalized version of himself. Like the real-life David, the character is well known in the entertainment industry as the co-creator and main co-writer of the highly successful sitcom "Seinfeld". For most of the series, the Larry David character is living a married life in Los Angeles with his wife, Cheryl (played by Cheryl Hines), without children. David's main confidant on the show is his manager, Jeff Greene (played by "Curb" executive producer Jeff Garlin), who has a temperamental wife, Susie (Susie Essman). A large portion of the show's many guest stars are celebrities and public figures, such as actors, comedians, sportspeople and politicians, who play themselves. These include David's longtime friend Richard Lewis, as well as Ted Danson and his wife Mary Steenburgen, who all have recurring roles as fictionalized versions of themselves.
The show is set and filmed in various affluent Westside communities of (and occasionally in downtown) Los Angeles, as well as in the adjacent cities of Beverly Hills, Culver City and Santa Monica. David's hometown of New York City is also featured in some episodes, most prominently in the eighth season.
Although David maintains an office, he leads a semiretired life in the series, and is rarely shown working regularly, other than in season four, which centered on his being cast as the lead in the Mel Brooks musical "The Producers", and in season seven, writing a "Seinfeld" reunion show. Most of the series revolves around David's interactions with his friends and acquaintances, with David often at odds with the other characters (usually to David's detriment). Despite this, the characters do not seem to harbor ill feelings toward each other for any extended period and the cast has stayed stable throughout the show.
Title.
David has explained the show's title in TV interviews as reflecting his perception that many people seem to live their lives projecting false enthusiasm, which he believes is used to imply that "they are better than you." This conflicts with his droll and dry style. The title also urges the audience not to expect too much from the show; at the time of the premiere, David wanted to lower expectations after "Seinfeld"'s phenomenal success.
Characters.
Recurring roles.
Among the show's many recurring roles, Richard Lewis and Ted Danson play versions of themselves as old friends of Larry's with whom he frequently butts heads. Shelley Berman plays Larry's father, Nat David. Bob Einstein frequently appears as Marty Funkhouser, another of Larry's oldest friends. Kaitlin Olson recurred as Becky, Cheryl's sister. Beginning with season six, J. B. Smoove appears as Leon Black, and in seasons six and seven, Vivica A. Fox appears as Loretta Black, members of a family of hurricane evacuees who stay in Larry's house.
Notable guest appearances.
Celebrities, including actors, comedians, authors, musicians and athletes, often make guest appearances on the show, with a large portion of them playing themselves, or fictional versions thereof. Some of the guest stars who have appeared as themselves include Mel Brooks, Michael York, Martin Scorsese, Ben Stiller, Lucy Lawless, David Schwimmer, Shaquille O'Neal, Rosie O'Donnell, Ricky Gervais, Michael J. Fox, and the main cast of "Seinfeld". Notable people who filled in fictional roles include Bob Odenkirk, Bea Arthur, Dustin Hoffman, Sacha Baron Cohen, Stephen Colbert, Steve Coogan, Jorge Garcia, and Scott Adsit.
Plots and episodes.
"Curb Your Enthusiasm" episodes are typically named after an event, object, or person which figures prominently in the plot, similarly to how "Seinfeld" episodes were named. Many episodes concern breaches of intricate aspects of social conventions, such as the various details of tipping at restaurants, the obligation to "stop and chat" upon meeting an acquaintance, the allowed amount of caviar one may put on a cracker at a house party, whether a house guest needs the permission of the homeowner before taking a soft drink from the refrigerator. Others involve more significant issues, such as if and when a white person may say the racially sensitive word "nigger". And some involve the etiquette of extremely complex and unique circumstances, such as the occasion when Larry discovered at a wake that the deceased was to be buried with his favorite golf club—borrowed from Larry. Another involved Larry picking up a prostitute for the sole purpose of using the carpool lane on the freeway. In many episodes, "Curb"—like its predecessor "Seinfeld"—tied together apparently unrelated events woven throughout a given episode into an unforced climax that resolves the story lines simultaneously, either to Larry's advantage or detriment.
Season overview.
While each episode has a distinct individual plot, most seasons feature a story arc that extends across several episodes throughout the season and culminates in a season finale.
Season one (2000).
The style and the characters of the show are introduced across a series of mostly isolated episodes, in the only season without a major story arc.
Season two (2001).
Cheryl is tired of Larry not working, so he begins to develop a new television show, initially with guest stars Jason Alexander and Julia Louis-Dreyfus (George and Elaine on "Seinfeld", respectively) as themselves. But Larry's constant social faux pas ruin the chances of the show being financed by a major television network.
Season three (2002).
Larry invests in a restaurant enterprise which finally opens despite many mishaps, most of which are Larry's fault.
Season four (2004).
Mel Brooks casts Larry as the lead in his hit musical "The Producers". Cheryl also gives Larry the opportunity to have sex with another woman before their tenth anniversary as an anniversary gift.
Season five (2005).
Larry's friend Richard Lewis gets very ill and requires a kidney transplant. Larry is a match, but spends the season looking for other sources of a kidney for Lewis. Also in season five, Larry suspects he may be adopted and embarks on a search for his biological parents.
Season six (2007).
The season is built around Cheryl persuading Larry to take in a family that is left homeless after a major Gulf Coast hurricane. Later in the season, Cheryl leaves Larry, mimicking Laurie David's real-life divorce from Larry. He spends the rest of the season either fighting for her to come back or looking for another woman.
Season seven (2009).
Season seven is centered on creating a "Seinfeld" reunion show with the original cast. Larry attempts to use the project as a means to reunite with Cheryl.
Season eight (2011).
Larry remains single after his divorce. At the midpoint of the season, all the main characters travel to New York City, where the rest of the season is set.
Future.
HBO has said that it is "cautiously optimistic" that David will do a ninth season. The network's president of programming, Michael Lombardo, commented, "For the first time ever after this season Larry didn't say 'I never want to do this again.'"
Critical reception.
Since its 2000 debut, the show has enjoyed wide critical acclaim and a steadily growing, dedicated audience that has helped it emerge from its early "cult" status. On Metacritic, the fifth season scored 91 out of 100 based on five reviews, the seventh season scored 81 out of 100 based on 18 reviews and the eighth season scored 85 out of 100 based on six reviews.
Online publication Slate Magazine named the characters of Cheryl David and Susie Greene as two of the best on television and as reasons they were looking forward to the return of the show in the fall of 2007. "Curb Your Enthusiasm" has also received praise from "Galus Australis" magazine for being even more unashamedly Jewish than the "Seinfeld" series.
On the show's depiction of Jewish characters, academic Vincent Brook stated, ""Curb"s commitment to Jewish identification greatly enhances its storytelling capacity, as it lends greater realism and dimension to the characters and opens the show up to episodes with meaningful Jewish themes."
The character of Larry on the show is in many ways reminiscent of the "schlemiel" character often present in traditional Yiddish folklore. The "schlemiel" is usually a comic character whose actions lead to his inevitable downfall, but also stands as a form of resistance to social and cultural values and norms. David Gillota wrote: "As a true "schlemiel", Larry's failure serves as a direct challenge to the status quo and encourages viewers to question the myriad unwritten rules that we follow in our everyday lives." Gillota also observed: "Whereas the schlemiel of Eastern Europe encountered problems that mostly affected Eastern European Jews (such as anti-Semitism and economic survival), Larry encounters problems that affect contemporary middle- to upper-class American Jews, namely, Jewish assimilation, secularism, intermarriage, and, as all of these suggest, the Jews' precarious ethnic identity in an increasingly multicultural environment."
Awards and nominations.
The series has received a total of 39 Primetime Emmy Award nominations with one win, for Outstanding Directing in a Comedy Series for Robert B. Weide for the episode "Krazee-Eyez Killa". The series has received seven nominations for Outstanding Comedy Series. Larry David has received five nominations for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series. Cheryl Hines has received two nominations for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series. Shelley Berman and Michael J. Fox have each received a nomination for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. The series has also received ten nominations for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series.
It has received five Golden Globe Award nominations and won for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy in 2002, while being nominated in 2005. Larry David has been nominated for three Golden Globes for Best Performance by an Actor in a TV Series – Musical or Comedy. It has been nominated for five Producers Guild of America Awards and has won twice. It has been nominated for four Screen Actors Guild Awards, two for Larry David and two for the ensemble cast. It has been nominated for four Writers Guild of America Awards and has won once. It has been nominated for nine Directors Guild of America Awards and has won once for Bryan Gordon for the episode "The Special Section".
Juan Catalan incident.
In 2003, Juan Catalan, a resident of Los Angeles, was cleared of premeditated murder charges against a material witness (a crime eligible for capital punishment) after outtake footage shot for the "Carpool Lane" episode of "Curb Your Enthusiasm" showed him and his daughter attending the Los Angeles Dodgers vs. Atlanta Braves baseball game some 20 miles from the crime scene at the time of the murder, resulting in a $320,000 settlement against the City of Los Angeles. Larry David joked afterwards, "I like to tell people that I've now done one good thing in my life, albeit inadvertently".
Syndication.
On June 2, 2010, the series premiered on the TV Guide Network, making its basic cable debut (without the TV-MA scenes). The network also recorded a series of related discussions with high-profile guest stars, media pundits, and prominent social figures called "Curb: The Discussion" debating the moral implications depicted in each episode. The show was also syndicated on local stations and WGN America, but has been removed from syndication from both outlets due to low ratings.
Media.
DVD releases.
"Curb Your Enthusiasm" seasons come in a two-disc DVD set with ten episodes, with the exception of the release of season one encoded for region two, that contains three discs.
Book.
A "Curb Your Enthusiasm" book was released October 19, 2006, published by Gotham Books. The book contains stories from Larry David's past, original interviews and commentary, episode outlines, episode guide, and over 100 full-color photographs. The contents of the book span the first five seasons of the show.
Music.
The show is punctuated between scenes with music orchestrated by Wendell Yuponce (first season), and from a music library company called Killer Tracks (seasons two to five). Frequently heard are instrumental arrangements of the whimsical "Three Little Maids From School Are We" from The Mikado, and the rhythmic Gypsy dance "Les tringles des sistres tintaient" from Carmen. The opening and closing theme song (not mentioned in the credits) is "Frolic" by Italian composer Luciano Michelini. Larry David heard the music used in a bank commercial years before the show was created and thought it had a lighthearted, joyful quality. An unofficial soundtrack was released by Mellowdrama Records in 2006.
