Big Bang or BigBang (Korean: ; stylized as BIGBANG) is a South Korean male group under the management of YG Entertainment. Formed in 2006, the group consists of G-Dragon, T.O.P, Taeyang, Daesung, and Seungri.
Big Bang is known for their unique urban-originated music and fashion style. The members' involvement in composing and producing their own music, most notably leader G-Dragon, has earned the group respect and praise from music industry experts.
The group's turning point came with their hit song "Lies", which stayed at number one on Korean charts for a record-breaking seven consecutive weeks. Their follow up releases, "Hot Issue" and "Stand Up", furthered their success, spawning hits such as "Last Farewell" and "Haru Haru". From 2007 to 2008, Big Bang received many awards, including "Best Male Group", "Song of the Year", "Artist of the Year", and the Grand Award at the Seoul Music Awards.
From 2009 to 2010, Big Bang expanded their endeavors to Japan, and were voted "the Korean group that Japanese fans wish to see the most". They became the first foreign group awarded "Best Newcomer" from the Japan Cable Broadcasting Station and "Best New Artist" at MTV Japan. Amidst their Japanese group promotions, the members branched out to do solo activities. Taeyang, G-Dragon, and Seungri have released solo albums. G-Dragon and T.O.P also collaborated on an album under the sub-unit GD & TOP. Seungri and Daesung have acted in both TV dramas and musicals. T.O.P became a highly acclaimed film star. Daesung also hosted many of Korea's most popular variety TV shows.
After nearly a two-year hiatus in Korea, Big Bang reunited in 2011 with their successful album "Tonight". However, promotions were cut short when multiple members encountered legal issues. In November 2011, representing the Asia-Pacific region, Big Bang emerged as the inaugural "Best Worldwide Act" winner at the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards. This was the first time in six months all five members were seen together. In 2012, Big Bang released their fifth Mini Album "Alive" in Korea and Japan before embarking on their first ever World Tour which concluded in early 2013.
History.
2000–2005: Formation.
Prior to the group's debut, a few of the members were already exposed to the entertainment industry. G-Dragon and Taeyang were the first ones to receive training under YG Entertainment at the age of eleven. They were child actors/stars first cast as the younger version of YG duo, Jinusean in their music video "A-YO". Memorized by the experience of casting into a hip hop music video, both of the child made the decision to cast into YGE, even though they were rejected in the beginning. The duo released two tracks under the name GDYB, and were often featured in label mate Wheesung, Gummy, Perry, Masta Wu, and Se7en's albums and music videos. One of their well-known piece is "Unfold to Higher Place", featuring Perry and Gummy. G-Dragon also participated in promotional activities with YG Family which consisted mostly all of YG label mates. The young trainees had planned to release an album together, but was later pushed aside as YGE had decided to debut an idol group with them participating. 
T.O.P was an underground rapper under the stage name "Tempo". One of his most popular track was "Buckwild" with NBK Gray. G-Dragon contacted T.O.P, with whom he was childhood friends, when YG Entertainment was scouting for candidates to create a boy group. The pair recorded several demos and sent them to Yang Hyun-suk, who later asked T.O.P to audition. However, he was rejected by the record label because he was deemed too "chubby" to fit the "idealistic version" of an idol. Six months later, he was recruited after losing weight. T.O.P reportedly lost twenty kg (44 lbs) in forty days.
Seungri was a leader of a local dance team in his hometown, Gwangju. He first appeared on the reality television series "Let's Cokeplay: Mnet Battle Shinhwa", a show in which idol group Shinhwa search for members to make up the "second-generation Shinhwa". His lack of vocal skills did not charm the panel and led to his elimination from the Top 4. He then auditioned and was accepted to train under YG, but in Big Bang's Documentary series, it was revealed his position was in jeopardy but he later impressed Yang Hyun-suk and made the cut. At the time, Seungri competed against another trainee, Hyunseung (now of BEAST fame), who was cut from Big Bang. Hyunseung, who went under the homonym of So-1, meaning "wish" in Korean, was shown in 10 out of 11 episodes but was cut from the final episode because Hyun-suk felt that he was not ready and needed more time.
Daesung was recruited in an open audition. He is well known for his strong singing ability. He was trained under Wheesung's supervision. Before the debut of Big Bang, he was diagnosed with vocal fold nodules, caused by strain on the vocal cords.
2006–2007: Debut.
Big Bang held their debut on August 19, 2006 at the Gymnastics Arena in Seoul Olympic Park during the YG Family 10th Year Concert. On September 23, 2006, the group had their debut performance on television broadcast.
Following the performance, the group's first single, "Bigbang", was released. It contained the songs "We Belong Together", featuring labelmate Park Bom; "A Fool's Only Tears" (Korean: ; Revised Romanization: "Nunmulppunin Babo"); and "This Love", an adaptation of the American rock band Maroon 5 song, rewritten and performed by G-Dragon. The single went on to sell nearly 40,000 copies. The second single, "BigBang Is V.I.P", was released in September, eventually topping 32,000 copies sold. Their last single, "Bigbang 03", followed, with final sales nearing 40,000 copies. At the end of December 2006, Big Bang held their very first concert, "The Real". The following month, their debut album, "Since 2007", was released, selling 48,000 copies by the end of February 2007.
2007–2008: Breakthrough success and Japanese debut.
On February 8, 2007, Big Bang released their live concert album, "The First / Real Live Concert", which sold 30,000 copies by the end of the year. The group also began their "Want You" tour, visiting five cities: Incheon, Daegu, Changwon, Jeonju and Busan. Their first mini-album, "Always", was also released in 2007, and marked several changes for the group. Though previously already writing and composing, the group has decided to take more control over their music. G-Dragon composed and wrote most of the tracks included in their first mini-album including the title single, "Lies" (Korean: ; Revised Romanization: "Geojitmal"). The mini-album also saw the introduction of electronic music for Big Bang. Reception was fairly positive, most notably in regards to the song "Lies", which critics described as "through the roof". Released as the lead single, it became their first number one hit. The album itself sold 87,000 copies. It also garnered the "Song of the Month (Digital Music)" award from Cyworld. Tickets for their "Big Bang Is Great" concert were also reportedly sold out in just nearly 10 minutes.
At the end of 2007, it was reported that members of the band were hospitalized from over-performing and exhaustion, halting their promotional activities. Reports were later released that Big Bang's albums and singles were in very high demand, causing the record company to reprint and repackage them for re-release. Riding on the success of their mini-album, the group collected numerous awards, including "Best Male Group" and "Song of The Year" from the 2007 Mnet Asian Music Awards. They later received the "Artist of the Year" award from the 17th Seoul Music Awards. The group earned a total of ₩12 billion ($10.6 million) by year's end.
As 2007 came to a close, Big Bang ventured overseas to Japan. Their first Japanese extended play, "For the World", released in early 2008, charted at number 10 on the Oricon chart with a little promotion only. The group also held a concert at the JCB Hall in Tokyo Dome City. Big Bang returned to South Korea after their promotions in Japan ended. Although group activities were delayed due to solo projects, their third mini-album of 2008, "Stand Up", was released. Featuring Daishi Dance and the Korean rock-band No Brain, "Stand Up" exceeded the 100,000 mark in sales. "Day By Day" (Korean: ; Revised Romanization: "Haru Haru"), the lead single, topped several online charts and held the number 1 position for six consecutive weeks. Following the lead single's success, other songs also charted within the Top 20, with "Heaven" reaching the second spot, "Oh My Friend" hitting the ninth spot, "A Good Man" at number 12, and "Lady" peaking at number 16 – a total of five songs in the Top 20 for the group.
During the release of their Korean materials, Big Bang released the Japanese song, "Number 1", from their album of the same name, performing the song on Japanese radio programs and TV shows, the album peaked at number three on the Japan's Oricon daily album chart. Their Korean follow-up album, "Remember", also released in 2008, yielded the number 1 single, "Sunset Glow" (Korean: ; Revised Romanization: "Byulkeun Noeul"). "Strong Baby", performed solely by Seungri, was released as the second single. The album went on to sell over 200,000 copies. Big Bang received their second "Artist of the Year" award from the 2008 Mnet Asian Music Awards. At the end of 2008, it was reported that Big Bang earned a total of ₩36 billion ($24.5 million).
2009–2010: Solo activities.
With the group on break in early 2009, the members pursued solo activities. They later reunited to collaborate with their label's new girl group 2NE1, who had been dubbed as "The Female Big Bang", for the song "Lollipop". A music video was also filmed for promotion. Initially used to promote a cellphone, "Lollipop" reached the number one spot on various online charts. Big Bang also released their third endorsement digital single "So Fresh, So Cool" to promote the beer brand "Hite", although Seungri wasn't in the commercial due to the fact he was not of drinking age. Their first self-titled full-length Japanese album was released under Universal Music in August 2009 and was promoted with two singles: "My Heaven" and . "My Heaven", a Japanese translation of their Korean single, "Heaven" (Korean: ; Revised Romanization: "Cheonguk") from "Stand Up", was composed by Japanese composer Daishi Dance and debuted at number 3 on the Oricon Music Chart. "Gara Gara Go!" charted at the fifth spot and the album itself peaked at number 3. After their return to Korea, the members went back to their solo activities. On August 18, G-Dragon released his debut album, "Heartbreaker", promoting it with the album's title track. The album went on to win the "Album of the Year" at the 2009 Mnet Asian Music Awards, selling over 210,000 units. Taeyang released two digital singles, "Where U At?" and "Wedding Dress" to promote his second album released in 2010. T.O.P joined the cast of the Korean thriller drama "Iris", playing the assassin Vick. Daesung and Seungri both perused various individual activities in acting and hosting. They later reunited to record the song "Koe wo Kikasete" for the Japanese drama . The song was later released as a single, peaking at #4.
For several days in January 2010, Big Bang performed their "2010 Big Bang Concert Big Show" in the Seoul Olympic Stadium. The following month, they embarked on their "Electric Love" tour in Japan. Although no official albums were recorded, 2010 saw the release of several singles for the group with promotional ties. The release of "Lollipop Part 2" in February, the follow-up to their single, "Lollipop"' with 2NE1, was used to coincide with promotions for LG Cyon's Lollipop phone. The single also reached number one on digital charts. Their next single, "Tell Me Goodbye", was recorded for the Japanese re-release of Korean drama "Iris". The song proved to be popular and gained favorable reviews, Additionally, tying in with the 2010 World Cup, the group released the song "Shout of the Reds" featuring the Korean rock band Transfixion and ice skater Kim Yu-na.
For most of the year, the members individually promoted their own solo works and solo activities, including the release of the GD & TOP unit with their collaboration album and the release of Seungri's first mini-album entitled "VVIP". Big Bang also won several notable awards, including the Best 5 New Artists award from the 24th Japan Gold Disc Awards as well as the "Best New Artist" award. Near the end of May, the group received the awards for "Best Pop Video" and "Best New Artist" from the MTV Video Music Awards Japan 2010. They released their latest Japanese single "Beautiful Hangover" on August 25, 2010.
2011: "Tonight" and MTV EMA.
After nearly two-year hiatus as a full group, Big Bang returned to South Korea with their 2011 Big Show concert. They also showcased songs from their latest extended play "Tonight", which went on to become a chart-topper upon its release on many Korean music charts. The album also became the very first K-pop album to reach the Top 10 on US iTunes chart and is the only non-English language album in the Top 100. The album had a pre-sale order of 10,000 copies in Cyworld, beating the record set by TVXQ's 6,500 copies back in 2008. Aside from shattering records for their mini-album preorders, Big Bang achieved an "all-kill" on the top real-time charts in South Korea (Soribada, Melon, Dosirak, Bugs and Cyworld) shortly after the release. Over-all reception for the extended play has been positive, with Choi Jun of Asiae complimenting the group's new direction in their music, acknowledging that during the two years hiatus, the group's "style and musical sensibility deepened." Seven days after the album's release, it was reported that Big Bang had already earned ₩7 billion (USD$6.2 million). In just a week, 100,000 copies of the album were sold. Its lead-single of the same name became a chart-topper on the Gaon Chart.
After promotions for "Tonight" was finished, Big Bang released a special edition album with two new tracks: "Love Song" and "Stupid Liar". "Love Song"'s music video on YouTube gained 2 million views within just two days. The group kicked off their "Love & Hope Tour" in May of the same year.
Big Bang won the 2011 MTV EMA's "Best Worldwide Act" award as representatives of the Asia-Pacific region with over 58 million votes. All five members were present at the awards show to receive the award, making it especially memorable since it was Daesung and G-Dragon's first public appearance since Daesung's car accident and G-Dragon's accused marijuana scandal. On November 29, the group also won the award for "Best Music Video" award with their "Love Song" music video at the 2011 Mnet Asian Music Awards.
YG Entertainment celebrated its 15th anniversary by putting on the 2011 YG Family Concert Tour, which opened its first show on December 3 in Seoul, South Korea. Big Bang's member Daesung made his first stage appearance since his car accident involving the death of a motorcyclist in late May there.
Big Bang released their third Greatest Hits album "The Best of Big Bang" on December 14, which contained a Japanese version of their all-time #1 hit "Haru Haru". The album topped the Oricon Daily chart on its first day of release and went on to sell over 14,000 copies in the first week, proving the group's consistent popularity. It was reported that Big Bang earned ₩88 billion (USD$77.5 million) in 2011 even though they had just promoted for half a year. The earnings included Big Bang's revenue concert for SBS's "Big Bang Show", their 2011 "Big Show Concert" and their "Love and Hope Tour" in Japan.
2012–present: "Alive" and first world tour.
Beginning from January 20, 2012, YG Entertainment began releasing teasers for Big Bang's 5th mini-album "Alive", which was released in both digital and physical formats on February 29. Preorders for Alive amounted to 260,000 copies in two weeks. Its lead single, "Blue", was released a week prior to the album's release and has reached the number one position on all major domestic charts. The mini-album was a commercial success, selling in excess of 200,000 copies in its first month of release. Internationally, Big Bang obtained 5 spots out of the Top 10 on "Billboard K-pop's Hot 100" and charted at 150 on "Billboard 200", making them the first Korean artist with a Korean album to do so. Their popularity also boosted them onto the Billboard Social 50, entering at #24. Since the release of "Alive", Big Bang has received recognition from notable sites such as "Time" magazine, and a photo was featured on the Grammy Awards homepage.
The album release coincided with their annual concert, Big Show 2012, held at Seoul Olympic Park Stadium from March 2–4 to a sold-out crowd of 40,000 fans. This marked the official kick off of their first world tour BIGBANG Alive Galaxy Tour 2012 in partnership with Live Nation. It is directed by renowned choreographer Laurieann Gibson and will be stopping on 4 continents, 13 countries, and 21 cities. Concert footage from Big Show was broadcasted in 160 countries through MTV World Stage, which pushed the promotion for their world tour.
The Japanese version of "Alive" was released on March 28 both digitally and physically, with 2 additional Japanese tracks. Included with the physical copy of their album was a bonus Japanese version of their hit song, "Haru Haru". It sold over 23,000 copies on its first day of release and peaked at #2 on the Oricon charts. It eventually sold over 100,000 copies in its first month and has since been certified gold by the RIAJ. Japanese promotions began with a performance at 2012's Springroove Festival alongside top American and Japanese hip hop artists. Big Bang was the first Korean act to be invited along with label-mates 2NE1.
Following the success of their comeback, Big Bang released a special edition album titled "Still Alive", on June 3. It featured four new tracks including two new Korean tracks of which their lead single was titled "Monster", as well as Korean remakes of the two additional tracks in the Japanese version of "Alive". The album sold over 100,000 copies in its first month of release. A special edition of their Japanese "Alive" album was also released following its Korean counterpart, titled "Monster". The success of their special edition album further boosted the group's global recognition, peaking just outside of the Top 10 at #11 on the Billboard Social 50.
Throughout May and June, the group focused on the Japanese leg of their world tour, visiting cities such as Nagoya, Yokohama, Osaka, Saitama and Fukuoka. A shorter Chinese leg of the tour succeeded the Japanese leg from late July to early August, with Big Bang visiting Shanghai, Guangzhou and Beijing. The group then toured South East Asia from late September to October, touring Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia, Taiwan, the Philippines and Malaysia. The group then began their American leg of their tour in early November, visiting New Jersey and Los Angeles in the United States and Lima, Peru. There was initially a stop planned in Brazil, but this was later cancelled. The group has recently begun the first part of their "Special Final in Dome Tour" in Japan, touring some of the largest stadiums in Japan, including Osaka Dome, Tokyo Dome and Fukuoka Dome. Big Bang performed in Hong Kong and England in December 2012 before concluding the tour with concerts in Osaka on January 12 and 13 and a three night stint at the Olympic Gymnastics Arena in Seoul on January 25, 26, and 27, 2013.
On November 30, 2012, Big Bang received a total of three awards at the 14th Mnet Asian Music Awards, including Best Male Group and Artist of the Year. Leader, G-Dragon, also received the Best Male Solo award at the event.
Musical styles.
During the early days of their career, Big Bang's music was predominately hip hop and hip pop, although they incorporated R&B songs into their albums as well. A writer for Yahoo! Japan once compared their early materials to that of American hip-hop artists such as The Black Eyed Peas, stating that their material included "catchy vocals, [...] rap and characters". "Always" was noted for its change of musical styles from their previous efforts, with the group experimenting with EDM and setting it as the new music trend in Korea. G-Dragon later stated that they hoped "to reach even more fans" with the new direction. In 2008, they recorded "Oh My Friend", a rock-based song, with the Korean rock-band No Brain. In an interview, the group also expressed interests in covering the music genre trot.
Members of the band have branched out to other styles for solo projects, thus the group has been described as "rich in variety" for their fans. Taeyang's mini-album, "Hot", was mainly a collection of R&B songs, with the singer stating that the genre was his "main focus". Daesung's first digital single, "Look at Me, GwiSoon" (Korean: ), was a trot song, which drew criticisms due to Big Bang's image as "hip-hop artists". For his debut album, "Heartbreaker", G-Dragon incorporated a mix of dance, hip-hop, and R&B songs.
Following the release of "Always", G-Dragon began involving himself with the production of the group's materials, penning the lyrics and composing the songs "Lies", "Last Farewell", and "Haru Haru". His involvement was praised by the "Korea Times", who described him as a "genius singer-songwriter". G-Dragon himself described the group as "an idol group not born of talent but through effort". A writer for Yahoo! Japan complimented the group for their involvement in their work, stating that "perhaps by of the members' contributing to their own materials, not only do they become in sync with one another, but each person's personality stands out."
Big Bang is often choreographed by Shaun Evaristo. While they once relied heavily on street dancing for their moves, Big Bang have made a transition towards more choreography. Their dance moves have been widely copied and covered. One of the moves, which incorporates the group lifting their shirts to expose their abdomens, quickly gained popularity online and became one of the top searches on the internet. Another one, in which the group incorporates the idea of "jump roping" as a dance move, also gained attention from fans.
Their latest album "Alive" has been noted for its different variety of musical styles involved. "Bad Boy" has been described as "nostalgic" , "Fantastic Baby" has a strong electropop tune to it while "Aint No Fun" is a mixture of 1990s euro trance and disco. Daesung's solo track "Wings" has elements of trot and rock while the first title song, "Blue" is defined as an "electronic ballad which starts off with soft piano and acoustic guitar that blends very well together".
Image and cultural impact.
Big Bang has received both praise and criticism. "Time" magazine described them as one of the "most promising" South Korean acts to venture into Japan, while the "Korea Times" called them "the icons of Korean pop name="plagiarism overview"></ref> Bill Lamb of About.com also list them as one of the "top 10 Asian boy bands". Their contribution to their materials early in their career, most notably by G-Dragon, has garnered praises; singer Baek Jiyoung has state that she "like[s idol singers if they are like Big Bang". 
Citing the longest-running boy band in South Korea, Shinhwa as their influence and role model, Big Bang's own influence extends beyond the music industry, shaping major trends in the fashion industry. Dubbed as "Big Bang fashion", their style has gained a following throughout Asia. The group first adopted the "hip-hop" image concept for their debut. The release of "Always" in 2007 was accompanied by a change in image, with the group leaning towards a more preppy-punk style, including skinny jeans with Converse or high-top sneakers which became a still ongoing trend in South Korea. Taeyang also traded his cornrows for a faux hawk. Seen wearing brands such as Bape, 10 deep, Louis Vuitton, Jeremy Scott, and Phenomenon, Big Bang also wear custom printed hoodies for many of their performances and music videos. They were also credited for bringing back "old school" fashion into the mainstream, such as Nike and Reebok high-top shoes. Described as the "most fashionable" one in the group, G-Dragon is known to sport triangular scarves that were later nicknamed "Big Bang scarves". T.O.P also gained a following for wearing sunglasses during performances. The clothes that the members donned on stage have gained a cult among their fans and are sold in boutique stores such as DongDaeMun. In 2011, Big Bang collaborated with Japanese clothing retailer Uniqlo to create t-shirts in promotion of their Japanese comeback. It was reported that the items were "sold out within 15 minutes of the store's opening."
Big Bang influenced the creation of the Chinese boy band OkBang, who were described as having "many similarities to Big Bang in terms of musical style, wardrobe and hairstyles". In 2010, the group's "Big Show" concert was chosen by the South Korean Touristic Committee for their "Visit Korea from 2010—2012" campaign, stating that they will "have a big economic impact on the country".
Reception.
In November 2011, the BBC declared that "K-pop bands, including Big Bang, are making their mark around the world"
While "The Vancouver Sun" described the group as an "ultra-stylized five-piece boy band from South Korea" and a "K-Pop sensation", the American financial news broadcaster CNBC called Big Bang a "selected, produced act". In March 2012, Krista Mahr, TIME magazine's South Asia correspondent, wrote an article about her first K-Pop concert at the Olympic Gymnastics Arena in Seoul, where she claimed that Big Bang is one of the largest in the entire K-Pop industry and she also declared the members of the group as "K-pop gods that were about to go on stage". "The New York Times" journalist Jon Caramanica described their concert in New Jersey as the "true wild heart of K-pop".
The British daily newspaper "The Guardian" introduced Big Bang to its readers as the group "who beat Britney to a European MTV Award last year". Justin Mccurry from The Guardian also wrote about Big Bang in a separate article: "Each of the five members Big Bang has his own individual look, and their musical range is equally eclectic, covering R&B, hip-hop, house, electro and pop."
Endorsements.
The group's popularity to all demographics has made them Korea's highest paid celebrities by endorsers along with Korean singer/actor Rain, with an asking price of $1 – 1.5 million USD per endorsement. Individual members have also obtained their own endorsement deals, G-Dragon and T.O.P. individually are the highest paid idols at $900,000 USD, while Daesung endorsed "Big Hit Chicken" by himself. Big Bang are the only celebrities to have scored major endorsement deals from all of the Top 4 companies in South Korea: Samsung, LG, Hyundai, and Lotte.
