Jennifer Esposito (born April 11, 1973) is an American actress, dancer and model, known for her appearances in films such as "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer", "Summer of Sam" and "Crash", and in television series such as "Spin City", "The Looney Tunes Show", "Samantha Who?", and "Blue Bloods".
Early life.
Esposito was born in Brooklyn, New York, the second of two daughters of Phyllis, an interior decorator, and Robert Esposito, a computer consultant and music producer. She is of Italian descent.
Career.
Esposito made her first television appearance in "Law & Order" in 1996. She then joined the cast of "Spin City", where she appeared for two seasons. She also appeared in "I Still Know What You Did Last Summer". One of her more notable roles was as Ruby in Spike Lee's "Summer of Sam" in 1999, which was set against the late-1970s backdrop of the Son of Sam murders. She originally had the Mira Sorvino role in "Summer of Sam", but had to take a different role due to scheduling conflicts. Esposito's next film was "Wes Craven Presents: Dracula 2000".
In 2000, Esposito appeared in the "" episode "Remorse" as a rape victim. She played Don Cheadle's girlfriend, Ria, in the Academy Award-winning film "Crash". Esposito was part of the cast of "Related". She also played the part of Jennifer in "The Master of Disguise" in 2002 and played a Lieutenant in the NYPD in the 2004 film "Taxi". She played a love interest to Denis Leary's character in the FX dramedy "Rescue Me". Esposito appeared on television as Andrea Belladonna in the ABC comedy, "Samantha Who?". She also appeared in the NBC medical drama "Mercy". Esposito joined the cast of "Blue Bloods" in 2010, during its first season; she plays Detective Jackie Curatola, the partner of Detective Danny Reagan (played by Donnie Wahlberg).
Personal life.
Esposito announced that she had been diagnosed with celiac disease on "The Late Show with David Letterman" in October 2011, reporting she had been diagnosed "a couple years ago" and had plans to open a gluten-free bakery.
According to Esposito, she collapsed on set while shooting an episode of Blue Bloods, requiring her to miss a week of work, and during the show's third season, informed CBS that her medical condition would limit her availability. On October 20, 2012, CBS announced that her character was being placed on indefinite leave of absence. Esposito and CBS reportedly have been at odds over her medical condition and its effect on her availability for work. 
Esposito married Bradley Cooper on December 30, 2006. They were divorced in 2007. 
In 2009, Esposito became engaged to Australian tennis player Mark Philippoussis. The couple separated in August 2010.
