Arindam Chaudhuri () is an Indian economist, author and the director of IIPM Think Tank at Indian Institute of Planning and Management. He has collected three National Film Awards as the producer of three award-winning movies. He is also a former member of the consultative committee to the Planning Commission, Government of India. He is referred to as a management guru.
Biography.
Arindam is the son of Malayendra Kisor Chaudhuri, who founded the Indian Institute of Planning and Management (IIPM) in 1973. He received his post graduate diploma in Planning and Entrepreneurship from IIPM in 1992 He later became the Honorary Dean for the IIPM Centre for Economic Research and Advanced Studies. Also in 2004, Arindam Chaudhuri was appointed as a member (social and agricultural sector) of the Consultative Committee for the Planning Commission, Government of India. He is the founder of Planman Consulting and Great Indian Dream Foundation, a social sector organisation. He is also the owner of the Delhi franchise of the i1 Super Series motor sports league.
The film "Rok Sako To Rok Lo" was Arindam's debut film venture.
Planman Motion Pictures went on to produced Bengali movies "Sanjhbatir Rupkathara" (2002), "Dosar" (2006) and the National Film Award winner "Faltu" (2006). Planman also produced two more Hindi movies "Mithya" (2008), starring Ranvir Shorey, Neha Dhupia, Naseeruddin Shah and Vinay Pathak. Another movie produced by them, "The Last Lear" was awarded the National Film Award for Best Film in English in the year 2009 by the Government of India.
In February 2011, a book excerpt on Arindam Chaudhuri published in the "Caravan" magazine and the chapter from the book ("The Great Gatsby: A Rich Man in India") on which the excerpt was based, were removed following a preliminary injunction order by a court against Caravan, author Siddhartha Deb and the book publisher Penguin Books, in response to a lawsuit citing "grave harassment and injury". On Feb 15, 2013 Mr Chaudhari was able to get 73 URLs (Uniform Resource Locators) which were critical of Indian Institute of Planning and Management (IIPM) blocked by a court order in India, including that of University Grants Commission (UGC) page with guidelines on IIPM, links carrying such content on newspaper, consumer forum and satire websites, as well as online news portals. 
