Warm Bodies is a novel by author Isaac Marion. The book was described as a "zombie romance" by the "Seattle Post Intelligencer", and makes allusions to William Shakespeare's "Romeo and Juliet". The author, based in Seattle, originally wrote a short story titled, "I am a Zombie Filled With Love," that attracted a wide internet audience. Atria Books, a division of Simon and Schuster, acquired the publishing rights to the full novel in early 2010.
Plot.
After a mysterious plague wipes out most of the world's population, humanity is reduced to small, concentrated groups held behind massive salvaged sporting domes. The narrator is an undead who only remembers that his name once began with an "R"; he is one of the few still capable of thought. R is friends with "M", an older male who is also able to think and to speak. Life is changed around every now and then by the governing "Boneys", described as skeletons with skin stretched over them and a peculiar humming noise emanating from their otherworldly forms. The undead feast on living flesh, and consuming brains allows them to experience the victim's memories.
One day, R and M lead a small hunting party to the city where they attempt to overtake a small party of living teenagers. R eats the brain of a young man named Perry Kelvin and experiences his emotions regarding his lover, Julie Grigio, whom he was protecting. Acting quickly, R smears his blood on Julie to mask her living scent and convinces her to follow him by addressing her by name. Upon arriving at the airport, Julie tentatively lives in R's abandoned 747. She begins to speak with R and they bond. Julie confides in R that her friend Nora witnessed R taking Julie, meaning people may come to rescue her from the zombie-filled airport. 
R has kept a portion of Perry's brain and continues to snack on it, experiencing more of Perry's memories and learning Perry had been an orphan and had developed suicidal tendencies. Wracked with guilt, R is unable to tell Julie that he killed her boyfriend.
R begins to have regular shutdowns that seem to be dreams. Waking up from one of the dreams, R realizes that Julie is being attacked in the Terminal by a group of zombies, including M. R promptly stops the attack, realizing it's time to get Julie back to her people in the Dome. He discusses this with M, who is both curious and jealous of R's new evolution. R accompanies Julie out of the Terminal, but they are attacked by Boneys attempting to kill Julie. They ultimately escape in the Mercedes Benz R has been teaching himself to drive.
After a long drive in the rain, R and Julie decide to stop at a house along the way. During the night, while Julie sleeps, Perry pops up in R's head, revealing that he is still partially alive in there and is helping R to change, becoming R's conscience. In the morning, Julie is able to contact her father in the Dome with a landline phone. She sends R to collect some gasoline, but takes the car and leaves while he is gone. R decides to return to the Terminal, but encounters M and several other undead who have been chased away by the Boneys because of the changes they are experiencing. M and the other Undead feign an act so that R can slip into the city and be mistaken for a living individual.
R sees that humanity is in a state of unrest as more than 20,000 people are crammed into the small protective Dome. He reunites with Julie, who introduces him to her friend Nora. They take the time to get to know more about R, finding he has not been hungry or fed since meeting Julie. They disguise him as a living person and give him a tour of the Dome. Inside R's head, Perry tells R that the world is changing and it is up to R to make the difference. Julie's father, General Grigio, is critical of R until the girls claim that R is Nora's new boyfriend from a neighboring Dome.
Hundreds more Undead that are changing have come to join R outside of the Dome, and he needs R and Julie to come out to support them. General Grigio comes home to check on Julie and during conversation stabs R to see if he is an undead. During the ensuing chaos, Nora grabs Grigio's gun and holds him off while R and Julie escape. While running from a worried but persistent Rosso, R and Julie plunge off the eight-story Superdome to escape. Still pursued by Rosso, they make it to the Zombie horde outside. 
They go up to the roof where Julie and R kiss, resulting in both their eyes turning yellow. Her dad sees this and says to kill his daughter as well as R because they're both infected. This resulted in him being eaten by a Boney which climbed up on the roof.
The Humans and the newly converted undead begin a tentative alliance. The undead are invited into the city with M introducing himself as Marcus to Nora as he makes a pass at her. The Bonies have become nearly lifeless and begin the process of dying off. Julie tells R he can pick a new name, but he decides to remain as R because of his new and happy rebirth.
Film adaptation.
Actor Nicholas Hoult stars as the zombie R in the feature film adaptation, written and directed by Jonathan Levine and released in February 2013. The film also stars Teresa Palmer as Julie Grigio, Rob Corddry as M, and John Malkovich as General Grigio. Other principal cast members include Dave Franco, Analeigh Tipton, and Cory Hardrict.
In the film, they don't kill Julie's father and it isn't set in a stadium. Most parts are left out and their story is made much shorter than the book.
Prequel.
On January 28, 2013, Zola Books published Isaac Marion's novella e-book prequel to "Warm Bodies", titled "The New Hunger."
Sequel.
On October 15, 2012, Marion announced via his blog that he is writing a sequel. No official title or release date have been set.
