Jack Reacher (previously titled One Shot) is a 2012 American thriller film. It is an adaptation of Lee Child's 2005 novel "One Shot". Written and directed by Christopher McQuarrie, the film stars Tom Cruise as the title character. The film entered production in October 2011, and concluded in January 2012. It was filmed entirely on location in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. 
The film's U.S. premiere gala, scheduled for December 15, was delayed after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting on December 14. The film was released in North America on December 21, and in the United Kingdom on December 26, 2012.
Plot.
In Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, a man drives a van into a parking garage across the Allegheny River from PNC Park and, after paying for parking, readies a sniper rifle. He takes aim and appears to randomly kill five people around the stadium and on the river’s North Shore Trail before fleeing in the van.
The police soon arrive, headed by Detective Emerson, and they discover a shell casing as well as the coin used to pay for parking. A fingerprint taken from the coin points to James Barr, a former U.S. Army sniper. When the police raid his house, they find the van, equipment for making bullets, the rifle in question, and Barr who they arrest.
During an interrogation by Emerson and the District Attorney, Alex Rodin, Barr writes "Get Jack Reacher" on a notepad. Reacher is a drifter and former U.S. Army Military Police Corps officer. Reacher later arrives in Pittsburgh after seeing a news report about Barr and the shooting. Emerson and Robin deny Reacher’s request to view the evidence, but agree to let him see Barr, who was brutally attacked by fellow inmates while being transported and is now in a coma. While there, he meets Barr’s defense attorney, counselor Helen Rodin, the DA’s daughter, who is trying to save Barr from the death penalty.
Helen says she can arrange for Reacher to see the evidence if he will become her lead investigator. Reacher retorts that he is not interested in clearing Barr. He confidentially reveals that Barr previously had gone on a killing spree during his tour in Iraq, but was not prosecuted because the victims were under investigation for major crimes--and the U.S. Army wants them forgotten. Reacher then vowed that if Barr tried anything like this again, he would take him down.
Reacher agrees to investigate if Helen visits the victims’ families to learn about the people murdered that day. Reacher goes to the crime scene and finds inconsistencies with this location, and thinking a trained shooter would have committed the killings from the cover of the van on the nearby Fort Duquesne Bridge. After Helen reports her findings about the victims to Reacher, he suggests that the owner of a local construction company was the intended victim, with the killing of other random victims intended to cover up that fact. 
After a seemingly random bar fight, Reacher realizes that someone is attempting to strong-arm him into dropping his investigation. Reacher is later framed for the murder of the young woman who was paid to instigate that bar fight, but this only motivates him further. Reacher eventually follows a lead at a shooting range in the neighboring state of Ohio, owned by former U.S. Marine Corps Gunnery Sergeant Cash, who will only talk if Reacher proves his sniping skills, which he does.
The real perpetrators are members of a Russian gang masquerading as legitimate businessmen. The gang's elderly leader spent much of his life in a Soviet Gulag and is known only as the Zec (prisoner). The gang kidnaps Helen with the aid of their accomplice Emerson, and holds her hostage at a construction site or mine. Reacher outwits the mob guards, killing them with Cash's help, before confronting the Zec about the conspiracy. The Zec is killed by Reacher after the Zec asserts that the other conspirators who were killed by Reacher were the only witnesses against the Zec, and that Reacher would more likely be the one to go to prison as a drifter accused of murdering a young woman. 
Reacher and Cash flee the scene, making Reacher a wanted man, but with confidence that Helen will clear his name. When Barr awakens from his coma, he tells Helen that he has no recent memory but believes that he must be guilty of the shooting. Barr's mental reconstruction of how he would have committed the shootings confirms Reacher's theory was correct from the beginning to Helen's father. Still unknowing of all this, Barr is willing to confess and accept punishment, fearing that Reacher will mete out justice if the law does not.
Production.
The film was directed by Christopher McQuarrie, who previously worked with Cruise on the 2008 film "Valkyrie". Josh Olson worked on the early screenplay and adapted it from Lee Child's original best seller, while McQuarrie worked on the finished script.
In July 2011, Cruise was in negotiations to play the role of Jack Reacher. Author Lee Child said that it would be impossible to find a suitable actor to play the giant Reacher and to recreate the feel of the book onscreen, and that Cruise had the talent to make an effective Reacher. Child also said, "Reacher's size in the books is a metaphor for an unstoppable force, which Cruise portrays in his own way." Of Cruise's relatively small stature, Child said, "With another actor you might get 100% of the height but only 90% of Reacher. With Tom, you'll get 100% of Reacher with 90% of the height."
Production on the film began in October 2011. The film rights were sold to Paramount Pictures. In February 2012, Kevin Messick, one of the film's producers, sued Don Granger and Gary Levinsohn, two other producers, for breach of contract over a Joint Venture Agreement, claiming he had "helped to develop the film, renew Paramount's options for the rights to the book, and participated in the search for a screenwriter" but starting in July 2010, had been left out of meetings with the screenwriter and the studio and not given certain drafts of the screenplay while it was under development. Messick is suing for "unspecified damages, his producer's fees and the right to participate in any upcoming sequels."
Cruise performed all of his own driving stunts during the film's signature car chase sequence. "Action to me is something very fun to shoot. The challenge in most car chases is you're trying to hide the fact that it's not the actor driving," McQuarrie said. "The challenge here was the exact opposite. We were trying to find a way to show that it was always Tom driving. He's literally driving in every stunt sequence." 
Distribution.
Marketing.
The trailer for "Jack Reacher" was officially released on Cruise's birthday, , 2012.
Theatrical release.
"Jack Reacher", then titled "One Shot", was originally slated to be released in February 2013. In March 2012, the release date was brought forward by Paramount Pictures to December 21, 2012, hoping to capitalize on the box office success of Cruise's "", which was released at a similar point in 2011. The film's new release date displaced the release of "World War Z" back six months.
The film was released in North American markets on December 21, 2012, with a premiere initially planned for Pittsburgh's SouthSide Works megaplex on December 15, 2012, which was to be attended by the film's stars, and Mr. Child.
On December 15, 2012, Paramount Pictures announced it was indefinitely postponing the film's premiere screening in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania out of respect for the families of the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting that had occurred the day before. The opening scene shows a sniper shooting at people including a woman holding a small child, and one point aiming the cross-hairs directly at her. Writer-director McQuarrie endorsed the decision, saying he and Cruise "insisted upon it. Nobody should be celebrating anything 24 hours after a tragic event like that. We thought long and hard about it. This was not a snap judgment, because we wanted to give back to the city of Pittsburgh having the premiere there, because they were so great to us."
The film held its United Kingdom premiere on December 10, 2012 at London's Odeon Leicester Square. It was released on December 26, 2012 in the U.K.
Reception.
Box office.
As of February 5, 2013, "Jack Reacher" has grossed $78,754,440 in North America and $112,100,000 in other countries for a worldwide total of $190,854,440. 
In North America, the film opened in 3,352 cinemas. CinemaScore polls reported that the average grade filmgoers gave the film was an "A-" on an A+ to F scale. "Jack Reacher" went on to gross $5.1 million on its opening day in the U.S. and Canada, and $15.6 million in its opening weekend. The film held well in its second weekend, dropping only -10.2% to a total of $14.1 million and ranking at 5.
Upon its opening five-day international start, making $5.5 million in the UK and $4.4 million in France, the film grossed a total of $18.1 million from 32 international markets. Throughout the following weeks, the film expanded to additional international markets and grossed a foreign total of $80,400,000.
Critical response.
"Jack Reacher" has received generally positive reviews from critics. The film has a "Certified Fresh" rating of 62% on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, based on 159 reviews, with a rating average of 6.2 out of 10. The site's summary is that, ""Jack Reacher" is an above-average crime thriller with a smoothly charismatic performance from Tom Cruise." Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, gives the film a score of 49 based on 34 reviews.
External links.
