Krrish 3 is an upcoming Bollywood superhero science fiction film. The film will be produced and directed by Rakesh Roshan. The film will continue the story of Rohit Mehra and his superhero son Krrish, after "Koi... Mil Gaya" and "Krrish", this being the third film of the Krrish film series. Both the earlier films have received blockbuster status at the box office. The film will be released during Diwali 2013 along with its 3D format.
Production.
Filming commenced on December 1, 2011 with Oberoi, Ranaut and Chopra. However, Hrithik Roshan did not participate in the first schedule due to a back injury. Actress Shaurya Chauhan met with a freak accident while shooting for the film in Hyderabad, due to which the film has faced some delays. 
Casting.
Following the success of "Krrish", director Rakesh Roshan planned to develop a sequel for the film with Hrithik Roshan playing the protagonist again. He had penned the script, but had to re-work it as the storyline was too similar to the Hollywood blockbuster "Spider-Man 3". Priyanka Chopra was later confirmed to reprise the role of Priya. In this film, she will be seen married to Krishna Mehra.
Next, Chitrangada Singh announced her inclusion in the project as a mutant. Singh was later replaced by Jacqueline Fernandez, who Roshan said would make the best Super Woman, however she later on also backed out of the film. It was reported that actresses Nargis Fakhri, Esha Gupta and Bipasha Basu were to replace Fernandez. Kangna Ranaut has finally been confirmed to play the role, who coincidentially was originally offered the role. Rakesh Roshan had earlier revealed to media that the main antagonist of film would be as powerful as the hero. After talks with Ajay Devgn and Shah Rukh Khan fell through, Vivek Oberoi was eventually cast for the coveted role.
In January 2011, Lakshmi Manchu claimed to have been offered a role in the film as the antagonist's girlfriend. The film has already started making profits. Its overseas distribution rights were sold to Eros International while Rakesh Roshan retained rights in Mumbai. There was also initial speculation that Rekha would play a major role in the film, which was later denied as a rumour.
Music.
The songs of the film are being composed by Rajesh Roshan at Krishna Audio; whilst the background score will being composed by Salim-Sulaiman. The music rights of the film was acquired by T-Series for .. There are 3 songs in the film and one theme song.
