English Vinglish is a 2012 Indian comedy-drama film directed by Gauri Shinde and produced by R. Balki. It was made simultaneously in Hindi and Tamil and released on 5 October 2012. It was also dubbed in Telugu and released simultaneously with the Hindi and Tamil versions.
The film stars Sridevi in the lead role, marks her comeback to Bollywood after 15 years and to Tamil cinema after 26 years. The film also features French actor Mehdi Nebbou, Adil Hussain, and Priya Anand. Amitabh Bachchan and Ajith Kumar make guest appearances in the Hindi and Tamil versions respectively.
The film revolves around housewife Shashi Godbole, who enrolls in an English language course in order to learn the language and gain some respect from her husband and daughter. Shinde wanted her characters to be rooted and so they decided that the family will be Marathi, which is why the film was shot in Pune. Sridevi's character is inspired by Gauri's mother.
Before its official worldwide release, "English Vinglish" was premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival, where the film and Sridevi's performance received a standing ovation. Prior to its release, English Vinglish was screened for the Indian press and critics and one of the biggest premieres of 2012 was held for the film fraternity. It received near universal critical acclaim and several critics hailed it as a must watch film. The film was declared a big Hit in India and overseas.
Plot.
Shashi Godbole (Sridevi) is a middle-aged Maharashtrian housewife who loves cooking and as a hobby makes and sells laddoos, which she considers to be a small business. She is a dedicated homemaker who is taken for granted by her husband, Satish(Adil Hussain) and daughter, Sapna and is ridiculed by them for her extremely poor English. However, her young son Sagar loves her as she is. There are frequent instances when Sapna and Satish make fun of her weak English but they never try to console or help her. This makes a deep impact in Shashi's emotions and makes her feel bad about herself.
Shashi's older sister, who lives in New York, invites Shashi's family for her daughter's wedding. It is decided that Shashi will go to New York alone to help her sister set up everything for the marriage. Her husband and kids will join her later when the wedding closes in. While Shashi is in New York, Shashi becomes embarrassed when her lack of English causes chaos at a local coffee shop so she secretly enrolls herself into a conversational English class that promises to teach the language in four weeks. The class comprises a Mexican nanny Eva, a Pakistani cab driver Salman Khan, a Chinese hairstylist Euso, a Tamil software engineer Rama, a quiet young African man, and a soft-spoken French chef named Laurent (Mehdi Nebbou). Shashi quickly emerges as amongst the most promising and committed students in her class. In midst of all this, Laurent becomes attracted to Shashi. Shashi is respected by everyone in the class for her charming behavior and her gifted capability of cooking delicious dishes. This makes Shashi start finding confidence in herself.
Meanwhile, Shashi's niece Radha (Priya Anand) finds out about her secret English classes and supports and helps her in her literary pursuit. Shashi starts watching English films at night and doing her homework religiously. To complete the English speaking course each of the students must take a final test, as announced by her teacher David Fischer. The test is a 5 minute speech that each student should prepare and deliver which will be judged by the tutor who will then issue the certificate. Shashi's family joins her in New York earlier than expected, as a surprise. At first Shashi tries to attend class, but when this becomes impossible because of her family duties, she asks Radha to tell the teacher she's quitting. Furthermore, the test date coincides with the wedding date so she misses the test.
Shashi's niece invites her English teacher and all her friends at the English speaking class to the wedding. At the wedding, Shashi gives a heart-touching and enlighting speech (in English), more of a toast to the couple at the wedding and stuns everyone who knew Shashi as a "typical conservative Indian woman". In the speech Shashi tells the importance of having a beautiful family and the roles required to be played by all the members of the family. She focuses on the fact that family should be the one which always gives respect to each other and never laugh at one's weaknesses. The English tutor, who is present amongst the guests, declares that she has passed the test with distinction and issues her the certificate. Shashi's husband and daughter finally realize their mistake of mocking her lack of proficiency in English and taking her for granted. Shashi thanks Laurent for "making her feel better about herself". The movie ends with Shashi's family returning to India. On the flight Shashi requests in quite fluent English if the stewardess has any Hindi newspapers.
Production.
Development.
In early 2011, it was reported that Sridevi would make a comeback with a film to be directed by ad filmmaker Gauri Shinde and produced by Gauri's husband R. Balki. It was said that Sridevi will play the protagonist in the role of a lady speaking English and the hilarious sequences that takes place in the process to learn the language forms the rest of the story. It was further reported that Amitabh Bachchan would play a cameo in the film and he shot with them for a day. The film was inspired by Shinde's relationship with her mother,who was a Marathi-speaking woman and ran her own pickle business at her house in Pune. Her mom did not speak good English, which embarrassed Shinde as a child. She said this in an interview, "I made this film to say sorry to my mother."
Owing to Sridevi's comeback after more than a decade, the film garnered much media interest. Amitabh's cameo, music by Amit Trivedi and Balki's track record have further added to the interest in the film. The film rights have been bought by Eros International for Rs. 20 crore.
The film marks the Bollywood debut of actress Priya Anand, whose previous work was in the Tamil and Telugu cinemas. It is also the directorial debut of Gauri Shinde. It was shot largely in New York. The principal photography concluded in October and the film was dubbed and released in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu.
Promotion.
The first look of "English Vinglish" was launched on 14 June 2012. The official distributor Eros International posted the first look video and poster on YouTube and Twitter. The two-minute teaser showed Sridevi reading out the Censor Certificate of the film in deliberate broken English according to her character Sashi in the film, who struggles with the language. The first look was received positively and praised for its unique and fresh concept. The full theatrical trailer was unveiled at a special media event on 13 August 2012 to coincide with Sridevi's birthday. The trailer met with a positive response and went viral on YouTube crossing one million views within a week of release. Sridevi's performance in the trailer was also highly acclaimed by her fans and the media with Hindustan Times reporting, ""Sridevi casts a spell in English Vinglish."" The Tamil and Telugu theatrical trailers were subsequently released at Chennai and Hyderabad respectively. Sridevi also appeared on Kaun Banega Crorepati with her director Gauri Shinde and on the dance show Jhalak Dikhla Ja.
Toronto International Film Festival.
In July 2012, "English Vinglish" was selected by the prestigious 2012 Toronto International Film Festival and slotted for a World Premiere at the coveted Galas section of the festival. The comeback of Sridevi made it a highly anticipated film at the festival and all shows at TIFF were sold out during advance booking. The World Premiere took place at the Roy Thomson Auditorium on 14 September and was attended by Sridevi, Mehdi Nebbou, R. Balki, Gauri Shinde and other cast and crew. At the end of the premiere, the full-house audience gave a 10 minute long standing ovation to the film.
After the Toronto Premiere, some international media outlets hailed Sridevi as the "Meryl Streep of India". Two weeks later America's entertainment weekly "Variety" wrote in its review of "English Vinglish" that it found Sridevi ""Disarmingly charming in a manner that recalls Audrey Hepburn.""
Indian Premiere.
The Indian Premiere of English Vinglish was held on October 4 and was one of the biggest film premieres of 2012. It was organised as a Red Carpet event to celebrate the return of Sridevi to films after 15 years and some of the biggest names in Bollywood attended the event. Directors like Yash Chopra, Ramesh Sippy, Rajkumar Hirani and Ashutosh Gowariker came for the premiere along with Amitabh Bachchan, Anil Kapoor, Vidya Balan, Sonakshi Sinha, Bipasha Basu, Tabu, Shilpa Shetty, Konkona Sen Sharma, Madhuri Dixit, Ayesha Takia, Kangana Ranaut and Javed Akhtar.
Morocco International Film Festival.
After Toronto Film Festival in September, English Vinglish was selected to be showcased in December 2012 at the Marrakech International Film Festival in Morocco. The film was screened to a huge audience of over 15,000 viewers and was attended by Sridevi, Gauri Shinde, R. Balki and Mehdi Nebbou.
Release.
English Vinglish was released in India and worldwide on 5 October. In India It was released across 739 screens for Hindi version, 110 screens for Tamil version in Tamil Nadu and Telugu version released on 47 screens Andhra Pradesh and around 250 screens overseas.
Box Office.
Worldwide gross collections for English Vinglish stood at 75 crores at the end of its third week, jumping to 85 crores by the end of the film's fourth week.
India.
English Vinglish opened with high critical acclaim and did well in multiplex screens and managed to earn 2.50 cr on its first day. The film saw a huge jump on Saturday making it the biggest Saturday growth in recent times. Collections jumped by 125% and the total figures for two days came to 7 cr. The Sunday figures were even better. Collections increased by a massive 200% and English Vinglish ended its first weekend with 13 crore net. The film ended a strong first week earning 21 cr nett.
Despite a slew of new releases like "Aiyyaa", "Bhoot Returns" and "Student of the Year", the film continued to remain rock-steady at the ticket-windows. The trade declared English Vinglish a box-office Hit at the end of its second week when it easily crossed the 30 crore mark. Lifetime earnings for the film in India stand at over 40 crores nett. English Vinglish was declared a Super-Hit in its fourth week and ultimately went on to complete a golden jubilee 50 Days run at the box-office.
Overseas.
According to Box Office India, English Vinglish final overseas gross figures was US$ 4 million making it one of the Top 10 highest overseas grossing Bollywood film of 2012. The film opened to a massive $3.8 million in Overseas bringing its worldwide total to 60 crores nett. English Vinglish overseas collections was $1.65 million in first weekend. The film has collected around $3.5 million in 17 days. The movie collected a total of 17 crore ($3.2 million) in 10 days. The film got listed in the UK box office top 10, as of 13 October 2012 On the twelfth day of its box-office run, Box Office India declared English Vinglish a Hit overseas. The film performed exceptionally well overseas collecting record figures unheard of for a heroine-oriented film.
Reception.
Critical Reception.
On release, the film and Sridevi's performance received positive response. Times of India gave the film 4/5 calling it ""Easily one of the best films of 2012...Sri's performance is a masterclass for actors...Request you to make a little place next to you, Rajkumar Hirani; Gauri Shinde has taken a bow in mainstream Bollywood."" Aniruddha Guha of Daily News and Analysis also gave the film 4/5 saying English Vinglish is ""among the most refreshingly novel films made in recent times...If you're a Sridevi fan, you can't miss it. If you aren't, you still can't miss it.""Arun of AP.com gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars and said,"1st is little boring without anything like comedy ad 2nd half is very gud.After seeing the 1st half i felt like giving 2 stars but after the second half i am giving 3.5 stars 
Another 4/5 came from Raja Sen of Rediff who found the film ""a winner all the way...Sri excels in fleshing out her character."" Taran Adarsh also scored it 4/5 calling it ""a remarkable motion picture...A must-watch for every parent, every child. Strongly recommended!"" Critic Subhash K Jha gave a 4.5 saying Sridevi ""makes the contemporary actresses, even the coolest ones, look like jokes...If you watch only two films every year make sure you see "English Vinglish" twice!"" Rajeev Masand of CNN-IBN gave it 3.5 stars saying Sridevi delivers ""a performance that is nothing short of perfect...It's warm and fuzzy, and leaves you with a big smile on your face."" Anupama Chopra of Hindustan Times also gave it 3.5 calling English Vinglish ""that rare thing...Sridevi doesn't miss a beat. Her performance is a triumph."" IMDB gave the film a high score of 8/10.
Firstpost's Rubina Khan gave the film a full 5/5 saying ""Sridevi brings acting back in English Vinglish."" Komal Nahta said the film was 'beyond stars' applauded Sridevi saying she ""makes the best comeback in Bollywood history and delivers a landmark performance."" Social Movie Rating site MOZVO gave it 4.1 out of 5 putting it in Must Watch category. Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian, gave it 3/5 and wrote in his review, "An undemanding picture that goes down as well as the heroine's tasty laddoos". Kate Taylor of The Globe and Mail gave it 2/4 and wrote in her review, "One wonders how long the neglectful Satish will remember the message of equality and gratitude if it is delivered as gently as this movie does." Amer Shoib of The Cinema Journal gave it 4/5 and called the film ""a hilarious, touching, sensitive, and sweet film that marks the triumphant come back of India's biggest female star...Sridevi."" Indian columnist Shobha De tweeted ""Paresh Rawal and Sridevi – Actors of the Year! The rest are just successful stars!"" and wrote a column titled 'What is that something about Sridevi?' UTV Stars called it the ""Mother India of our times""
Impact.
Sridevi also won the 'Vuclip Icons of 2012' mobile survey to be voted as the Most Admired Actress of Bollywood. Her performance created an enormous impact when Amitabh Bachchan admitted in his blog that Sridevi's heart-rending acting in English Vinglish moved him to tears leaving ""collective lumps in the throat"" A poll by BolywoodLIfe also declared Sridevi as the 'Most Powerful Actress in B-Town' winning by a landslide 75% votes over all the current actresses. 
The actress was featured as one of the Top Newsmakers of 2012 by both NDTV and Filmfare. Filmfare also listed Sridevi as the Top Game Changer of 2012 for making ""a hit comeback after getting married and mothering two kids."" Reuters list stated that ""Sridevi, in her comeback movie, outshone any actress in any role this year and proved once again that you don't need a male star to make a good Bollywood film."" while India Today said ""Sridevi was reinvented in a role of substance"" and MTV wrote that ""when an actor of Sridevi's calibre breaks her 15 year hiatus, you can be sure she has a winner in tow.""
Since it's worldwide success, English Vinglish consistently made it to Best Films of the Year lists by various media houses. The film was ranked No.1 on Times of India list of 'Top 10 Films of 2012' comparing Gauri Shinde's directorial debut with veterans like Manoj Kumar, Gulzar and Aparna Sen. It featured in 'Best Bollywood Films of 2012' by Reuters, 'Bollywood's Most Appreciared Films of 2012' by CNN-IBN, 'Top Bollywood Movies of 2012' by India Today, 'Best Films of 2012' list by Rediff and Forbes 'Best of Bollywood 2012'. The film ranked third on MTV's 'Top 5 Movies of 2012'. It ranked second on Raja Sen's 'Ten Best Films of 2012' and fourth on Rajeev Masand's list of Top 5 'Hits of 2012.' The famous Cafe scene in the film ranked second on CNN-IBN's list of 'Top 10 Bollywood's Best Scenes of 2012'. English Vinglish also made news for motivating Dalit girls in Bihar to master the English language inspired by Sridevi's character in the film.
Director Gauri Shinde featured in the Financial Times 2012 list of '25 Indians To Watch'. She also featured on Rediff's list of 'Bollywood's 5 Best Directors of 2012.'
