The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (original title in literally, "men who hate women") is a crime novel by the late Swedish author and journalist Stieg Larsson. It is the first book of the "Millennium series" trilogy, which, when published posthumously in 2005, became a best-seller in Europe and the United States.
Background.
Larsson spoke of an incident which he said occurred when he was 15, Larsson stood by as three youths gang-raped an acquaintance of his named Lisbeth: he did nothing to help her. Days later, wracked with guilt, he begged her forgiveness—which she refused. The incident, he said, haunted him for years afterward, and in part inspired him to create a character named Lisbeth who was also a rape survivor. The veracity of this story has been questioned since Larsson's death, after a colleague from "Expo" magazine reported to "Rolling Stone" that Larsson had told him that he had heard the story secondhand and retold it as his own.
With the exception of the fictional Hedestad, the novel takes place in actual Swedish towns. The "Millennium" magazine featured in the books has characteristics similar to that of Larsson's magazine, "Expo", which also had financial difficulties.
Plot.
In December 2002, Mikael Blomkvist, publisher of the Swedish political magazine "Millennium", loses a libel case involving allegations about billionaire industrialist Hans-Erik Wennerström. He is sentenced to three months (deferred) in prison, and ordered to pay hefty damages and costs. Soon afterwards, he is invited to meet Henrik Vanger, the retired CEO of the Vanger Corporation, unaware that Vanger has checked into his personal and professional history; the investigation of Blomkvist's circumstances has been carried out by Lisbeth Salander, a brilliant, but deeply troubled, researcher and computer hacker.
Vanger promises Blomkvist evidence against Wennerström in return for discovering what happened to his grandneice, Harriet, who disappeared in 1966; Vanger believes that she was murdered by a member of the family. Harriet disappeared during a family gathering at the Vanger estate on Hedeby Island, when the island was temporarily cut off from the mainland by a traffic accident on the bridge. Blomkvist moves to the island and begins his research into the history of the Vanger family and Harriet's disappearance.
Salander was ruled legally incompetent as a child, and is under the care of a legal guardian, Holger Palmgren. When Palmgren suffers a stroke, he is replaced by Nils Bjurman, who uses his position to sexually abuse her. After using a hidden camera to record Bjurman raping her, Salander takes her revenge, torturing him and threatening to ruin him unless he gives her full control of her life and finances. she then uses a tattoo gun to brand him as a rapist.
While searching through the evidence, Blomkvist decides that he needs a research assistant, and Vanger's lawyer suggests Salander. When he sees the report she prepared for Vanger, Blomkvist realises that Salander has hacked into his computer. He confronts her and asks her to help him with the investigation, to which she agrees. The two eventually become lovers, but Salander keeps Blomkvist at a distance.
Blomkvist and Salander begin to realise that they are on the trail of a serial killer. When looking through old photographs, Blomkvist realises that they contain a clue to the murderer's identity. When he becomes suspicious of Harriet's brother, Martin Vanger, and goes to his house, Martin takes him prisoner. Martin reveals that his father, Gottfried, "initiated" him into rape and murder before his death, and implies that Gottfried sexually abused both him and Harriet. Martin admits to murdering dozens of women, but denies killing his sister. Salander saves Blomkvist just as Martin is about to kill him, and goes in pursuit of Martin, who dies when he crashes his car.
By following a trail that leads to Cecilia's sister Anita, who now lives in London, Blomkvist and Salander learn that Harriet is still alive and in living under Anita's name in Australia. When Blomkvist flies there to meet her, Harriet tells him the truth about her disappearance: her father and brother had repeatedly raped her until she killed her father in self-defense; a year later, her cousin Anita had smuggled her out of Sweden. Blomkvist persuades her to return to Sweden, where she reunites with Henrik. Blomkvist accompanies Lisbeth at the funeral of her mother, who has just died, and tells him that she was declared legally incompetent after trying to kill her father.
Blomkvist learns that the evidence against Wennerström that Vanger promised him is useless. However Salander has already hacked Wennerström's computer and has discovered that his crimes go far beyond what Blomkvist documented. Using her evidence, Blomkvist prints an exposé and book which ruins Wennerström and catapults "Millennium" to national prominence. Salander, using her hacking skills, succeeds in stealing more than a quarter of a billion dollars from Wennerström's secret bank account. Blomkvist and Salander spend Christmas together in his holiday retreat. At Christmas, she goes to Blomkvist's home, intending to declare her love for him, but backs away when she sees him with his long-time lover and business partner Erika Berger.
As a postscript, Salander continues to monitor Wennerström and after six months, anonymously informs a lawyer in Miami of his whereabouts. He is found in Marbella, Spain, dead, shot three times in the head.
Major themes.
Larsson makes several literary references to the genre's classic forerunners, and comments on contemporary Swedish society. Reviewer Robert Dessaix writes, "His favourite targets are violence against women, the incompetence and cowardice of investigative journalists, the moral bankruptcy of big capital and the virulent strain of Nazism still festering away ... in Swedish society." Cecilia Ovesdotter Alm and Anna Westerstahl Stenport write that the novel "reflects--implicitly and explicitly--gaps between rhetoric and practice in Swedish policy and public discourse about complex relations between welfare state retrenchment, neoliberal corporate and economic practices, and politicized gender construction. The novel, in fact, endorses a pragmatic acceptance of a neoliberal world order that is delocalized, dehumanized and misogynistic."
Alm and Stenport add, "What most international (and Swedish) reviewers overlook is that the financial and moral corruptibility at the heart of "The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo" is so profound as to indict most attributes associated with contemporary Sweden as democratic and gender-equal. The novel is in fact far from what American critic Maureen Corrigan calls an "unflinching ... commonsense feminist social commentary". (Corrigan's article was "Super-Smart Noir With a Feminist Jolt," National Public Radio, 23 September 2008.)
Larsson further enters the debate as to how responsible criminals are for their crimes and how much is blamed on upbringing or society. Salander has a strong will and assumes that everyone else does, too. She is portrayed as having suffered every kind of abuse in her young life, including an unjustly ordered commitment to a psychiatric clinic and subsequent instances of sexual assault suffered at the hands of her court-appointed guardian.
Maria de Lurdes Sampaio, in the journal "Cross-Cultural Communication", asserts that, "Blomkvist, a modern Theseus, leads us to the labyrinth of the globalized world, while the series' protagonist, Lisbeth Salander, modeled on the Amazon, is an example of the empowerment of women in crime fiction by playing the role of the "tough guy" detective, while also personifying the popular roles of the victim, the outcast and the avenger." In this context, she discusses "Dialogues with Greek tragedy... namely Salander's struggles with strong father figures." Sampaio also argues, 
Locked room mystery.
Larsson writes within the novel, in Chapter 12, "It's actually a fascinating case. What I believe is known as a locked room mystery, on an island. And nothing in the investigation seems to follow normal logic. Every question remains unanswered, every clue leads to a dead end." He supplies a family tree delineating the relationships of five generations of the Vanger family.
Reception and awards.
The novel was released to great acclaim in Sweden and later, on its publication in many other European countries. In the original language, it won Sweden's Glass Key Award in 2006 for best crime novel of the year. It also won the 2008 Boeke Prize, and in 2009 the Galaxy British Book Awards for Books Direct Crime Thriller of the Year, and the prestigious Anthony Award for Best First Novel.
Larsson was posthumously awarded the ITV3 Crime Thriller Award for International Author of the Year in 2008.
"The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo" debuted at number four on The New York Times Best Seller list.
The novel received mixed reviews from American critics. In a review for "The New York Times" upon the book's September 2008 publication in the United States, Alex Berenson wrote, "The novel offers a thoroughly ugly view of human nature"; while it "opens with an intriguing mystery" and the "middle section of "Girl" is a treat, the rest of the novel doesn't quite measure up. The book's original Swedish title was "Men Who Hate Women", a label that just about captures the subtlety of the novel's sexual politics." The "Los Angeles Times" said "the book takes off, in the fourth chapter: From there, it becomes classic parlor crime fiction with many modern twists...The writing is not beautiful, clipped at times (though that could be the translation by Reg Keeland) and with a few too many falsely dramatic endings to sections or chapters. But it is a compelling, well-woven tale that succeeds in transporting the reader to rural Sweden for a good crime story." Several months later, Matt Selman said the book "rings false with piles of easy super-victories and far-fetched one-in-a-million clue-findings." Richard Alleva, in "Commonweal", wrote that the novel is marred by "its inept backstory, banal characterizations, flavorless prose, surfeit of themes (Swedish Nazism, uncaring bureaucracy, corporate malfeasance, abuse of women, etc.), and--worst of all--author Larsson's penchant for always telling us exactly what we should be feeling."
On the other hand, Dr. Abdallah Daar, writing for "Nature", said, "The events surrounding the great-niece's disappearance are meticulously and ingeniously pieced together, with plenty of scientific insight." The "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" wrote, "It's a big, intricately plotted, darkly humorous work, rich with ironies, quirky but believable characters and a literary playfulness that only a master of the genre and its history could bring off."
As of 3 June 2011, "The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo" had sold over 3.4 million copies in hardcover or ebook formats, and 15 million copies altogether, in the United States.
Film adaptations.
The Swedish film production company Yellow Bird created film versions of the "Millennium Trilogy", all released in 2009, beginning with "The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo", directed by Danish filmmaker Niels Arden Oplev. The protagonists were played by Michael Nyqvist and Noomi Rapace.
A Hollywood adaptation of the book, directed by David Fincher, was released in December 2011. The main characters were portrayed by Daniel Craig and Rooney Mara.
