Unified Modeling Language (UML) is a standardized general-purpose modeling language in the field of object-oriented software engineering. The Unified Modeling Language includes a set of graphic notation techniques to create visual models of object-oriented software-intensive systems.
The Unified Modeling Language was developed by Grady Booch, Ivar Jacobson and Jim Rumbaugh at Rational Software in the 1990s. It was adopted by the Object Management Group (OMG) in 1997, and has been managed by this organisation ever since. In 2000 the Unified Modeling Language was accepted by the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) as industry standard for modeling software-intensive systems.
Unified Modeling Language is used to specify, visualize, modify, construct and document the artifacts of an object-oriented software-intensive system under development. The metamodeling architecture of Unified Modeling Language (UML) is defined in the Meta-Object Facility (MOF).
Overview.
Unified Modeling Language (UML) combines techniques from data modeling (entity relationship diagrams), business modeling (work flows), object modeling, and component modeling. It can be used with all processes, throughout the software development life cycle, and across different implementation technologies.
UML has synthesized the notations of the Booch method, the Object-modeling technique (OMT) and Object-oriented software engineering (OOSE) by fusing them into a single, common and widely usable modeling language. UML aims to be a standard modeling language which can model concurrent and distributed systems. 
UML models may be automatically transformed to other representations (e.g. Java) by means of QVT-like transformation languages. UML is extensible, with two mechanisms for customization: profiles and stereotypes.
History.
UML has been evolving since the second half of the 1990s and has its roots in the object-oriented methods developed in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The timeline (see image) shows the highlight of the history of object-oriented modeling methods and notation.
Before UML 1.x.
After Rational Software Corporation hired James Rumbaugh from General Electric in 1994, the company became the source for two of the most popular object-oriented modeling approaches of the day: Rumbaugh's Object-modeling technique (OMT) and Grady Booch's method known as Object-oriented design (OOD). They were soon assisted in their efforts by Ivar Jacobson, the creator of the object-oriented software engineering (OOSE) method. Jacobson joined Rational in 1995, after his company, Objectory AB, was acquired by Rational. The three methodologists were collectively referred to as the "Three Amigos".
In 1996, Rational concluded that the abundance of modeling languages was slowing the adoption of object technology, so repositioning the work on a unified method, they tasked the Three Amigos with the development of a non-proprietary Unified Modeling Language. Representatives of competing object technology companies were consulted during OOPSLA '96; they chose "boxes" for representing classes rather than the "cloud" symbols that were used in Booch's notation.
Under the technical leadership of the Three Amigos, an international consortium called the UML Partners was organized in 1996 to complete the "Unified Modeling Language (UML)" specification, and propose it as a response to the OMG RFP. The UML Partners' UML 1.0 specification draft was proposed to the OMG in January 1997. During the same month the UML Partners formed a Semantics Task Force, chaired by Cris Kobryn and administered by Ed Eykholt, to finalize the semantics of the specification and integrate it with other standardization efforts. The result of this work, UML 1.1, was submitted to the OMG in August 1997 and adopted by the OMG in November 1997.
UML 1.x.
As a modeling notation, the influence of the OMT notation dominates (e. g., using rectangles for classes and objects). Though the Booch "cloud" notation was dropped, the Booch capability to specify lower-level design detail was embraced. The use case notation from Objectory and the component notation from Booch were integrated with the rest of the notation, but the semantic integration was relatively weak in UML 1.1, and was not really fixed until the UML 2.0 major revision.
Concepts from many other OO methods were also loosely integrated with UML with the intent that UML would support all OO methods. Many others also contributed, with their approaches flavouring the many models of the day, including: Tony Wasserman and Peter Pircher with the "Object-Oriented Structured Design (OOSD)" notation (not a method), Ray Buhr's "Systems Design with Ada", Archie Bowen's use case and timing analysis, Paul Ward's data analysis and David Harel's "Statecharts"; as the group tried to ensure broad coverage in the real-time systems domain. As a result, UML is useful in a variety of engineering problems, from single process, single user applications to concurrent, distributed systems, making UML rich but also large.
UML 2.x.
UML has matured significantly since UML 1.1. Several minor revisions (UML 1.3, 1.4, and 1.5) fixed shortcomings and bugs with the first version of UML, followed by the UML 2.0 major revision that was adopted by the OMG in 2005.
Although UML 2.1 was never released as a formal specification, versions 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 appeared in 2007, followed by UML 2.2 in February 2009. UML 2.3 was formally released in May 2010. UML 2.4.1 was formally released in August 2011. UML 2.5 was released in October 2012 as an "In process" version and has yet to become formally released. 
The current versions of these standards follow: UML Superstructure version 2.4.1, UML Infrastructure version 2.4.1, OCL version 2.3.1, and UML Diagram Interchange version 1.0.
Although many UML tools support some of the new features of UML 2.x, the OMG provides no test suite to objectively test compliance with its specifications.
Topics.
Software development methods.
UML is not a development method by itself; however, it was designed to be compatible with the leading object-oriented software development methods of its time (for example OMT, Booch method, Objectory). Since UML has evolved, some of these methods have been recast to take advantage of the new notations (for example OMT), and new methods have been created based on UML, such as IBM Rational Unified Process (RUP). Others include Abstraction Method and Dynamic Systems Development Method.
Modeling.
It is important to distinguish between the UML model and the set of diagrams of a system. A diagram is a partial graphic representation of a system's model. The model also contains documentation that drives the model elements and diagrams (such as written use cases).
UML models can be exchanged among UML tools by using the XMI interchange format.
Diagrams overview.
UML does not restrict UML element types to a certain diagram type. In general, every UML element may appear on almost all types of diagrams; this flexibility has been partially restricted in UML 2.0. UML profiles may define additional diagram types or extend existing diagrams with additional notations.
In keeping with the tradition of engineering drawings, a comment or note explaining usage, constraint, or intent is allowed in a UML diagram.
Structure diagrams.
Structure diagrams emphasize the things that must be present in the system being modeled. Since structure diagrams represent the structure, they are used extensively in documenting the software architecture of software systems.
File:BankAccount1.svg|Class diagram
File:Policy Admin Component Diagram.PNG|Component diagram
File:Composite Structure Diagram.png|Composite structure diagram
File:Deployment Diagram.PNG|Deployment diagram
File:Object diagram.png|Object diagram
File:Package Diagram.PNG|Package diagram
</gallery>
Behavior diagrams.
Behavior diagrams emphasize what must happen in the system being modeled. Since behavior diagrams illustrate the behavior of a system, they are used extensively to describe the functionality of software systems.
File:Activity conducting.svg|UML Activity Diagram
Image:UML state diagram.png|State Machine diagram
Image:UML_Use_Case_diagram.svg|Use Case Diagram
</gallery>
Interaction diagrams.
Image:Kommunikations diagramm-2.png|Communication diagram
Image:Iau-diagramm-1.png|Interaction overview diagram
Image:CheckEmail.svg|Sequence diagram
</gallery>
The Protocol State Machine is a sub-variant of the State Machine. It may be used to model network communication protocols.
Meta modeling.
The Object Management Group (OMG) has developed a metamodeling architecture to define the Unified Modeling Language (UML), called the Meta-Object Facility (MOF). The Meta-Object Facility is designed as a four-layered architecture, as shown in the image at right. It provides a meta-meta model at the top layer, called the M3 layer. This M3-model is the language used by Meta-Object Facility to build metamodels, called M2-models. 
The most prominent example of a Layer 2 Meta-Object Facility model is the UML metamodel, the model that describes the UML itself. These M2-models describe elements of the M1-layer, and thus M1-models. These would be, for example, models written in UML. The last layer is the M0-layer or data layer. It is used to describe runtime instance of the system.
Beyond the M3-model, the Meta-Object Facility describes the means to create and manipulate models and metamodels by defining Common Object Request Broker Architecture (CORBA) interfaces that describe those operations. Because of the similarities between the Meta-Object Facility M0-model and UML structure models, Meta-Object Facility metamodels are usually modeled as UML class diagrams. A supporting standard of the Meta-Object Facility is XMI, which defines an XML-based exchange format for models on the M3-, M2-, or M1-Layer.
Criticisms.
Modeling experts have written criticisms of UML, including Brian Henderson-Sellers and Cesar Gonzalez-Perez in "Uses and Abuses of the Stereotype Mechanism in UML 1.x and 2.0".
UML modeling tools.
The most well-known UML modeling tool is IBM Rational Rose. Other tools include, in alphabetical order, ArgoUML, BOUML, Dia, Enterprise Architect, MagicDraw UML, Modelio, PowerDesigner, Rational Rhapsody, Rational Software Architect, StarUML and Umbrello. Some of the popular development environments also offer UML modeling tools, e.g.: Eclipse, NetBeans, and Visual Studio.
