Terra Nova is an American science fiction drama television series. It premiered on September 26, 2011 with a two-hour premiere, and concluded on December 19, 2011 with a two-hour finale. The series follows the Shannon family as they travel 85 million years into the past to an Earth of a parallel universe. The series is based on an idea by British writer Kelly Marcel. On March 5, 2012, it was announced that Fox would not pick up the series for a second season.
Plot.
The series is initially set in 2149, a time when overpopulation and declining air quality worldwide threatens all life on Earth. After scientists discover a rift in spacetime, they begin sending people in a series of "pilgrimages" 85 million years into Earth's Cretaceous past, to a different "time stream". The series focuses primarily on the lives of the Shannon family (Jim, his wife Elisabeth, and their three children Josh, Maddy, and Zoe) as they join the Terra Nova colony in the prehistoric past. The phrase "Terra Nova" means "New Earth" or "New World" in Latin.
Because not every human from the future can be brought to the new colony of the past, the process for selecting chosen individuals was highly competitive; based on status of ability. Elisabeth Shannon is chosen for her skills as a doctor, and her children brought along with her. Her husband, imprisoned for violating a sustainability law (breaking a regulation on population control by harbouring a third child) and assaulting an agent (trying to protect his young daughter), was not allowed to join his family, but stows away. He is caught, but eventually convinces Commander Taylor that his skills as a cop may be useful for the safety of the colony and as protection to the colony administration. The colony is said to be set up with the intention of "a new beginning" for humanity, with emphasis on being Earth-responsible.
Opposing the colony and its leader, Commander Nathaniel Taylor, is a group of separatists known as the "Sixers", so called because they arrived in the "Sixth Pilgrimage" who are working in concert with corporate industrialists in an effort to strip the distant past Earth of its resources and send them back to 2149. It is later revealed that Commander Taylor is hiding a controversy about the nature of the colony. This issue involves his son and wife (deceased), and would explain the Sixers' opposition. Though Taylor claims his son, Lucas, to have perished, he was revealed to be alive and also be a Sixer ally. Leaving clues and drawings behind in a way that mocks his father, the "Sixers" plan attacks on the Terra Nova colony and participate in an ongoing war between the two groups. This leads up to the point where Lucas perfects a device to travel to and from the future enabling the industrialists, along with a private army called "The Phoenix Group", to invade Terra Nova. At the end of the series, Jim Shannon travels back to 2149 to destroy the gateway that controls the portal, severing the link with the Cretaceous. The remainder of the Phoenix Group retreat to the nearby "Badlands", leaving behind a relic from human history they had found there: a wooden ship's figurehead.
Production.
Alex Graves signed on to direct the pilot. Brannon Braga and René Echevarria serve as showrunners. Australia was chosen after producer Steven Spielberg vetoed Hawaii because he wanted a different filming location from his 1993 film "Jurassic Park". The two-hour pilot was filmed over 26 days in late November to December 2010. It was shot in south-east Queensland, Australia, with locations in Brisbane, the Gold Coast, and the Gold Coast Hinterland. The shoot was plagued by torrential rain and additional material had to be shot in 2011, with a total estimated cost of US$14 million to be amortized over the season. More than 250 sets were constructed. An episode took from eight to nine days to shoot, like most television dramas, but six weeks in post-production, twice the television average at the time. The average episode budget was about US$4 million, not including Australian tax breaks, compared to an average of US$3 million for broadcast network dramas. Fox Entertainment president Kevin Reilly stated: "This thing is going to be huge. It's going to take an enormous production commitment."
In an unusual decision, Fox skipped ordering just a pilot, and instead immediately ordered thirteen episodes. This was partly due to financial reasons, as the large Australian sets are expensive to dismantle and rebuild. Despite this decision, the producers denied the production was over-budget, with Peter Rice explaining instead the show is "a very expensive ... very ambitious television show". Kevin Reilly continued: "We're not in completely uncharted territory here. The start-up cost for the series is definitely on the high end. But it's not some bank-breaking series." With only 10% of Cretaceous-era dinosaurs recorded in the fossil record, the producers decided to supplement the series with ones which might have existed; palaeontologist Jack Horner was brought in to help create realistic creatures for the period and different from those of the "Jurassic Park" film franchise.
In June 2010, the first cast member was announced – Jason O'Mara as Jim Shannon. In late August, Allison Miller joined the cast. In September, "Deadline Hollywood" reported that Stephen Lang signed on to play the role of Commander Taylor. An executive producer, David Fury, left the series as a result of creative differences. In September, Shelley Conn landed the female lead role. In October, Brian Tyler was chosen as the composer, Mido Hamada was cast as a security head, while Landon Liboiron, Naomi Scott and Alana Mansour were cast as the three children. In November, Christine Adams was cast as Mira. In May 2011, Rod Hallett joined the cast.
The cast and crew returned to Queensland, Australia on May 20, 2011 to continue production on the first season. Filming commenced on May 25, 2011. With a long production process on the series, it was announced in July 2011 that the first season would consist of thirteen episodes to finish airing in December 2011.
Many of the weapons used during the show were reworked and repainted Nerf blasters.
Cancellation.
Shortly after the airing of the season one finale in December 2011, Fox Broadcasting stated that no decision would be made until 2012 regarding the continuation of the series. Fox announced the cancellation of "Terra Nova" on March 6, 2012. 20th Century Fox Television stated that it would try to sell the show to other networks. Netflix was considering picking up the series but ultimately decided to pass on continuing the show.
Motion comic continuation.
Twentieth Century Fox Home Entertainment set up a "video mashup" website where purchasers of the DVD can create a motion comic continuing the series.
Broadcast.
North America.
"Terra Nova" was expected to premiere in May 2011 with a two-hour preview, but due to the time involved for visual effects, its pilot was moved to autumn (late September) 2011 to air with the rest of season one. In May 2011, Fox announced the series would air on Monday nights, and released a full trailer. "Terra Nova" premiered at the 2011 San Diego Comic-Con International on July 23, 2011. The FOX premiere drew 9.22 million viewers and 3.1 in the 18–49 demo in live plus same day results, rising to 4.1 in Live+3, the best result by a new drama. "Terra Nova"'s high DVR gains were attributed to competition from "Monday Night Football" which, being a sports event, is less conducive to delayed viewing. In its second week on FOX, the show retained 100% of its demo rating (3.1), the best retention by a new series. FOX aired the entire first season consecutively on Monday nights, until its two-hour finale on December 19, 2011. In Canada, Citytv simulcast every first season episode; the Canadian premiere drew 1.4 million viewers, the largest audience for a drama in Citytv's history.
International.
In Australia, where the series was filmed, Network Ten began airing the series within days of its U.S. release.
In the UK and Ireland, digital channel Sky 1 broadcast the show from October 3, 2011. In France, Canal + broadcast the show on January 19, 2012. In India, Star World broadcast the show late into the night (01:00 AM & 04:00 AM) in August 2012. In Mexico, Canal 5 aired the series from September 17 until October 8. The series was also in Czech tv called Prima Cool. In Brazil aired by Fox Brasil on primetime and by TV Globo as a late show.
Episodes.
Note: As first and last episodes are two hours, some senders cut them up to air as 13 episodes.
Reception.
Critical reception.
Early reviews indicated much promise in the series. In June 2011, "Terra Nova" was one of eight honorees in the "Most Exciting New Series" category at the "Critics' Choice Television Awards", voted by journalists who had seen the pilots. The "Pittsburgh Post-Gazette" compared it to "Outcasts". The "Los Angeles Times" wrote: "Easily the most exciting show of the fall season, Fox's "Terra Nova" has such obvious, instant and demographically diverse appeal." The "New York Post" called it "Good family fun", while "USA Today" wrote, "What matters are the dinosaurs, who – particularly in the first hour – are as convincing and startling as TV has ever offered, roaming a gorgeous, CGI-enhanced terrain." The "Wall Street Journal" wrote: ""Terra Nova" leaves ye olde cheap-set series in the dust with production values that make each episode look cinematic." The "Washington Post" wrote, "Literally the biggest thing on TV this fall, "Terra Nova" has it all: time travel, misguided utopianism, "Swiss Family Robinson"-style cohesion and lots of hungry dinosaurs. It's all pretty dazzling."
However, mid-season reviews were highly critical. The show was called ""Stargate Universe" by Dr. Seuss" by Mark A. Perigard of the "Boston Herald". Sam Wollaston of "The Guardian" observed that there was only one interesting character and that "A lot of the fault lies with what they have to say to each other. The script is as corny and cheesy as a family-sized portion of cheesy corn nachos." "New York" magazine reviewer Chadwick Matlin vowed never to watch the show again, saying "Sure, the premise had promise, but even masochists like us can only take so much." But by the finale in December things had turned around again where critics were mostly pleased and enthusiastic. "Entertainment Weekly" called the season finale "exciting". The series' first season received an aggregated score of 64% across 28 reviews from Metacritic.
US ratings.
The first season averaged 7.52 million American viewers and a 2.5 rating in the 18–49 demographic. The show was ranked the #2 new drama among adults 18–49, the #1 new show among men 18–49, 18–34, and 25–54 and was one of the top 20 regular programs among teens, as of January 1, 2012.
Series DVD release.
The series was released on a 4-disc DVD set on September 11, 2012. The set contains deleted scenes; bloopers; and featurettes including "Director's Diaries – Making the Pilot", an extended "Occupation/Resistance" episode with audio commentary from Stephen Lang, Brannon Braga and Rene Echevarria, "Mysteries Explored", and "Cretaceous Life: The Dinosaurs of Terra Nova".
