Robin Charles Thicke (; born March 10, 1977) is an American R&B singer-songwriter, musician, composer, and actor. Thicke is a dual citizen, also holding Canadian citizenship through his father. Thicke's albums, which he previously released under the name Thicke, are noted for their feature of a predominantly R&B sound. Thicke has written hits for popular artists such as Christina Aguilera, Jennifer Hudson, Usher and Mary J. Blige. Thicke has also been acknowledged for his work in popular albums such as "Confessions" and "Tha Carter III".
Thicke is a singer, mentor, and judge on the ABC show "Duets".
Career.
Early years.
Before his days as a singer-songwriter, Thicke had written "Love Is on My Side" on Brandy's self-titled album and a number of songs for 3T's "Sexual Attention" and collaborated with Jordan Knight, Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis on several songs in Knight's 1999 album "Jordan Knight." He also co-wrote the songs "When You Put Your Hands on Me" for Christina Aguilera's debut album and "No Tears on My Pillow" for Mýa's sophomore release, "Fear of Flying". As an artist, he recorded and performed solely under his surname, Thicke. He would continue to do so until 2005.
2002–04: Early commercial success.
In 2000, Thicke, who simply went by his last name, went to work on material for his debut album, initially titled "Cherry Blue Skies". The album focused more on soul than his pop-offerings for other artists.
In 2002, Thicke released his debut single "When I Get You Alone". The track samples Walter Murphy's "A Fifth of Beethoven", which itself is a disco rendition of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony. The music video for the song received some rotation on MTV2 and BET's "Rated Next" and was spun moderately on pop and urban radio, peaking at #49 on Radio & Records Pop chart. Globally, however, "When I Get You Alone" became a chart success when it peaked in the Top 20 in Australia, Belgium, and Italy, and reached the Top 10 of the singles charts in New Zealand and the Top 3 in the Netherlands. The tune was featured for the soundtrack of "Agent Cody Banks".
The moderate success was enough to signal the release of the album, with its name changed to "A Beautiful World". Despite the release of a second single, "Brand New Jones," the album received very little promotion, and debuted at only #152 on the Billboard 200 albums chart, eventually selling 63,000 copies.
Runner-up Blake Lewis performed "When I Get You Alone" during the 2007 season of "American Idol" when the Top 3 chose a song to sing. Lewis has often put Robin Thicke in his list of musical influences in interviews and on the "American Idol" website. The song was also performed by Blaine Anderson (played by Darren Criss) on "Glee" during the Season 2 episode "Silly Love Songs."
2005–07: "The Evolution of Robin Thicke".
In 2005, Thicke performed as a guest on the remix of Will Smith's song, "Switch". After being signed to The Neptunes label, Star Trak, he began working on his second album entitled "The Evolution of Robin Thicke". The first single, "Wanna Love U Girl", featured producer Pharrell and experienced chart success on urban radio in the United Kingdom. For the video, Thicke changed his appearance, cutting off his trademark long hair. In 2006, a remix version of the song was filmed with rapper Busta Rhymes. Nearly a year after the single was released, the album was released on October 3, 2006. To promote the album Thicke toured with India.Arie, and then opened for John Legend in late 2006.
His second single, the ballad "Lost Without U", began getting a lot of radio airplay in Urban & Rhythmic stations towards the end of 2006 and early 2007. With the assistance of radio airplay, the song became his breakout hit, reaching as high as number fourteen on the Billboard Hot 100, and number one on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, the first Caucasian male artist to top that chart since George Michael. With album sales over 1.5 million copies sold domestically after the re-release as a Deluxe Edition (with three new bonus tracks) on February 13, 2007, "The Evolution of Robin Thicke" became a commercial success in the United States.
The album peaked at number five on the "Billboard" 200 and number one on the "Billboard" Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums chart, garnering Thicke his first R&B number one album of his career. In early 2007 the single "Lost Without U" and album "The Evolution of Robin Thicke" simultaneously spent two consecutive weeks at number one on the R&B singles and albums charts respectively. On the March 3, 2007 issue of Billboard magazine, Thicke simultaneously topped four Billboard charts; Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums, Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs, Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Airplay, and Hot Adult R&B Airplay. In March 2007, "The Evolution of Robin Thicke" was certified Platinum by the RIAA. Thicke and his record label Interscope soon considered potential tracks to be released as the album's next and third single. Thicke's preference was the track "Can U Believe", which peaked at number fifteen on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and at number ninety-nine on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. On October 2, 2007 the track "Got 2 Be Down" was released as the album's fourth official single. The single peaked at number sixty on Billboard's Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Singles & Tracks.
Late in 2007, Thicke finished promotion for the album as the featured opening act for the North American leg of Beyoncé's US tour, The Beyoncé Experience. Thicke also performed a one off UK concert in London's Koko Arena on September 24, 2007. As of February 10, 2009, the album was certified Double-Platinum by the RIAA.
2008–10: "Something Else" and "Sex Therapy".
Thicke released his third solo album, entitled "Something Else", on September 30, 2008. It debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 charts and sold nearly 140,000 records the first week. The first single from the album was "Magic" a further expansion of the R&B sound that powered his 2006 breakthrough, "The Evolution of Robin Thicke". "Magic" went on to peak at number two on the Urban AC charts. He followed this success with the second single, "The Sweetest Love", which also peaked at number two on the Urban AC charts and remained in the top five for twelve consecutive weeks.
During an interview to promote his third album, Thicke explained: 
Thicke appeared on an episode of ABC's "The Bachelor" to perform “Magic” and “The Sweetest Love” for the remaining female contestants. Thicke wrote and produced a track for the movie "Precious" in which his wife Paula Patton also starred. He co-headlined a U.S. tour with Jennifer Hudson, which began March 31, 2009 in Albany, New York, and wrapped up 25 shows later in Biloxi, Mississippi. At the start of the tour, Thicke released "You're My Baby" as the official third single from "Something Else", despite filming and releasing a music video for the track "Dreamworld". As of April 2009, "Something Else" has shifted over 435,000 units in the U.S.
Seven months after the release of "Something Else", Billboard.com announced that Thicke would release his fourth studio album in the fall of 2009, which would not be self-produced. The album, titled "Sex Therapy", had its release date postponed to winter, on December 15, 2009. Jay-Z is featured on the track "Meiple (Me I Play)". The first single from the album was the self-titled track, produced by Polow Da Don and released in October 2009. In November 2009, Thicke premiered the second single to radio, "Shakin' It for Daddy", featuring rapper Nicki Minaj. It was also produced by Polow Da Don.
Speaking of the musical background to "Sex Therapy", Thicke told Pete Lewis - Deputy Editor of "Blues & Soul" - "I'm always gonna have the influence of Marvin Gaye, Stevie Wonder and Al Green in my music. But with this album I also wanted to show my HIP HOP side. I grew up listening to Run DMC and N.W.A and Biggie and Pac and Jay-Z... So I really wanted to make a record that represented how much that music has influenced me." Earlier in 2009, on October 14, Leighton Meester's debut single "Somebody to Love", featuring Thicke, was released. Thicke told MTV he was glad to have Lil Wayne on the album. He also pointed out that he was featured on Lil Wayne's last two albums, and Lil Wayne was on his last two albums. "We're kind of good luck charms for each other."
Thicke appeared on ABC's "New Year's Rockin' Eve" on January 1, 2010 and performed three songs in Las Vegas, in a pre-recorded segment. Also in 2010, it was confirmed that he, along with Melanie Fiona, would feature on The Freedom Tour with Alicia Keys. As of October 2011, the album has sold 289,000 copies in the United States.
2011–present: "Love After War and Duets".
The album has produced three singles. The first is the title track, "Love After War" released on October 11, 2011 and has peaked at #14 on the "Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs" chart and topped "Urban AC" making it his second song after "Lost Without U" to top that chart. The music video for the song premiered November 21, 2011. The music video features his wife Paula Patton and consist of Thicke making up with his wife after a fight. The second single is "Pretty Lil' Heart", which features Lil Wayne and was released on November 8, 2011. The music video for that premiered on March 2, 2012. It peaked at #51 on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. On May 31, 2012, Thicke released a video for his promo single, which was a cover of the "Whitney Houston" classic "Exhale (Shoop Shoop"). The third official single is "All Tied Up" which was released to Urban AC radio on April 10, 2012. The music video premiered on June 7, 2012 on "Vevo".
In July, 2012, Thicke made his feature film debut staring against Jaime Pressly in Jimbo Lee's ABBY IN THE SUMMER produced by Gabriel Cowan, John Suits, Dallas Sonnier and Jack Heller. 
Thicke is appearing as a judge on a new ABC television show called "Duets" which premiered May 24, 2012 and which also features John Legend, Jennifer Nettles, and Kelly Clarkson. The judges double as mentors who search for singers across the country (Robin Thicke's singers being Olivia Chisholm and Alexis Foster) to duet with them as they perform in front of a live studio audience. The premier episode drew in 7 million viewers. The show went live June 28, 2012, allowing the viewers to vote for their favorite contestants.
Artistry.
Songwriting and producing.
Thicke began his songwriting career by writing hits for popular artists. He co-wrote and produced the Color Me Badd hit "Sexual Capacity" in 1996. The Thicke original "When I Get You Alone" was performed by Guy Sebastian, the winner of the first Australian Idol 2003, during the competition and at the Idol grand finale. "When I Get You Alone" was a popular song choice for Sebastian; he put the live idol performance on his four-times platinum debut single "Angels Brought Me Here"; it was the fastest selling single in Australia debuting at #1 and immediately breaking an Aria record. In 2004, Thicke co-wrote "Out With My Baby" with Guy Sebastian, from Sebastian's second album, "Beautiful Life". Thicke also produced this single for Sebastian. During this same year, he wrote a song with the singer and actress Raven-Symoné for the album "This Is My Time", with the song "Set Me Free".
In April 2007, Thicke co-wrote a song with singer/songwriter Angela Via called "Wrong for You". In 2008, Thicke was enlisted by producer Polow da Don to play piano on the Usher track, "Love in This Club". At the 2009 Grammy Awards, Thicke was recognized for his work on Lil Wayne’s sixth studio album "Tha Carter III", as well as Jennifer Hudson’s self titled debut album. Thicke wrote and produced the song "Tie My Hands" on "Tha Carter III", which went on to win Best Rap Album. Thicke wrote and produced the song "Giving Myself" for the album "Jennifer Hudson", which went on to win Best R&B Album.
Collaborations.
In 2007, Thicke appeared on 50 Cent's album "Curtis", which was released on September 11, 2007, on a song called "Follow My Lead". The following year, he worked with Ashanti on her fourth studio album, "The Declaration", which was released on June 3, 2008. Also that year, Thicke reunited with Lil Wayne and was featured on his album "Tha Carter III" on a track entitled "Tie My Hands", which Thicke also produced. Thicke also appeared on R. Kelly's Untitled Album (2009) on the track "Pregnant" which also features Tyrese and The-Dream.
Personal life.
Thicke's mother is "Days of Our Lives" actress and singer Gloria Loring and his father is Canadian actor Alan Thicke. They divorced when he was seven. An older brother, Brennan, worked as a voice actor in the mid-80s.
Thicke began dating actress Paula Patton at the age of 16. They were married in 2005 and had a son, Julian Fuego Thicke, on April 6, 2010. In the fall of 2010, Robin Thicke spent several weeks in New York City recording and living in a rented SoHo apartment which he had converted into a makeshift professional studio. Thicke has said he does not like his music being described as "blue-eyed soul", calling the label "small-minded and stereotypical."
