"That's My Boy" is a 2012 American comedy film starring Adam Sandler and Andy Samberg. The script was written by David Caspe and directed by Sean Anders.
The film was produced under Sandler's production company Happy Madison, and shot in Massachusetts, around Boston, Everett, Peabody, Lynn, Brockton, Stoughton and Cape Cod. The film was released on June 15, 2012, and distributed by Columbia Pictures.
The film received very negative reviews from critics and is nominated for eight Golden Raspberry Awards, ultimately winning in the categories of Worst Actor and Worst Screenplay. The film has been subject of controversy and criticism due to its comedic portrayal of pedophilia, incest and statutory rape. It is the sixth Sandler film to be rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America. "That's My Boy" was a box office failure, grossing $57.7 million worldwide, thus failing to reimburse its $70 million budget. 
Plot.
In 1984, 13-year-old Donny Berger is molested by his teacher Mary McGarricle, who becomes pregnant. When she is sentenced to a lengthy prison term, Donny is left to raise their son, who he names Han Solo Berger.
By 2012, Donny (Adam Sandler) is an alcoholic slacker, who spends his time with his friends, bartender Brie (Ciara) and stripper Champale (Luenell). Donny is estranged from his son, who, embarrassed by Donny's immaturity, has changed his name to Todd Peterson and managed to become a successful businessman. He has recently arrived at the Cape Cod house of his boss, where he is to be married to Jamie (Leighton Meester).
Donny learns from his lawyer, Jim Nance, that he owes $43,000 to the IRS in back-taxes and will be imprisoned for three years if he doesn't repay the money by the end of the weekend. He visits TV producer Randall Morgan, who had produced shows for Donny during his brief period of celebrity, and Morgan offers him $50,000 if he can organize a reunion with Han and Mary McGarricle at the women's prison.
Donny arrives at Cape Cod to try to convince Todd to participate. Because he had previously told people that his parents had died, Todd introduces Donny as an old friend; Donny elaborates with a heroic backstory and, despite his extremely crude behavior, quickly becomes well-liked by the other guests, at the expense of Todd's popularity. Donny tries to convince Todd to come to the women's prison to see his mother, without revealing that it is for a tv show, but Todd refuses. Todd fights constantly with Donny about his father's immaturity, both now and during his childhood. Donny admitted he was wrong for his actions and should've stopped him, but he didn't know how to be a father. 
Donny joins Todd and his friends at Todd's bachelor party, a relaxing day at a spa. However, Donny offends the employees and guests and eventually convinces the wedding party to attend a strip club where Todd bonds with Brie. The group gets drunk and high and commits various acts of debauchery. Over the course of the evening, Todd bonds with his father and agrees to meet Mary McGarrigle at the prison. Donny, knowing that a tv crew will be waiting, tries to stop the meeting from happening, but Todd goes to the prison anyway. Todd, Donny, and Mary are ambushed by the film crew and a disgusted Todd leaves without signing a release form, leaving Donny without any money.
Donny overhears Jamie on the phone saying that she has been having sex with Todd's boss. He tries to warn Todd, but Jamie comes up with a convincing cover story. Later, Donny discovers Jamie having sex with her brother. She pays Donny the money he needs in order to keep him quiet.
After receiving a conciliatory present from Todd, Donny decides that he has to stop the wedding. At the ceremony he reveals himself to be Todd's father and rips up Jamie's check, and forces her to admit her infidelity to Todd. A disgusted Todd breaks up with Jamie and quits his job, acknowledging Donny as his father and even taking back his birth name of Han Solo Berger.
The following day at the strip club, Han reveals that he is dating Brie. He offers Donny the money to help pay for the unpaid taxes, but he refuses stating that it's time for him to grow up and accept responsibility. Donny is preparing to go to prison when a bet he placed wins him enough money to satisfy the IRS.
Production.
The film was originally titled "I Hate You, Dad", and then changed to "Donny's Boy" before the producers finally settled on "That's My Boy".
Promotion.
A red-band trailer was released on March 1, 2012. A green-band trailer was later released on March 5, 2012. On June 1, 2012, the whole cast sat down with MTV on the City Walk stage to discuss the film, their individual upcoming projects and also participated in a Q&A with the audience. The film was also promoted through the 2012 MTV Movie Awards, where Adam Sandler, Andy Samberg, and Leighton Meester were presenters for Best Kiss.
A spoof trailer was posted by Samberg on The Lonely Island's YouTube account on June 1, 2012.
Reception.
Box-office.
The film opened on June 15, 2012 with $4.6 million and was expected to earn $13 million for its whole weekend debut which would be Sandler's worst opening weekend since "Reign Over Me" in 2007, which had a significantly lower budget.
The film grossed $13,453,714 in its opening weekend, ranking #4 behind the second weekends of "" and "Prometheus", and the opening of "Rock of Ages". As of November 24, 2012, the film has grossed $36,931,089 domestically and $57,719,093 worldwide and failing to recoup its $70 million budget making it a box office flop.
Critical reception.
Reviews for "That's My Boy" were very negative. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a "rotten" score of 21% based on reviews from 109 critics, with an average rating of 3.4/10. The consensus states, "While it does represent a new foray into raunch for the normally PG-13 Sandler, "That's My Boy" finds him repeating himself to diminishing effect – and dragging Andy Samberg down with him." Metacritic gives it a weighted average score of 31% based on 27 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". Online review show Half in the Bag called the film "pathetic", it went on to criticize Sandler as a comic, including his inability to create real humor that isn't based on childish jokes. Bob Fishbach from the "Omaha World Herald" gave the film one out of four stars, saying it was "worse than Sandler's previous stinker, "Jack and Jill"". Richard Roeper gave the film an "F" rating, calling it "an ugly, tasteless, deadly and mean-spirited piece of filmmaking,” while Alonso Duralde gave the film a scathing review, calling it "vulgar, trite, sexist, misogynist, hacky, tacky, gross, sentimental and stupid, with occasional flourishes of racism and veiled homophobia thrown in to boot."
Despite the negative reviews, fans of Sandler were much more positive about the film describing it as "a step back in the right director" for Sandler.
The film has been criticized for its comedic portrayal of statutory rape, pedophilia, and incest.
Home media.
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released "That's My Boy" on DVD and Blu-ray on October 16, 2012.
