Anthony Jeselnik ( ; born December 22, 1978) is an American stand-up comedian, actor, and television writer, known for his performances on the "Comedy Central Roasts" of Donald Trump, Charlie Sheen and Roseanne Barr and his dark comedy style, usually involving sociopathic non-sequiturs.
Early life.
Jeselnik was born in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and raised in the suburb of Upper St. Clair. He graduated from Upper St. Clair High School in 1997. Jeselnik earned a bachelors degree in English literature with a business minor from Tulane University, and then moved to Los Angeles. He began performing stand-up comedy at open mics while working as an accounting clerk in the TV industry.
Jeselnik resides in New York City.
Career.
Jeselnik worked as a writer on "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon" for the show's first season and often appeared in the show's comedy sketches. He was also the first stand-up comedian to perform on the show. After working on "Late Night" for a year, he left the show in March 2010 to focus on performing stand-up comedy and other projects.
Jeselnik has performed stand-up comedy on the television programs "Late Night with Conan O'Brien", "Jimmy Kimmel Live!", "Down and Dirty with Jim Norton" and "Last Call with Carson Daly". He was named one of Comedy Central's breakout comedians of 2009, along with Nick Kroll, Aziz Ansari, Whitney Cummings, Donald Glover, Matt Braunger, T. J. Miller, Kumail Nanjiani, and Jon Lajoie. 
In 2010, he released his debut album, "Shakespeare".
He is a regular at the Comedy Cellar in Greenwich Village, New York City.
His "Comedy Central Presents" stand-up special premiered on January 16, 2009. He performed at the Comedy Central Roast of Donald Trump which first aired March 15, 2011. On September 19, Jeselnik appeared at the Comedy Central Roast of Charlie Sheen. He also appeared on The Comedy Central Roast of Roseanne Barr in August 2012. Jeselnik appeared on the Power of Comedy event on November 17.
Jeselnik's first comedy special, "Anthony Jeselnik: Caligula" premiered on Comedy Central on January 13, 2013, and his Comedy Central program, "The Jeselnik Offensive", premiered February 19, 2013.
Personal life.
Jeselnik is in an on-and-off relationship with comedian Amy Schumer. 
Regarding religion he has said "I'm not a religious person. I would call myself an atheist... I'm just reasonable.
