Boys Over Flowers () is a 2009 South Korean television series starring Ku Hye-sun, Lee Min-ho, Kim Hyun-joong of SS501, Kim Bum, Kim Joon of T-Max and Kim So-eun. It aired on Korean Broadcasting System (KBS2) from January 5 to March 31, 2009 on Mondays and Tuesdays at 21:50 for 25 episodes. 
It is based on Japanese shōjo manga series, , written by Yoko Kamio. The series is the fifth television adaptation of the manga following the Taiwanese "Meteor Garden" and its sequel "Meteor Garden II" and the Japanese "Hana Yori Dango" and its sequel "Hana Yori Dango Returns". It spins the modern-day Cinderella tale of a poor, but spunky schoolgirl at an exclusive academy who attracts the interest of the four ultra-rich and ultra-handsome princes of the school known as F4. 
Plot.
Tough, hardworking Geum Jan-di (Ku Hye-sun) attends the exclusive Shinhwa High School, but she finds her shallow, privileged classmates unbearable, especially the notorious F4. Rich, handsome, and arrogant, Goo Jun-pyo (Lee Min-ho), Yoon Ji-hoo (Kim Hyun-joong), So Yi-jung (Kim Bum), and Song Woo-bin (Kim Joon) are the kings of the school and no one, not even the teachers, dare challenge them. No one, that is, except Jan-di. Angry at their rudeness, Jan-di tells off F4 leader Jun-pyo, bringing a world of trouble upon herself. The proud and persistent Jun-pyo falls hard for feisty Jan-di, but she shares a connection with the quiet, sensitive Ji-hoo. Caught between the two friends, Jan-di's heart is torn.
Reception.
"Boys Over Flowers" attracted high viewership ratings and buzz throughout South Korea during its broadcast in 2009, and created another Korean wave throughout Asia. The cast members became household names and shot to stardom overnight, and after the series ended, several of them became the faces of various endorsements and advertisements. The show is credited with launching the career of its lead actor, Lee Min-ho, who had previously appeared in a small number of low-budget high school dramas.
During its broadcast, the series influenced South Korean men to take their appearances more seriously to copy the metrosexual or "pretty boy" image ("kkotminam", lit. "men as beautiful as flowers") of the F4 characters in the drama. This led to an increase in South Korean males wearing cosmetics, preppy and cruise outfits, and clothing in traditionally more feminine looks like the color pink and floral prints. 
The drama's local filming locations became tourist attractions, such as Damyang Dynasty Country Club in South Jeolla Province; Ragung hanok hotel in Silla Millennium Park in Gyeongju, North Gyeongsang Province; Hilton Namhae Gold & Spa Resort in South Gyeongsang Province; Grand Hyatt Seoul ice rink; Lotte Hotel World's Emerald Room; Farmer's Table in Heyri; and Yangpyeong English Village. The overseas locations featured such as New Caledonia and Macau also became sought-after holiday destinations. 
The series' international popularity extended to Japan, Thailand, Vietnam, Singapore, Nepal, Philippines, Taiwan, the northeast Indian state of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Mizoram,Manipur and among others. The cast members held various sold-out events across Asia, such as concerts and fan meetings. 
The Seoul chapter of the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) criticized the series for being the epitome of materialism and the Cinderella complex, saying it sets a bad example for Korean dramas by depicting school violence, and teenagers indulging in pleasure and prejudice toward others based on their appearance and social class. The YWCA report also singled out the leading female character (Geum Jan-di) for being passive and dependent.
Episode Ratings.
Source: TNS Media Korea
DVD licensing.
In North America, YA Entertainment released the series in two DVD box sets; volume one was released in November 2009 and volume two in December 2009.
