Sir Ben Kingsley, CBE (born Krishna Pandit Bhanji; Gujarati:કૃષ્ણ પંડિત ભાણજી; 31 December 1943) is an English actor who has won an Oscar, Grammy, BAFTA, Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild awards in his career. He is known for starring as Mohandas Gandhi in the film "Gandhi" in 1982, for which he won the Academy Award for Best Actor. He is also known for his performances in the films "Schindler's List" (1993), "Sexy Beast" (2000), and "Hugo" (2011).
Early life.
Kingsley was born Krishna Pandit Bhanji in Snainton, North Riding of Yorkshire, near Scarborough, the son of Anna Lyna Mary (née Goodman), an actor and model, and Rahimtulla Harji Bhanji, a medical doctor.
Kingsley's father, born in Kenya, was of Gujarati Indian Ismaili Muslim Khoja descent. Kingsley's paternal grandfather was a spice trader who had moved from India to Zanzibar, where Kingsley's father lived until moving to Britain at the age of 14. Kingsley's mother was British; she was born out of wedlock, and "loathto speak of her background". Kingsley's maternal grandfather was believed by the family to have been a Russian or German Jew, while Kingsley's maternal grandmother was English, and worked in the garment district of East London.
Kingsley grew up in Pendlebury, near Manchester. He was educated at Manchester Grammar School, where one of his classmates was the actor Robert Powell.
Early career.
Kingsley studied at the University of Salford and at Pendleton College, which later became home to the Ben Kingsley Theatre.
Whilst at college he became involved in amateur dramatics in Manchester, making his professional stage debut on graduation, aged 23. In 1967 he made his London West End theatre debut at the Aldwych Theatre. Later spotted by music producer and manager Dick James, he offered to mould Kingsley into a pop star, but Kinglsey chose to join the Royal Shakespeare Company after an audition in front of Trevor Nunn.
Devoting himself almost exclusively to stage work for the next 15 years, he made his Broadway debut in 1971 with the RSC. Kingsley played Mosca in Peter Hall's 1977 production of Ben Jonson's "Volpone" for the Royal National Theatre, and in Peter Brook's acclaimed production of "A Midsummer Night's Dream". At about this time, he changed his name from Krishna Pandit Bhanji to Ben Kingsley, fearing that a foreign name would hamper his career; he took his stage surname from his paternal grandfather's nickname, "King Clove". He also starred in the role of Willy Loman in a 1982 production of "Death of a Salesman" in Sydney, Australia opposite Mel Gibson.
Film and television career.
Kingsley made the transition to film roles early on, with his first role coming in "Fear Is the Key", released in 1972. Kingsley continued starring in bit roles in both film and television, including a role as Ron Jenkins on the soap opera "Coronation Street" from 1966 to 1967 and regular appearances as a defence counsel in the long-running British legal programme "Crown Court". In 1975, he starred as Dante Gabriel Rossetti in the BBCs historical drama "The Love School". He found fame only years later, starring as Mohandas Gandhi in the Academy Award-winning film "Gandhi" in 1982, his best-known role to date. The audience agreed with the critics, and "Gandhi" was a box-office success. Kingsley won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal.
Kingsley has since appeared in a variety of roles. His credits included the films "Turtle Diary", "Maurice", "Pascali's Island", "Without a Clue" (as Dr. Watson alongside Michael Caine's Sherlock Holmes), "Suspect Zero", "Bugsy" (nominated for Best Supporting Actor), "Sneakers", "Dave", "Searching for Bobby Fischer", "Schindler's List", "Silas Marner", "Death and the Maiden", "Sexy Beast", for which he received another Academy Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor, and "House of Sand and Fog", which led to an Oscar nomination for Best Actor. He won a Crystal Globe award for outstanding artistic contribution to world cinema at the Karlovy Vary International Film Festival in 2001.
In 1997, he provided voice talent for the video game "Ceremony of Innocence". In 1998, he was the head of the jury at the 48th Berlin International Film Festival.
In July 2006, he received an Emmy nomination for his performance in the made-for-TV film "Mrs. Harris", in which he played famed cardiologist Herman Tarnower, who was murdered by his jilted lover, Jean Harris. Later that year, Kingsley appeared in an episode of "The Sopranos" entitled "Luxury Lounge", playing himself. In the show, Christopher Moltisanti and Carmine Lupertazzi offer him a role in the fictional slasher film "Cleaver", which he turns down. Lupertazzi offers him the role on the basis of Kingsley's real-life performance in "Sexy Beast". 
In 2007, Kingsley appeared as a Polish American mobster in the Mafia comedy "You Kill Me", and a hitman in "War, Inc." In 2010, Kingsley has worked voicing a character named Sabine in Lionhead Studios game "Fable III", and starred alongside Leonardo DiCaprio in "Shutter Island", directed by Martin Scorsese. He appeared in Scorsese's next film, "Hugo", and has signed up to appear in the new feature by Neil Jordan and John Boorman entitled "Broken Dream".
Honours.
Kingsley was named a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2000. He was made a knight bachelor in the 2002 New Year Honours (the award was announced on 31 December 2001, which happened to be Kingsley's 58th birthday). His demand to be called 'Sir' was documented by the BBC, to some criticism. Since then, Kingsley appears to have altered his stance; credits for his latest films refer to him as Ben Kingsley. Co-star Penélope Cruz was reportedly unsure what to call him during the filming of "Elegy" as someone had told her she needed to refer to him as "Sir Ben". One day it slipped out as such, and she called him that for the remainder of the shoot.
In 1984, he won a Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word or Nonmusical Recording for "The Words of Gandhi". He was awarded the Indian civilian honour Padma Shri in 1984.
In May 2010, Kingsley was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
Personal life.
Kingsley has been married four times and has four children: Thomas Bhanji and artist Jasmin Bhanji, with actress Angela Morant, and Edmund Kingsley and Ferdinand Kingsley, both of whom became actors, with theatrical director Alison Sutcliffe. In 2005, he divorced German-born Alexandra Christmann, having been "deeply, deeply shocked" after pictures of her kissing another man surfaced on the Internet. On 3 September 2007, Kingsley married Daniela Lavender, a Brazilian actress, at Eynsham Hall, in North Leigh, Oxfordshire.
He currently lives in Spelsbury, Oxfordshire, England, where he has resided for more than ten years.
