There are 53 animated feature films produced or released by Walt Disney Productions and its successor label, Walt Disney Pictures. Walt Disney Studios began work on animated short films in 1923. Then, in 1937, the studio released its first feature-length animated film with "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs", and has continued to produce shorts, featurettes, and feature films to this day. Throughout the years, the studio has expanded its reach. Between collaborating with other studios to co-produce films to The Walt Disney Company distributing animated features produced by other companies, Walt Disney Studios no longer produces all their animated content under the Disney banner.
Animated films produced by Disney-owned studios.
Walt Disney Animation Studios.
The following is a list of the animated films that were either entirely produced in-house by Walt Disney Productions prior to 1986, or were produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios, formerly known as Walt Disney Feature Animation, after 1986.
For advertising purposes, The Walt Disney Company began to affix numbers to each of the films in the late 1980s. Through this method, they could proclaim the film to be "Disney's "n"th full-length animated film". When the numbering system was introduced, the group of films included became collectively known as the "Disney Animation Canon." Many film historians and animation fans refer to them as Disney "classics" or Disney "features." The numbering system remains today, as recent press releases for such products as the 20th anniversary edition of "Oliver & Company", as well as the opening and closing logos and marketing materials for "Tangled", still refer to the film's number. 
Features in development include a Mickey Mouse feature film; "King of the Elves", based on a Philip K. Dick short story; and an adaptation of Marvel Comics' "Big Hero 6".
DisneyToon Studios.
The following DisneyToon Studios films have had, or are planned to have, a theatrical release.
Stop-motion films.
The stop-motion makers Henry Selick and Tim Burton have worked on the following stop-motion films that have been released or distributed by Disney.
ImageMovers Digital.
The following films were produced by ImageMovers Digital, a film studio run by Robert Zemeckis' ImageMovers and Disney. Both of the films below are computer animated, and were also released in Disney Digital 3-D versions. Following the poor box office performance of "Mars Needs Moms", Disney closed ImageMovers Digital.
Animated features produced by non-Disney studios.
Unlike the films above that were made by Disney, the films below were only distributed by Disney.
Partially animated live-action films.
All of the following are live-action films and documentaries that contain animated scenes or sequences.
Other live-action films containing Disney animation.
The following are live-action films produced by other studios, that contain animation scenes or sequences produced by Walt Disney.
