The Subaru Impreza is a compact automobile, manufactured since 1992 by Subaru—the automobile division of Japanese transportation conglomerate, Fuji Heavy Industries (FHI). Subaru introduced the Impreza as a replacement for the Leone, with the Leone's EA series engines replaced by the newer EJ series versions.
Now in its fourth generation, Subaru has offered four-door sedan and five-door hatchback body variants since 1992; the firm also offered a coupe from 1995 for the first generation only. Mainstream versions have received naturally aspirated "boxer" flat-four engines ranging from 1.5- to 2.5-liters, with the performance-oriented Impreza WRX and WRX STI models uprated with the addition of turbochargers. Since the third generation series, some markets have adopted the abbreviated Subaru WRX name for these high-performance variants. The first three generations of Impreza in North America were also available with an off-road appearance package titled Subaru Outback Sport. For the fourth generation, this appearance package became known as the Subaru XV, and is sold internationally.
Subaru has offered both front- and all-wheel drive versions of the Impreza. Since the late-1990s, some markets have restricted sales to the all-wheel drive model—therefore granting the Impreza a unique selling proposition in the global compact class characterized by front-wheel drive. However, Japanese models remain available in either configuration.
First generation (1992–2000; GC, GF, GM).
Introduced on March 1, 1993, the Impreza was offered in either front-wheel drive (FWD) or all-wheel drive (AWD) versions and as a four-door sedan or five-door hatchback. According to a "Motor Trend" article written March 1992 on page 26, the name of Subaru's new compact was, initially, to be called the Loyale, displaying an official photograph of the four-door sedan. In late 1995, a two-door coupe was introduced in Japan. The Impreza, like many Subaru-built cars, was equipped with a flat engine, a distinguishing Subaru characteristic. Initial engine choices included 1.6 L, 1.8 L and 2.0 L naturally aspirated engines.
Subaru chose to continue their longstanding use of the boxer engine in the Impreza. According to Subaru, their configuration of the engine inline with the transmission minimizes body roll due to the lower center of gravity compared with offset engines in most other vehicles. The boxer design provides good vibration mitigation due to the principles of a balanced engine because the movement of each piston is largely countered by a piston in the opposing cylinder bank, eliminating the need for a counter-rotating weighted crankshaft (harmonic balancer), but with some vibration from offsets. Torque steer is also reduced with this type of powertrain layout since the front drive shafts are of equal length and weight.
The Outback Sport was introduced to North America in 1994 for the 1995 model year as an updated Impreza "L" Sport Wagon. It was the top trim level of the Impreza wagon model with no significant mechanical or performance changes from the lower trim levels aside from a slightly lifted suspension. Subaru found some sales success with the Outback Sport as a smaller companion with similar ride height changes, body colors and trim levels to the larger, more successful selling Legacy based Outback. One engine was offered, which was the 2.2-liter, and it was the first time the 2.2 engine was used in the American Impreza. Later, the 2.5 engine was introduced. In Japan, the Impreza Sport Wagon was offered with a similar approach to the Outback Sport, calling it the "Impreza Gravel Express" with the WRX turbocharged engine. Subaru discontinued the Gravel Express when the second generation Impreza was introduced due to very limited sales. The hoodscoop found on the American Outback Sport was non-functional but was probably included because the American and Japanese versions were built at the same factory in Japan. The Outback Sport was offered with optional equipment, such as a gauge pack installed on top of the dashboard, that included a digital compass, outside temperature and barometer or altimeter readings.
Trim levels were LX, GL and Sport. LX models were front-wheel drive, and powered by a 1.6 L engine; these were four-door only.
GL trim levels were either front-wheel drive (Subaru badged these 2WD) or all-wheel-drive (badged AWD); cars launched in 1993 had a choice of 1.6 and 1.8 flat-4 engines, the 1.6 being available with 2WD, the 1.8 an AWD version only. From 1996, the 1.6 and 1.8 versions were dropped (in the European market), and replaced by a 2.0 L engine. Sport versions had alloy wheels, and a 2.0 L engine only. These were "warm hatch" versions which were similar to the WRX, albeit less adorned.
During this generation, Subaru made a limited edition Impreza Sport Wagon called the CasaBlanca, which had a retro front and rear end treatment, which was inspired by the popular kei car Subaru Vivio Bistro styling package and Subaru Sambar Dias Classic. The Sport Wagon was also offered with the WRX turbocharged engine, and was called the Gravel Express.
The Impreza received an external facelift for the 1997 model year, followed by an interior redesign in 1998, using the new redesigned dashboard from the Forester.
Subaru of North America initially offered the Impreza with the 1.8-liter engine only, with either front- or all-wheel drive; a 2.2-liter engine became optional for 1995. Subaru later decided to emphasize all-wheel drive, making it standard on every Impreza (and Legacy) from 1997 onwards. North American markets never received the WRX version of the first generation Impreza. To test the waters for a full-fledged turbocharged model, Subaru showcased a turbocharged Impreza at various car shows around the country. The vehicle was named the 2.5RX and is now located in Subaru of America's Cherry Hill, New Jersey storage facility. Subsequently the 2.5RS performance model was introduced in 1998 (the same year the 1.8 L engine was dropped). A naturally aspirated 2.5-liter engine and larger brakes were fitted into the coupe body with gold-colored 16-inch five-spoke alloy wheels. The 2.5RS also featured several external cues from its overseas brethren such as hood vents, a hood scoop, and a rally-inspired rear spoiler. The 1999 model featured several changes: the newly designed "Phase II" SOHC version of the same 2.5 L engine featured a slightly higher peak torque by , the wheels turned to a standard silver, the interior got an update, and the exterior became visually similar to the Japanese model with an updated front bumper borrowed from the Japanese Version 5 Impreza WRX STI. 2.5RS models became available in sedan form for 2000.
WRX.
There have been seven noted versions of the WRX. The STI versions were marketed with consecutive numbers. Another way to determine the version of a WRX was to look at the chassis code. All WRX sold between 1992 and 2000 have the beginning chassis code of GC8 sedan or GF8 hatchback; this is followed by a letter from A to G. Coupe versions share the "GC" code with sedans, except in the US, where they have a separate chassis code of "GM".
In 1994, Subaru introduced Subaru Tecnica International (STI) versions of the Impreza WRX in Japan. These models were upgraded from the standard WRX in many categories, including blueprinted performance-tuned engines, transmissions, and suspensions. The STI versions of the Impreza were immensely successful in rallies and popular among street racers but were only sold in the Japanese market. Compared to the WRX, the STI had mostly mechanical modifications.
The WRX debuted in November 1992 with . The center differential was a viscous coupling type, the rear limited slip differential was a viscous type. The WRX Type RA is a stripped down version of the WRX that was available in the Japanese market for people to purchase for motorsports and tuning. Targeted for race and rally, the RA versions were generally lighter in weight; featuring reduced soundproofing, manual windows, no air conditioning, no anti-lock brakes, and added racing features such as more robust engines, driver controlled center differentials, and shorter gearing. The WRX Type RA uses a closer ratio gearbox and a three-spoke leather steering wheel from Nardi.
In Europe, the WRX was introduced as the Impreza GT, and as the Impreza Turbo 2000 (UK). It came with . In the United Kingdom, Subaru offered six "WRX 1.8GL" in 1993. The firm imported six Type RS's, the development car that led to the stripped-out Type RA. Three cars went to Prodrive; three were retained by Subaru UK and were subsequently sold. For UK car certification reasons they were registered as "1.8GL", despite having the 2.0-liter turbocharged engine.
In October, 1993, Subaru introduced the 1994 model year WRX which produced . The rear rotors were substituted from ventilated disk to solid disk. October 1993 was also the start of production of the hatchback version, with .
The first STI was known simply as "WRX STI", with 100 per month were produced starting from February 1994. It had . This version of the STI was the only version where the standard cars were taken at the end of the assembly line and replaced by STI parts. An STI version of the Type RA was also offered, again with many amenities deleted to reduce weight and cost. Producing , this version of the WRX STI came with a Driver Controlled Center Differential (DCCD). This device was an electromechanical differential that could lock the differential.
In November 1994, the WRX had a power increase to . The wheel diameters were increased to and brake rotors were both changed to ventilated disks. In Japan, the WRX engine was also offered with the hatchback body variant and was called the "Impreza Gravel Express" but was discontinued due to very limited sales.
To commemorate Colin McRae's success in the international rally scene, Subaru in the UK released 200 limited edition "Series McRae" WRXs in June 1995, prepared by Prodrive. These vehicles were finished in a very limited "Rally Blue" colour scheme, sported gold 16-inch alloy wheels, McRae decals, individual numbered badging from 1–201 (car 13 was never built since the number 13 is considered unlucky), and a factory-fitted electric tilt/slide sunroof. Recaro seats were fitted in the front, and the rear seats and side panels were retrimmed in the same Le Mans/Avus material.
The regular STI's engine output stood at . The car weighed and had gold wheels like those on the World Rally Championship Impreza. Now, the STI was built alongside the WRX on the production lines.
The 1996 model year WRX debuted in January 1996. The WRX design received minimal mechanical changes, but a WRX V-Limited Edition was introduced to celebrate the success of the Impreza WRC car in the FIA WRC. It was mechanically the same to the WRX but had a curb weight nudge to . The V-limited cars are painted in World Rally Blue. A WRX STI V-limited edition was also produced. The interior is colored blue on the seat inserts and carpeting. The WRX Type RA STI received a radio and air-conditioning in the V-limited form. 1,000 WRX STI Version 2 V-limited were produced, with 555 WRX Type RA STI Version 2 V-limited models produced.
In September 1996, the WRX was updated with new styling. The WRX now has a power rating of and now weighed . Although it actually developed about 300 PS, the output was under-reported at the then-established gentlemen's agreement power limit of 280 PS.
Subaru in the UK released the WRX "Catalunya" in March 1997, a limited production of 200 cars (again excluding car number 13) in black with red flecks riding on gold alloy wheels. The Catalunya was made to celebrate winning Subaru's second WRC manufacturer's title at the Rally of Spain (Catalunya).
With GC8D came the start of the coupé version of the WRX STI. It is called the WRX Type R STI. The coupé was chosen by Prodrive for use in the WRC because it was lighter and stiffer than the sedan, although it carried the same exterior dimensions. It was essentially a two-door version of the WRX Type RA STI meaning it had DCCD, minimal sound insulation, close-gear ratios and hardened gearbox. This car also has a water-spray nozzle to dampen the top of the intercooler. The water will then evaporate, taking heat away from the intercooler and cooling the intake charge. This car was produced on an order-only basis. Also, there was a WRX STI type RA (sedan) available, with a roof vent instead of map lights, and wind up windows, although electrics are an option from factory.
Also available was a WRX Type R V-limited. It has a WRX motor with no forged internals like the STI, and it misses out on the four-pot front brakes as they are to be installed by rally teams. It has a roof vent and is lightweight, making a good base for a rally car.
In Europe, the Subaru Impreza WRX GT's (Turbo 2000 in UK) interior was updated to leather. For the STI, power remained at 280 PS. Forged pistons were also added. The interior and the cockpit were changed into a newer design along with the new white colored gauges.
For the UK, the WRZ "Turbo Terzo" was released in April 1998. 333 cars in blue with gold alloy wheels were produced to celebrate Subaru's WRC title.
In 1998, Subaru of Japan produced a widebody, coupe WRX STI called the "22B STI" produced between March and August 1998. The 22B was used to commemorate both Subaru's 40th anniversary as well as the third consecutive manufacturer's title for Subaru in the FIA World Rally Championship. On the release of the sales, all 400 Japanese units sold out from 30 minutes to 48 hours, depending on the report. Another 24 were produced for export markets—16 for the UK, along with another 5 for Australia, and 3 prototypes. The 16 cars imported to the UK were modified by Prodrive, with longer gear ratios, and UK specification lights. Because 50 22Bs had already been imported privately into the UK, Subaru had to wait until 1999 to register the 16 officially imported cars under the VCA's Single Vehicle Approval scheme.
The 22B had the "EJ22" engine (note, the internal Subaru material states the closed-deck block comes from a V3 "EJ20G"). This means the displacement was increased from 1,994 cc to 2,212 cc. It produced . This car was given a unique color of blue and had fender flared widebody taken from the Peter Stevens designed WRC car, thus widening the width by 80 mm (3.15 inches). The car has a unique hood, front and rear fenders, a WRC-inspired front bumper and a unique adjustable rear wing. During assembly, a WRX Type R chassis was taken off the line. The fenders were replaced with the 22B STI fenders. The suspension is provided by Bilstein, while the brakes were Brembo manufactured painted red. The wheels were increased in size from the standard WRX Type R STI from 16- to 17-inches and the clutch was upgraded to a sintered twin clutch with a ceramic disk. The origin of the name 22B has often been debated. Many assume 22 referred to the 2.2 liter displacement and the B was for the Bilstein suspension. This would correlate with the idea that Subaru sells a Legacy Spec B, where the B represents the Bilstein suspension. The car's curb weight is .
Mechanically this was virtually the same as its predecessor. The torque was increased a little from at 4000 rpm. The weight also continues to increase and is set at .
To celebrate the return of British driver Richard Burns to the rally team, a limited edition of 444 WRX "RB5" models in gray were created in 1999 for the UK. The basic model had little more than cosmetic differences, but most had the WR Sport Performance Pack, an option consisting of a new ECU and exhaust for and torque. There was also an optional Prodrive suspension pack.
The standard UK Impreza Turbo 2000 was also tuned and partly restyled by Prodrive in 1999 to create the WRX "Prodrive WR Sport". It featured a unique interior, suspension upgrade, new bodykit and wheels, plus WR Sport decals and an optional ECU upgrade.
For the STI, the power stayed the same as the previous version but the engine layout and design was made cleaner and was dubbed as the "Boxer Phase 2" engine. The facelift the rest of the Impreza line had was also applied to the STI. The WRX STI weighed . There were 1000 WRX Type RA STI Version 5 Limited cars and each had a four-month waiting period. The interior was also changed slightly, including seats and steering. This model was also produced as a 555 limited edition.
The last version of the GC WRX was introduced on September 1999. There is no change in the mechanical specifications. Added features are newly designed alloy wheels, color-coded mirrors and door handles, remote central locking, intermittent wipers with a timer and map lights.
The European WRX turbo model received further upgrades in the form of more parts from the STI range. The front brakes became Subaru branded four-pot calipers with discs, the wheels having become 16-inch lightweight alloys. The STI 4 high-level wing was fitted to the sedan, and STI-style front bucket seats and firmer suspension were also fitted. The "Phase 2" engine now fitted developed , an increase of over the previous model.
To counter the grey imports of high-performance Japanese variants, Subaru UK commissioned Prodrive to produce a limited edition of 1,000 two-door cars in Sonic Blue, called the WRX "P1". Released in March 2000, they were taken from the STI Type R lines and used for the P1. The car was the only coupé version of the WRX STI GC chassis to receive ABS. In order to allow for ABS, the DCCD was dropped. Engine output was boosted to , and the suspension optimised for British roads. Options were available from Subaru consisting of four-piston front brake calipers, electric Recaro seats, 18-inch wheels and a P1 stamped backbox. The P1, or Prodrive One, is echoed in the name of the Prodrive P2 concept car.
Likewise, for the STI, most of the changes were cosmetic with the fender being sculpted to be more aggressive. There were 2,000 WRX STI Version 6 Limited model produced, plus 500 of the WRX STI Type R coupe Version 6 Limited, 2,000 of the WRX STI RA Version 6 Limited, and also 500 of the WRX STI Version 6 Limited hatchback models.
In 2000, STI released the WRX STI "S201", of which 300 were produced. This series is a limited production series that sports an engine output of 224 kW (305 PS) as special variants were excluded from the gentlemen's agreement. The car was decked with nearly every single part from the STI catalogue. The S201 was a sedan that sported the only body-kitted S-series WRX STI. Weighing in at 1270 kg, the S201 had a tri-planar wing and a massive front airsplitter. The entire suspension was composed of STI parts.
Second generation (2000–2007; GD, GG).
Subaru introduced the "New Age" Impreza to the world market in 2000. Larger in size compared to the previous iteration, the sedan increased its width by , while the hatchback notably increased by just —placing the two variants in different Japanese classification categories. The coupe body style from the first generation did not reappear for the new series. However, the off-road appearance package that included contrasting-colored bumpers did carry over forward. Marketed as a separate model line, this North American-only variant was, as before, badged Subaru Outback Sport.
Naturally aspirated flat-four engines comprised the 1.5-liter "EJ15", the 1.6-liter "EJ16", the 2.0-liter "EJ20", and the 2.5-liter "EJ25". Turbocharged versions of the 2.0- and 2.5-liter engines were offered in the WRX and WRX STI models.
Although the headlamp styling of the "New Age" Impreza was considered polarizing, improvements to the car brought greater mainstream acceptance. Subaru updated the Impreza's fascia in 2002 with more rectangular headlamps. In 2005, Subaru introduced a second facelift which introduced Subaru's new corporate face—including the controversial "jet intake and wings" grille design.
An anomalous relative to the second generation Impreza is the Saab 9-2X. Manufactured by Subaru between 2004 and 2005, the Saab retailed only in the North American market for the 2005 and 2006 model years. To better integrate with the Saab design language, the 9-2X received redesign of the front- and rear styling and various minor tweaks.
WRX.
As with the first generation, the turbocharged WRX and STI variants were available in numerous specifications with a myriad of limited edition variants sold. Subaru issued yearly updates to the WRX and STI, tweaking cosmetics and equipment levels, and also improving performance and handling.
Third generation (2007–2011; GE, GH, GR, GV).
Subaru revealed the third generation Impreza at the New York Auto Show on April 2, 2007—both the standard naturally aspirated Impreza and turbocharged WRX versions were revealed. The high-performance WRX STI debuted in October 2007. Initially, the new Impreza was offered as a five-door hatchback (designated "GH"), with the four-door sedan (designated "GE") introduced in 2008. The wide-body variants of the hatchback and sedan are labelled "GR" and "GV", respectively. Dimensionally, this version is wider by and increases track by approximately . Although first adopted by the STI, the wide-body platform was later utilized by the regular WRX range.
The third series of Impreza is slightly longer, wider and offers a longer wheelbase. Two Subaru traditions were discontinued with the new model: the parking light switch atop the steering column is no longer present, and for the first time the windows have frames to improve noise, vibration, and harshness levels. Subaru made an effort to control the weight of the new chassis. Despite the increase in size, stiffness, and safety equipment, the car's weight is similar to the previous generation. The front suspension uses a MacPherson strut setup, while the rear features a new double wishbone suspension.
Safety of the car has been increased with range wide inclusion of electronic stability control as standard in many markets. When the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety (IIHS) in the US crash-tested the five-door Impreza, the organization granted the Impreza the highest ranking available. ANCAP in Australia tested the Impreza where it scored 34.66 out of 37 points, or the full five-star rating in the occupant safety crash test; the Impreza also scored a four-star pedestrian safety test.
Flat-four gasoline engines in the naturally aspirated tune comprised a 1.5-liter "EL15" producing , the 2.0-liter "EJ20" with and , and the 2.5-liter "EJ25" with . Turbocharged versions of the two latter engines were fitted to the WRX and WRX STI versions as discussed later. Subaru introduced a flat-four diesel engine, designated "EE20" at the 2008 Paris Motor Show. Sales began in several European countries from early 2009, with the 2.0-liter turbo diesel engine of . Two models are available as of July 2009, 2.0 TD and 2.0 TD Sport.
The Impreza range received a facelift in late 2009 for the 2010 model year, gaining a new grille insert.
In the Japanese domestic market the range comprised the 1.5-liter 15S, plus the 2.0-liter 20S and turbocharged S-GT, both using the 2.0-liter engine. Japanese dealers retailed the hatchback initially, with the sedan body variant arriving in autumn 2008 as the Impreza Anesis. This generation represented the first time that the Impreza was no longer in compliance with Japanese government regulations concerning exterior dimensions. Japanese specification models are fitted with an engine start button.
Subaru Australia released the third generation hatchback in September 2007. Naturally aspirated 2.0-liter versions fell under the R, RX and RS trims, with the turbocharged 2.5-liter reserved for the WRX. The sedan body style came later in 2008, paralleling the hatchbacks's model range.
North America received only the 2.5-liter models. Released to the United States market for the 2008 model year, the model range consists of the 2.5i, the turbocharged WRX, and the Outback Sport that Subaru marketed as a separate model line. The normally aspirated models are electronically limited from surpassing . For 2009, a new 2.5 GT trim arrived to the market with the turbocharged engine from the 2008 model WRX (this 2009 WRX received a boost in power). While automatic transmission was not available with the WRX, the 2.5 GT did gain an optional four-speed automatic. In the Canadian market, the base Impreza 2.5i received upgrades for the 2009 model year, including rear disc brakes, electronic stability control, and body-colored door handles—features previously only found on the 2.5 Sport and more expensive trims.
In Israel, the Impreza is denoted as the B3, and three styles are offered: the B3 1.5, with a 1.5-liter engine, the B3 2.0 and the B3 2.0 Sport, both with the 2.0-liter engine. Four-door and five-door models are available for each engine type, ranging from the basic R class, to the medium RX and top RXI class.
Indonesian-specification versions were initially only available as the hatchback style, with the sedan arriving in 2011. The 1.5R and 2.0R could be ordered with a dual-range five-speed manual, or four-speed automatic transmission. However, in Singapore and Thailand, the Impreza 1.5 R, 2.0 R, and 2.5 WRX are also offered as four-door sedan. The WRX STI trim in Singapore, Indonesia and Thailand can be ordered with the dual-range six-speed manual, or five-speed automatic if WRX STI A-Line is available.
WRX.
Subaru debuted the turbocharged WRX performance variant of the third generation series alongside the mainstream naturally aspirated models on April 2, 2007. For this generation, most markets adopted the abbreviated name "Subaru WRX", although the Japanese and North American markets retained the full "Subaru Impreza WRX" title. The 2.5-liter "EJ255" engine is largely unchanged, with a power output of and from its 2.5-liter engine. It was offered in either a five-speed manual, or 4 speed automatic. The weight of the car also has been lightened and gives the WRX a time of 5.8 seconds. In contrast, curb weight of the standard Impreza model is around heavier. The STI is lighter than the WRX trim level. For the US market, the WRX was offered in "base", Premium, and Limited trim levels. In Australia, the WRX is available as a sedan or hatchback. An optional premium package adds the satellite navigation with DVD player and 7-inch screen, leather upholstery and a sunroof.
In response to criticism that the third generation WRX suspension is too soft, and needing to keep on par with rival car companies new releases, Subaru issued several changes in 2008 for the 2009 model year. The "EJ255" engine received an output boost to and of torque by swapping the previous "TD04" turbocharger to an IHI "VF52". This lended to the car now achieving a 0-60 time of just 4.7 seconds, as tested by Car and Driver. In addition, the updated model received stiffer suspension parts from the STI and an aerodynamic package. Cosmetic changes included an updated mesh grill with WRX badge and darker wheels.
Further changes in 2010 for year model 2011 saw the WRX gain the wide-body shell from the STI, as well as the addition of quad muffler tips with diffuser. The new model gains . Firmer rear sub-frame bushings and wider 17-inch wheels contribute to improved traction.
WRX STI.
Debuting at the Tokyo Auto Show in October 2007, WRX STI versions build further on the standard WRX cars. The STI available in Japan is fitted with the 2.0-liter "EJ207" engine with twin scroll turbocharger generating . Export markets receive the higher-displacement 2.5-liter "EJ257" unit with the single-scroll "VF48" turbocharger rated at and of torque. The turbocharger directs air through a larger top-mount intercooler which has lost the red "STI" that was on previous generations. It is the first STI to feature automatic transmission.
Like the standard WRX, the third generation model was shortened to "Subaru WRX STI", with the Japanese and North American markets notably abstaining from this convention. To differentiate the STI from the regular WRX, Subaru opted to manufacture the STI with a wider body and therefore track—as noted by the flared wheel arches. Furthermore, Subaru utilized aluminum suspension components for the STI. Electronic modifications include a multi-mode electronic stability control with "normal", "traction", and "off" modes; Subaru Intelligent-Drive (SI-Drive) with three modes: "intelligent", "sport", and "sport sharp"; and multi-mode driver controlled center differential (DCCD). The DCCD enables driver to switch between manual and automated torque distribution ratio of the center differential. This distribution can vary from 35/65 to 50/50 front/rear.
The STI hatchback was released in the United States in March 2008. In 2010 for the 2011 model year, the WRX STI became available as a four-door. The most noticeable feature on the STI sedan is a large rear spoiler. Australia also received the 2011 model year STI as a sedan to complement the hatchback released in 2008. Australian STIs were offered in standard form, plus the STI spec.R. An electric sunroof, leather upholstery, satellite navigation, and BBS wheels are standard on the spec.R, while Recaro seats are optional.
A facelift of the STI arrived in 2010 for the 2011 model year, distinguished by a new front bumper. Tweaks to the suspension—stiffer springs, larger anti-roll bars, new pillow ball bushings on the front lower arms, as well as wider standard tires—had the affect of improved handling.
Surfacing at the MotorSport Japan 2008 auto show, the Subaru Takumi concept previewed the "20th Anniversary Edition WRX STI". The only visual cues to differentiate the Takumi from the regular STI are a blacked-out rear spoiler, front lip spoiler, and 12-spoke wheels. The upgraded parts included on the car are drivetrain and suspension modifications. All 300 examples of the 20th Anniversary were exclusive to the Japanese market.
The "WRX STI spec C" was released in Japan on July 23, 2009. The 900 units limited edition has engine, suspension, and body parts improvement over the regular model. The ball bearing on the turbine axle was modified to reduce friction, the ECU retuned for better response, and an intercooler water spray fitted. The cross member, suspension and power steering were also improved for better handling and body rigidity. An aluminum hood, laminar window glass, and a lighter battery helped to reduce weight.
Subaru launched the "WRX STI A-Line" with a five-speed semi-automatic on February 24, 2009. Initially available only in Japan and Singapore, the A-Line features include steering wheel-mounted paddles. The A-Line is also offered in Hong Kong, and later in Thailand and Indonesia with debut at the Indonesia International Motor Show in July 2010, and was exported to Australia in 2011.
Subaru in the United Kingdom unveiled two new WRX STI models at the British Auto Show that have specific tuning by Prodrive. The first is the "WRX STI 330S", producing . The second of the two was the "WRX STI 380S", which features new wheels and an upgraded body kit and was expected to produce . Subaru announced, on September 10, 2008, that the 380S variation would not be produced, due to homologation and specification difficulties. However, the regular 330S model did enter production as the "WRX STI Type UK".
For 2010 model year, Subaru of North America introduced the "WRX STI Special Edition" similar to Japanese STI Spec C. Fitted with stiffer suspension and a thicker stabilizer bar for better handling, it also gains seven twin-spokes gray 18-inch alloy wheels. Inside, the Special Edition received downgraded manual air conditioning and a four-speaker stereo instead of climate control and 10-speaker premium audio on the regular WRX STI.
Available for the UK market only, the "Cosworth WRX STI CS400" was announced in late May 2010. Only 75 units were built, with power deriving from a Cosworth-tuned version of the standard STI engine. Stylistically, the CS400 can be distinguished from the regular STI by its upper mesh grille with piano black finish on the top frame, modified front bumper with "Cosworth" emblem on the lower mesh grille, 18-inch alloy wheels, lip front spoiler, and rear waist spoiler. To match its performance, the CS400 comes with Bilstein struts and Eibach springs for better quality ride and handling. Braking was updated by AP Racing's larger diameter ventilated front brakes with six-pot calipers. Inside, the CS400 has Recaro leather seats with "Cosworth" label, piano black center console panel, and "Cosworth"-badged floor mats.
Fourth generation (2011–present; GP, GJ).
The fourth generation Impreza was unveiled on 20 April 2011 at the New York Auto Show, with sales commencing later in the year. Remaining nearly the same size as the previous series, the new car is lighter and more fuel efficient, plus is claimed to be better packaged. The 2012 Impreza received longer wheelbase that provides more interior room. The Impreza hatchback rear head- and legroom is impressive; two adults can ride in the back of the Impreza with comfort. In the hatchback, the rear 65/35 split seatbacks fold down, offering 52.4 cu. ft. of cargo space. Higher quality materials are fitted throughout the interior, and due to its larger exterior dimensions as defined by Japanese government regulations, the Impreza is an upmarket product in Japan. It is now almost exactly the same dimensions as the first and second Subaru Legacy (1990-1999).The third generation high-performance WRX variants will continue on in production until new versions will be released in 2013.
The new Impreza was released in Japan on 30 November 2011, where the hatchback is marketed as Impreza Sport and the sedan as Impreza G4. Engine choices are the new 1.6-liter "FB16" and 2.0-liter "FB20" gasoline flat-four engines. Trim levels for both body variants are 1.6i, 1.6i-L, 2.0i, 2.0i-S, 2.0i EyeSight, and 2.0i-S EyeSight. Transmission choices include a five-speed manual and a "Lineartronic" continuously variable transmission (CVT). Sales were strong, averaging 8,800 units per month for the first four months. EyeSight consists of two cameras with one on each side of the interior rear view mirror, that use human like stereoscopic vision to judge distances and generally keep tabs on the driver. The system can help maintain a safe distance on the highway, a lane departure warning system, a wake up call when traffic lights change, and even keeps an eye out for pedestrians. Autonomous cruise control system has been integrated into the EyeSight feature as a driver safety aid. This feature is only available in Japan.
For the US market, the Impreza 4 door Sedan and 5 door Hatchback is offered in the base 2.0i, 2.0i Premium, and 2.0i Limited. In addition to the regular models, Subaru also offered the Impreza Sport Hatchback in the Premium and Limited trim levels. The so-called American Impreza Sport (not to be confused with the JDM regular hatchback with the same name) has the rugged style with side spoilers, roof rack, different style alloys, and availability of two-tone colors. However it also has the normal ground clearance, unlike the new XV. For the Premium model grade, buyers can choose 5 speed manual or Lineartronic CVT, while the Limited is only come with CVT.
Subaru XV.
The raised suspension version of the latest Impreza Hatchback is again named Subaru XV, including in North America where a XV-type model was previously sold as the Outback Sport. The XV Concept made its first public appearance at 2011 Shanghai Motor Show, and the production version began sales in 2012. During the New York International Auto Show in April 2012, the XV was shown as a concept vehicle, and it was also released that the XV Sport will be offered in the United States starting in early 2013. 
Power for the XV mirrors the regular Impreza, although some markets have restricted choices. For example, in North America, the XV Crosstrek only gets the 2.0-liter gasoline engine, but comes available with a CVT or manual transmission. In addition to the 2.0 liter gasoline, buyers in Europe also have choices of the XV with 1.6 liter gasoline and 2.0 liter diesel.
The Subaru XV for the South East Asian markets will be assembled in Malaysia from late 2012.
Motorsport.
The Impreza chassis has been more successful in rallying than Subaru's previous contenders. Prior to the introduction of the Impreza into World Rally Championship racing in 1993, the Subaru World Rally Team had fielded its larger mid-size Legacy. However, with the rest of the rally competition increasingly shifting towards smaller and lighter chassis, Subaru introduced the smaller Impreza, immediately achieving a podium on its debut on the 1993 1000 Lakes Rally. To jumpstart its early rally efforts, and to develop the Impreza into a competitive rally car, Subaru teamed up with its current preporatory firm, British motorsports company Prodrive, in 1989.
Immediately following the first overall WRC event win for both the fledgling Subaru team and its young driver, the late Colin McRae aboard a Group A Legacy on the 1993 Rally New Zealand, the Scotman's team-mate and childhood idol, 1981 World Rally Champion, Ari Vatanen of Finland, went on to finish second in the debut rally of the first ever factory Impreza. New recruit for the following season, 1990 and 1992 World Champion, Carlos Sainz brought the Impreza its inaugural victory on the 1994 Acropolis Rally.
The Impreza brought Subaru three consecutive WRC constructors' titles (1995–1997, the latter season the first for the newly introduced World Rally Car class) and a driver's championship for McRae in 1995, the late Richard Burns in 2001, and the Norwegian, Petter Solberg in 2003.
Another evolution of the Impreza WRC made its debut in the 2007 Corona Rally Mexico. Unfortunately, the team had several major problems with reliability as the car experienced mechanical difficulties in almost every rally from its first.
Subaru debuted an Impreza WRC in hatchback form for the first time from the 2008 Acropolis Rally onwards, on which event Solberg scored a second place finish. On 16 December 2008 Subaru announced that it would withdraw from the World Rally Championship due to economic problems.
However, the Subaru Rally Team USA is still competing in the Rally America National Championship. Also, there are still several teams using Subaru models in the Intercontinental Rally Challenge. Starting in 2006, Subaru of America (SOA), as the official distributor of Subaru vehicles in the United States, participates in the Subaru Road Racing Team (SRRT) with a Subaru Legacy 2.5 GT Spec-B in the Grand-Am Street Tuner class. In 2010, SRRT campaigns a Subaru Impreza WRX STI in the Grand Sport class. In 2011, SRRT switched from the hatchback to a 2011 Subaru Impreza WRX STI sedan.
In April 2010, a modified third generation WRX STI driven by Tommi Mäkinen set a lap time of 7:55 on the Nürburgring Nordschleife, which is a record for a 4-door car. The Subaru Road Racing Team debuted the Impreza WRX STI hatchback and switched to Impreza WRX STI sedan in 2011 participated to the GRAND-AM Continental Tire Sports Car Challenge series.
