The Truth About Love is the sixth studio album by American recording artist and songwriter Pink, released on September 14, 2012, by RCA Records. The first single from "The Truth About Love", "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" was released in July 2012, the song sat firmly at number five on the US "Billboard" Hot 100 for 3 weeks, and went Platinum for over 1,000,000 copies sold, as well as charting inside the top ten in several other countries. The follow up second single, "Try" received matching success and became P!nk's thirteenth Hot 100 Top 10 hit. 
In the United States, the album debuted at number one on the "Billboard" 200 chart, selling 281,000 copies in its first week becoming her first number one album there, and has been certified Platinum by RIAA after selling over a million copies in the US. The album also debuted at number-one in Australia, Austria, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, Sweden, and Switzerland. "The Truth About Love" was announced as Australia's biggest selling album of the year and gave Pink her third time at the top of Australia's year end album chart. 
"The Truth About Love" samples rock music influences and is generally themed about relationships, breakups and the different stages and cases of love. It features guest starts Eminem, Lily Rose Cooper and Nate Ruess of American band fun. To support the album, P!nk began her "Truth About Love Tour" in February, 2013. The tour is expected to continue through 2013 and will include American, Australian and European legs.
Background and development.
On October 7, 2011, RCA Music Group announced that it would be disbanding Jive Records, along with Arista and J Records. With the shutdown, Pink and all other artists previously signed to the labels, would release any future material through RCA Records. In 2011, Joe Riccitelli, an executive with the label, announced that Pink was preparing to enter the studio to begin work on her sixth studio album, to be released in September 2012. On February 29, 2012, Pink took to her Twitter account and confirmed that she is currently in the writing process for her new record. On June 19, 2012, Pink announced via video on Twitter that the first single from her upcoming album will be called "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" and that it was released on July 9, 2012. She added, "I think you're going to like it, because I really like it, and I like it enough for all of us." However, the demo version of the song leaked on July 1, 2012, a week before its scheduled release. The next day, it was released via Pink's official page and her YouTube account. On July 4, 2012, Pink announced that her sixth studio album will be titled "The Truth About Love".
Release and promotion.
On September 6, 2012, Pink performed "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" for the first time with "Get the Party Started" at the 2012 MTV Music Video Awards. On September 10, 2012, Pink performed "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" and "Who Knew" on "The Ellen DeGeneres Show".
 Pink also released lyric videos for all the album's tracks (not including the bonus tracks) all on her official VEVO account. On September 14, 2012, Pink appeared on Alan Carr's show Chatty Man, performing her first single "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" and taking part in an interview. On November 18, 2012, Pink performed 'Try" at the American Music Awards of 2012.
Singles.
"Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" was released as the lead single from the album. An uptempo pop rock and dance-pop song with dance music influences produced by Greg Kurstin, "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" received general praise from most music critics, with some of them noting its resemblance with "Stronger (What Doesn't Kill You)" which was also produced by Kurstin. The song first appeared on the Australian Singles Chart on the week ending 16 July 2012, peaking at number 1. The song debuted at number 8 on the New Zealand Top 40 chart. It also debuted at number 13 on the Canadian Hot 100 chart. In Ireland, the song debuted at number 23 on the Irish Singles Chart. In the United States, the song charted at number 58 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 chart on the week ending 21 July 2012. The following week, it rose to number 9 and eventually peaked at number 5. "Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" has also recently debuted and number 3 on the UK Singles Chart and number 1 on the Scottish Singles Chart. 
"Try" was released as the second single. The song debuted at twenty-one in New Zealand and eight in Australia. The song became an instant hit, charting within the top 10 in fourteen countries, including at number 9 on the Billboard Hot 100. Its video was highly praised and was reenacted at the 2012 AMA's which lead to a notable increase in the sales of both the song and its host album.
"Just Give Me a Reason" is to be released as the third single in 2013. The song has charted in the US, Canada, France and Switzerland due to strong sales. It was also the third song from "The Truth About Love" to be released on YouTube with a lyric video. A music video was shot and released on P!nk's VEVO account in early February. The video features guest vocalist Nate Ruess and P!nk's husband Carey Hart. 
Other songs.
"Are We All We Are" was serviced to Australian radio in late November, 2012 and has so far peaked at #30 on the Australian Airplay Radio chart.
Critical reception.
"The Truth About Love" received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 77, which indicates "generally favorable reviews", based on 16 reviews. Kyle Anderson of "Entertainment Weekly" dubbed it a "lyrical masterpiece" and praised Pink's songwriting as "unfalteringly vibrant, loaded with righteous anger, irreverence, and a clear eye for the darker side." Caroline Sullivan of "The Guardian" commended her for having "the nous to convert raw emotion into pop-punk earworms", although she commented that the "Mariah-slick motivational ballads ... detract from an otherwise fierce record." Andrew Hampp of "Billboard" called the album "a peerlessly witty, endlessly melodic tour de force". Consequence of Sound's Sarah Grant commended Pink for "filter whatever the current trend is through her unique musical lens" and commented that her "consistency proves she should be taken at her word."
Josh Langhoff of PopMatters praised Pink's hooks and found the album "not bad" for "major label singer-songwriter stuff". Jon Pareles of "The New York Times" felt that she "is committed to pop impact, not to any particular style", and "recognizes some nonstorybook sides of romance." Allmusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine complimented her "eagerto dive into the muck of grown-up emotions, expanding and deepening her music without succumbing to stuffy pretension", and called it "weird and willfully, proudly human, a big pop album about real emotions and one of P!nk's wildest rides." Caryn Ganz of "Spin" called Pink "charmingly unhinged" and wrote that, despite some "objectionable moments" of "rock'n'roll karaoke", "her songs have enough heart, grit, and energy to stand on their own." MSN Music's Robert Christgau viewed that, apart from its last two songs, the album "hit[s every time" and quipped, "Pink (!) and her 21 collaborators fashion a recorded image of her feisty, heartfelt, all-over-the-place love/sex life."
Although he found it "supercatchy", Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" viewed that the album "devolves into self parody" as "Pink strains to shock, peppering songs with gratuitous curse words." Hermoine Hoby of "The Observer" favored its "workmanlike ballads delivered with beyond-workmanlike shading" over its "chunky guitar pop stuffed with shouty, bad-girl choruses", which she considered "dominates" the album. Marc Hirsh of "The A.V. Club" felt that Pink is pandering to her contemporaries in pop music, but complimented her "disarming candor that's all the more bracing because it's delivered with a middle finger." Slant Magazine's Sal Cinquemani viewed the album as formulaic and "competently, often frustratingly more of the same from an artist who still seems capable of much more." Greg Kot of the "Chicago Tribune" perceived "formula production and hack songwriting", but complimented Pink's personality and its "handful" of worthy tracks.
Accolades.
In his list for Barnes & Noble, Robert Christgau named "The Truth About Love" the fourth best album of 2012. It also made NPR Music's list of 50 Favorite Albums Of 2012. It placed #11 on SPIN's list of best Pop Albums of 2012 It became Pink's second consecutive album to receive a Grammy Award nomination for Best Pop Vocal Album, and her third overall to achieve the honor. However, on February 10, the album lost the Grammy to Kelly Clarkson's "Stronger". P!nk became the artist with most nominations in the category, with three, tying up with Clarkson, Madonna and Sarah McLachlan.
Commercial performance.
In Australia, the album debuted at number one and was certified double platinum within its first week of release, becoming Pink's third number one album there. In the United Kingdom, the album debuted at number two with 80,000 copies sold in its first week behind The Killers' "Battle Born". 
"The Truth About Love" became Pink's first chart topping album in the United States, debuting at number one with first week sales of over 281,000. In its second week the album fell to number four with 94,000 copies sold. On Thanksgiving week, following her American Music Awards performance of "Try," the album leaped back into the "Billboard" 200 top ten at #7 with 144,000 copies sold. It has earned a Platinum certification from the RIAA denoting shipments to retailers of over 1 million copies in the US. In 2012, it sold 945,000 copies in the US and 446,000 copies in the UK. In Canada, the album debuted at number one selling 28,000 copies. 
Personnel.
Credits for "The Truth About Love" adapted from Allmusic.
