An adverb is a word that changes or qualifies the meaning of a verb, adjective, other adverb, clause, sentence or any other word or phrase, except that it does not include the adjectives and determiners that directly modify nouns. Adverbs are traditionally regarded as one of the parts of speech, although the wide variety of the functions performed by words classed as adverbs means that it is hard to treat them as a single uniform category. 
Adverbs typically answer questions such as "how?", "in what way?", "when?", "where?", and "to what extent?". This function is called the adverbial function, and is realized not just by single words (i.e., adverbs) but by adverbial phrases and adverbial clauses.
Uses.
Adverbs are words like "slowly", "now", "soon", and "suddenly." An adverb usually modifies a verb or a verb phrase. It provides information about the manner, place, time, frequency, certainty, or other circumstances of the activity denoted by the verb or verb phrase.
1. She was walking slowly ("Slowly" is the adverb.)
2. The kids are playing together. (Here, the adverb "together" provides information about how the kids are playing.)
Adverbs can also modify adjectives and other adverbs.
1. You are quite right. (Here, the adverb "quite" modifies the adjective "right".)
2. She spoke quite loudly. (Here, the adverb "quite" modifies another adverb – "loudly".)
In English, adverbs of manner (answering the question "how?") are often formed by adding "-ly" to adjectives. Other languages often have similar methods for deriving adverbs from adjectives (French, for example, uses the suffix "-ment"), or else use the same form for both adjectives and adverbs. Some examples are listed under below.
Where the meaning permits, adverbs may undergo comparison, taking comparative and superlative forms. In English this is usually done by adding "more" and "most" before the adverb ("more slowly, most slowly"), although there are a few adverbs that take inflected forms, such as "well", for which "better" and "best" are used.
For more information about the use of adverbs in English, see . For use in other languages, see below, and the articles on individual languages and their grammars.
Adverbs as a "catch-all" category.
Adverbs are considered a part of speech in traditional English grammar and are still included as a part of speech in grammar taught in schools and used in dictionaries. However, modern grammarians recognize that words traditionally grouped together as adverbs serve a number of different functions. Some would go so far as to call adverbs a "catch-all" category that includes all words that do not belong to one of the other parts of speech.
When this approach is taken, it is seen that adverbs fall into a number of different categories. For example, some adverbs can be used to modify an entire sentence, whereas others cannot. Even when a sentential adverb has other functions, the meaning is often not the same. For example, in the sentences "She gave birth naturally" and "Naturally, she gave birth", the word "naturally" has different meanings. "Naturally" as a sentential adverb means something like "of course" and as a verb-modifying adverb means "in a natural manner". This "naturally" distinction demonstrates that the class of sentential adverbs is a closed class (there is resistance to adding new words to the class), whereas the class of adverbs that modify verbs isn't.
Words like "very" and "particularly" afford another useful example. We can say "Perry is very fast", but not "Perry very won the race". These words can modify adjectives but not verbs. On the other hand, there are words like "here" and "there" that cannot modify adjectives. We can say "The sock looks good there" but not "It is a there beautiful sock". The fact that many adverbs can be used in more than one of these functions can confuse this issue, and it may seem like splitting hairs to say that a single adverb is really two or more words that serve different functions. However, this distinction can be useful, especially considering adverbs like "naturally" that have different meanings in their different functions. Huddleston distinguishes between a "word" and a "lexicogrammatical-word".
"Not" is an interesting case. Grammarians have a difficult time categorizing it, and it probably belongs in its own class
Adverbs in specific languages.
Listed below are some of the principles for formation and use of adverbs in certain languages. For more information, see the articles on individual languages and their grammars.
