Jennifer Marie Morrison (born April 12, 1979) is an American actress, model, and film producer. She is best known for her role as Dr. Allison Cameron in "House", and Emma Swan in the current ABC adventure fantasy television series "Once Upon a Time". She also portrayed Zoey Pierson in the sixth season of "How I Met Your Mother".
Early life.
Jennifer Morrison was born in Chicago, Illinois, and raised in Arlington Heights, Illinois. She is the eldest of three children with a sister, Julia, and a brother, Daniel. Her father, David L. Morrison, is a retired music teacher who was named teacher of the year by the Illinois State Board of Education in 2003. Morrison's mother, Judy Morrison, is also a retired teacher. 
Morrison attended South Middle School then graduated from Prospect High School in 1997 where her parents worked. She played clarinet in the school's marching band, sang in the choir and was a cheerleader with the school's pep squad. She attended Loyola University Chicago where she majored in Theatre and minored in English, graduating in 2000. She studied with the Steppenwolf Theatre Company before moving to Los Angeles to pursue a career in film and television.
Career.
Jennifer Morrison started her career as a child model, appearing in print advertisements for JCPenney and Montgomery Ward and commercials for Rice Krispies and Mondo. In May 1992, she was featured on the cover of "Sports Illustrated for Kids" with basketball star Michael Jordan.
She made her film debut at the age of fifteen as the daughter of Richard Gere and Sharon Stone in the 1994 film, "Intersection", and later appeared as Samantha in "Stir of Echoes" with Kevin Bacon in 1999. Her first leading role came in the 2000 film "", and she has since gone on to appear in films including "Grind" with Adam Brody, "Surviving Christmas" with Ben Affleck and James Gandolfini, and "Mr. & Mrs. Smith" with Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie in 2003, 2004 and 2005, respectively.
She has worked on several hit television shows, including "Touched by an Angel" and "Dawson's Creek" before landing the role of immunologist Dr. Allison Cameron on "House" in 2004 co-starring alongside Hugh Laurie. In 2006, she starred in and produced the independent film "Flourish". Morrison is also one of the producers that found "Glee" during its early draft and brought it to attention of writer Ryan Murphy, who with Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan, adapted it into a television series. Morrison did not stay involved creatively, but is credited as an associated producer on the first season for her involvement in finding it and helping it get into the right hands.
In 2007, Morrison appeared as Kirce James in the computer game "", a character who frequently interacts with the player during the course of the GDI campaign.
Her film projects that year included "Big Stan" alongside Rob Schneider, and "The Murder of Princess Diana", a television movie based on the book of the same name by Noel Botham. Produced by Lifetime and Working Title Television, Morrison portrays an American journalist, Rachel, who witnesses the car crash which took the life of Diana, Princess of Wales.
In 2009 Morrison returned to the big screen, appearing in the opening scene of J. J. Abrams' "Star Trek" reboot as James T. Kirk's mother, Winona.
Morrison has also appeared in music videos for Nick Lachey ("Shut Up"), and The Donnas ("Too Bad About Your Girl"). She also has appeared on two "TV Guide" covers with her "House" co-stars, and has been featured in photoshoots with "In Style", "Stuff", "Entertainment Weekly" and "Premiere", among others. She is currently represented by Abrams Artists Agency. Morrison landed the cover of "Health" in the 2009 July/August issue.
After her contract on "House" was not renewed, it was announced on December 17, 2009, that Morrison had garnered the role of Kate Keller, Helen Keller's mother, in the Broadway-bound revival of "The Miracle Worker". Morrison left "House" in Season 6: Episode 8 called "Teamwork". In 2010, however, she did make a return to "House" in Season 6: Episode 17 called "Lockdown", which was directed by Hugh Laurie. In the episode she concluded her character's storyline.
In the fall of 2010 Morrison appeared as a guest-star in the fourth episode of NBC's "Chase". She played the role of Faith, a single mother-turned-fugitive, who embarks on a bloody killing spree across Texas with her daughter in tow. She joined the cast of CBS's "How I Met Your Mother" as recurring character Zoey Pierson, a mischievous architecture nerd and love interest of main character Ted Mosby, and "the biggest female character we’ve maybe ever added to the show in Ted’s life", according to executive producer Craig Thomas.
In 2011 Morrison co-starred alongside Joel Edgerton, Tom Hardy, and Nick Nolte in "Warrior", a film about two estranged brothers who enter a mixed martial arts tournament and are forced to confront their struggling relationship with each other and with their father. Morrison plays the wife of Edgerton's character, struggling to keep her family together. Since October 2011, Morrison has had a starring role in ABC's "Once Upon a Time". She plays the role of Emma Swan, a bail bonds collector, whose biological son claims that she is the missing daughter of Snow White and Prince Charming. She holds the key to saving the real and fantasy worlds.
Morrison returned to "House" in the series finale called "Everybody Dies" that aired on May 21, 2012.
Personal life.
 started dating "House" co-star Jesse Spencer in July 2004. Spencer proposed to Morrison on December 23, 2006, at the Eiffel Tower and the two had planned to marry later in 2007. In August 2007 the couple called off their engagement. 
Morrison is dating "Once Upon a Time" co-star Sebastian Stan as of May 2012.
