Morena Baccarin (, born June 2, 1979) is a Brazilian American film and television actress best known for roles in several American science fiction television series: as Inara Serra in the series "Firefly" and the follow-up film "Serenity"; as Adria in the series "Stargate SG-1" and the follow-up film ""; and as Anna in the 2009 version of the series "V". She currently co-stars as Jessica Brody in the Showtime series "Homeland".
Early life and education.
Baccarin was born in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Her mother is Brazilian stage and TV actress Vera Setta, and her father is Fernando Baccarin, a Brazilian journalist of Italian descent. When she was 7, Baccarin moved with her family to Greenwich Village, New York, as her father was transferred to Globo TV's headquarters in the United States, working as editor. Baccarin attended Public School 41 and New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies, where she and her future "Homeland" costar, Claire Danes, were classmates. She later attended the Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts before she entered the theater program at the Juilliard School, where she was in the Drama Division's "Group 29" (1996–2000).
Career.
Baccarin landed her first film role in the improvised fashion world comedy "Perfume" (2001). This was followed by a lead role in the film festival hit "Way Off Broadway" (2001). Baccarin appeared with Natalie Portman and understudied for her role in the acclaimed Central Park production of "The Seagull". The science-fiction drama "Firefly" was Baccarin's first television series and she reprised her role of Inara Serra in the 2005 film "Serenity". 
In February 2005, Baccarin provided the voice for Black Canary in multiple episodes of the animated series "Justice League Unlimited". She also guest starred in three episodes of the television series "The O.C." in 2006. Baccarin also appeared in the unaired pilot episode of "It's Always Sunny in Philadelphia", playing Carmen, a male-to-female transsexual.
It was announced in April 2006 that Baccarin would be playing the adult version of Adria, a recurring villain in the tenth season of "Stargate SG-1". She first appeared in season 10 episode "Counterstrike" as adult Adria (the younger versions of Adria were previously played by other actresses). Baccarin reprised her role as Adria in the movie "".
In May 2009, Baccarin made her off-Broadway debut in Theresa Rebeck's television satire "Our House" at Playwrights Horizons in New York City.
Baccarin landed the lead role of Anna, the leader of the alien Visitors, in ABC's 2009–2011 series "V", a remake of the 1984 series. In May 2011, shortly following the airing of the show's second season finale, it was announced that the show would not return for a third season.
That same month, Baccarin joined the cast of the Showtime television drama "Homeland", for which she won acclaim for her performance as the conflicted wife of a former prisoner of war.
Personal life.
Baccarin married director Austin Chick over Thanksgiving in 2011.
