The Pianist is a 2002 biographical war drama film directed by Roman Polanski, written by Ronald Harwood and starring Adrien Brody. It is an adaptation of "Death of a City", a World War II memoir by the Polish-Jewish musician Władysław Szpilman. The film is a co-production between Poland, France, Germany and the United Kingdom.
"The Pianist" met with significant critical praise and received multiple awards and nominations. The film was awarded the Palme d'Or at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival. At the 75th Academy Awards, "The Pianist" won Oscars for Best Director (Polanski), Best Adapted Screenplay (Ronald Harwood) and Best Actor (Brody), and was also nominated for four other awards, including the Academy Award for Best Picture. It also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film and BAFTA Award for Best Direction in 2003 and seven French Césars including Best Picture, Best Director and Best Actor for Brody.
Plot.
In September 1939, Władysław Szpilman, a Polish-Jewish pianist is playing on Polish State radio in Warsaw when it is bombed during Nazi Germany's invasion of Poland at the outbreak of World War II. Hoping for a quick victory, Szpilman rejoices with family when learning that Britain and France have declared war. But Germany defeats Poland in just over a month. Very quickly life for Jews deteriorate as the Nazi authorities prevent them working or owning businesses, and force them to wear Star of David armbands. 
By November 1940, Szpilman and his family have been forced from their home into the overcrowded Warsaw Ghetto where conditions only get worse. People starve, the guards are brutal and corpses are left in the streets. On one occasion, the Szpilmans witness the SS kill an entire family during a Łapanka (raid) in an apartment building across the street. In the summer of 1942, the family are deported to Treblinka extermination camp but Szpilman is saved at the Umschlagplatz by a friend in the Jewish Ghetto Police.
Szpilman becomes a slave labourer working on the "Aryan" side, where he survives a random mass execution. Szpilman learns of a coming Jewish revolt and helps by smuggling weapons into the ghetto, narrowly avoiding a suspicious guard. He then manages to escape and goes into hiding with help from non-Jewish friend Andrzej Bogucki and his wife Janina. In April 1943, Szpilman observes the rise and fall of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising from his window near the ghetto wall. A year goes by and Szpilman is forced to flee after a neighbor discovers him. In a second hiding place provided to him, he is shown into a room with a piano but forced to keep quiet, and suffers jaundice.
In August 1944, the Polish resistance attack a German building across the street from Szpilman's hideout in Ochoto district during the Warsaw Uprising. A tank shells his apartment forcing him to flee and hide elsewhere. Over the course of the next months the city is destroyed and emptied of the population. Szpilman is left to search desperately for shelter and supplies among the ruins. In one house, he is discovered by the Wehrmacht officer Wilm Hosenfeld, who learns that Szpilman is a pianist. Asked to perform by the German, the decrepit Szpilman plays "Ballade in G minor" on a grand piano. Hosenfeld, who was moved by the music, allows Szpilman to hide in the attic of the empty house. Over the coming months, the German officer regularly brings him food. 
In January 1945, the Germans are forced to retreat due to the advance of the Red Army. Hosenfeld meets Szpilman for the last time promising he will listen to him on Polish Radio after the war. He gives Szpilman his greatcoat to keep warm and leaves. However this act has almost fatal consequences for Szpilman because he mistaken as a German and shot at by Polish troops liberating Warsaw.
In Spring 1945, former inmates of a Nazi concentration camp pass a Soviet prisoner-of-war camp holding captured German soldiers and verbally abuse them. One ex-prisoner says he used to be a violinist. On hearing this, the captured Hosenfeld asks the violinist if he knows Szpilman, which the violinist confirms. The German asks if Szpilman can return the favor. Later the violinist brings Szpilman back to the site but it is only a grassy field. 
Later, Szpilman performs Chopin's "Grand Polonaise brillante" to a large and prestigious audience. 
An epilogue states that Szpilman died at the age of 88 in 2000 while Hosenfeld died in Soviet captivity in 1952.
Production.
The story had deep connections with director Roman Polanski because he escaped from the Kraków Ghetto as a child after the death of his mother. He ended up living in a Polish farmer's barn until the war's end. His father almost died in the camps, but they reunited after the end of World War II.
Joseph Fiennes was Polanski's first choice for the lead role, but he turned it down due to a previous commitment to the theatre. Over 1,400 actors auditioned for the role of Szpilman at a casting call in London. Unsatisfied with all who tried, Polanski sought to cast Adrien Brody, whom he saw as ideal for the role during their first meeting in Paris.
Principal photography on "The Pianist" began on 9 February 2001 in Babelsberg Studio in Potsdam, Germany. The Warsaw Ghetto and the surrounding city were recreated on the backlot of Babelsberg Studio as they would have looked during the war. Old Soviet Army barracks were used to create the ruined city, as they were going to be destroyed anyway.
The first scenes of the film were shot at the old army barracks. Soon after, the film crew moved to a villa in Potsdam, which served as the house where Szpilman meets Hosenfeld. On 2 March 2001, filming then moved to an abandoned Soviet military hospital in Beelitz, Germany. The scenes that featured German soldiers destroying a Warsaw hospital with flamethrowers were filmed here. On 15 March, filming finally moved to Babelsberg Studios. The first scene shot at the studio was the complex and technically demanding scene in which Szpilman witnesses the ghetto uprising. 
Filming at the studios ended on 26 March and moved to Warsaw on 29 March. The rundown district of Praga was chosen for filming because of its abundance of original buildings. The art department built onto these original buildings, re-creating World War II–era Poland with signs and posters from the period. Additional filming also took place around Warsaw. The Umschlagplatz scene where Szpilman, his family and hundreds of other Jews wait to be taken to the extermination camps was filmed at the National Defence University of Warsaw.
Principal photography ended in July 2001, and was followed by months of post-production, which took place in Paris, France.
Reception.
"The Pianist" received mostly positive reviews from film critics. It has a 96% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, based on 178 reviews with an average rating of 8.2/10 and the consensus, "Well-acted and dramatically moving, The Pianist is Polanski's best work in years." Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score, gave the film a score of 85/100, based on 40 reviews from critics.
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave a positive review of the film, noting that "perhaps that impassive quality reflects what Roman Polanski wants to say... By showing Szpilman as a survivor but not a fighter or a hero—as a man who does all he can to save himself, but would have died without enormous good luck and the kindness of a few non-Jews—Polanski is reflecting... his own deepest feelings: that he survived, but need not have, and that his mother died and left a wound that had never healed." Michael Wilmington of the "Chicago Tribune" said that the film "is the best dramatic feature I've seen on the Holocaust experience, so powerful a statement on war, inhumanity and art's redemption that it may signal Polanski's artistic redemption." He would later go on to say that the film "illustrates that theme and proves that Polanski's own art has survived the chaos of his life -- and the hell that war and bigotry once made of it." Richard Schickel of "Time" called it a "raw, unblinkable film" and said that "We admire this film for its harsh objectivity and refusal to seek our tears, our sympathies." Mick LaSalle of the "San Francisco Chronicle" said that the film "contains moments of irony, of ambiguity and of strange beauty, as when we finally get a look at Warsaw and see a panorama of destruction, a world of color bombed into black-and-white devastation." He also said that "In the course of showing us a struggle for survival, in all its animal simplicity, Polanski also gives us humanity, in all its complexity." A.O. Scott of "The New York Times" said that Szpilman "comes to resemble one of Samuel Beckett's gaunt existential clowns, shambling through a barren, bombed-out landscape clutching a jar of pickles. He is like the walking punchline to a cosmic jest of unfathomable cruelty." He also felt that "Szpilman's encounter, in the war's last days, with a music-loving Nazi officer... ...courted sentimentality by associating the love of art with moral decency, an equation the Nazis themselves, steeped in Beethoven and Wagner, definitively refuted."
Home release.
"The Pianist" was released on DVD on 26 May 2003 in a double-sided disc Special Edition DVD, with the film on one side and special features on the other. Some Bonus Material included a making-of, interviews with Brody, Polanski, and Harwood, and clips of Szpilman playing the piano. The Polish DVD edition included an audio commentary track by production designer Starski and director of photography Edelman.
Universal Studios Home Entertainment released the film on HD-DVD on 8 January 2008 with extras comprising the featurette "A Story of Survival" and rare footage of the real Wladyslaw Szpilman playing his piano, as well as additional interviews with Adrien Brody and other crew.
Optimum Home Entertainment released "The Pianist" to the European market on Blu-ray as part of their "StudioCanal Collection" on 13 September 2010, and this is the film's second release on Blu-ray. The first was troublesome due to issues with subtitles; the initial BD lacked subtitles for spoken German dialogue. Optimum later rectified this but the initial release also lacked notable special features. The "StudioCanal Collection" version includes an extensive Behind the Scenes look as well as several interviews with the makers of the film and Szpilman's relatives.
