Nigger is a noun in the English language. The word originated as a neutral term referring to black people, as a variation of the Spanish/Portuguese noun "negro", a descendant of the Latin adjective "" ("color black"). Often used slightingly, by the mid 20th century, particularly in the United States, its usage had become unambiguously pejorative, a common ethnic slur usually directed at people of Sub-Saharan African descent.
Etymology and history.
The variants "neger" and "negar", derive from the Spanish and Portuguese word (black), and from the now-pejorative French "nègre" (nigger). Etymologically, "negro", "noir", "nègre", and "nigger" ultimately derive from "nigrum", the stem of the Latin (black) (pronounced which, in every other grammatical case, grammatical gender, and grammatical number besides nominative masculine singular, is "nigr-", the "r" is trilled).
In the Colonial America of 1619, John Rolfe used "negars" in describing the African slaves shipped to the Virginia colony. Later American English spellings, "neger" and "neggar", prevailed in a northern colony, New York under the Dutch, and in metropolitan Philadelphia's Moravian and Pennsylvania Dutch communities; the African Burial Ground in New York City originally was known by the Dutch name "Begraafplaats van de Neger" (Cemetery of the Negro); an early US occurrence of "neger" in Rhode Island, dates from 1625. An alternative word for African Americans was the English word, "Black", used by Thomas Jefferson in his Notes on the State of Virginia. Among Anglophones, the word "nigger" was not always considered derogatory, because it then denoted "black-skinned", a common Anglophone usage. Nineteenth-century English (language) literature features usages of "nigger" without racist connotation, e.g. the Joseph Conrad novella "The Nigger of the 'Narcissus'" (1897). Moreover, Charles Dickens and Mark Twain created characters who used the word as contemporary usage. Twain, in the autobiographic book "Life on the Mississippi" (1883), used the term within quotes, indicating reported usage, but used the term "negro" when speaking in his own narrative persona.
During the fur trade of the early 1800s to the late 1840s in the Western United States, the word was spelled "niggur", and is often recorded in literature of the time. George Fredrick Ruxton often included the word as part of the "mountain man" lexicon, did not indicate that the word was pejorative at the time. "Niggur" was evidently similar to the modern use of dude, or guy. This passage from Ruxton's Life in the Far West illustrates a common use of the word in spoken form—the speaker here referring to himself: "Travler, marm, this niggur's no travler; I ar' a trapper, marm, a mountain-man, wagh!" It was not used as a term exclusively for blacks among mountain men during this period, as Indians, Mexicans, and Frenchmen and Anglos alike could be a "niggur".
By the 1900s, "nigger" had become a pejorative word. In its stead, the term "colored" became the mainstream alternative to "negro" and its derived terms. Abolitionists in Boston, Massachusetts, posted warnings to the "Colored People of Boston and vicinity". Writing in 1904, journalist Clifton Johnson documented the "opprobrious" character of the word "nigger", emphasizing that it was chosen in the South precisely because it was more offensive than "colored." Established as mainstream American English usage, the word "colored" features in the organizational title of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, reflecting the members' racial identity preference at the 1909 foundation. In the Southern United States, the local American English dialect changes the pronunciation of "negro" to "nigra". Linguistically, in developing American English, in the early editions of "A Compendious Dictionary of the English Language" (1806), lexicographer Noah Webster suggested the "neger" new spelling in place of "negro".
By the late 1960s, the social progress achieved by groups in the United States such as the Black Civil Rights Movement (1955–68), had legitimized the racial identity word "black" as mainstream American English usage to denote black-skinned Americans of African ancestry. In the 90's, "Black" was later displaced in favor of the compound blanket term "African American". Moreover, as a compound word, "African American" resembles the vogue word "Afro-American", an early-1970s popular usage. Currently, some black Americans continue to use the word "nigger", often spelled as "nigga" and "niggah", without irony, to either neutralize the word's impact or as a sign of solidarity.
Usages.
British.
In the United Kingdom and the Anglophone world, "nigger" denoted the dark-skinned (non-white) African and Asian (i.e., from India or nearby) peoples colonized into the British Empire, and "dark-skinned foreigners" — in general.
In "A Dictionary of Modern English Usage" (1926), H. W. Fowler states that applying the word "nigger" to "others than full or partial negroes" is "felt as an insult by the person described, & betrays in the speaker, if not deliberate insolence, at least a very arrogant inhumanity"; but the second edition (1965) states: "N. has been described as 'the term that carries with it all the obloquy and contempt and rejection which whites have inflicted on blacks.' ".
Victorian writer Rudyard Kipling used it in 'How the Leopard Got His Spots' and 'A Counting-Out Song' to illustrate the usage of the day. Likewise, P. G. Wodehouse used the phrase "Nigger minstrels" in "Thank You, Jeeves" (1934), the first Jeeves–Bertie novel, in admiration of their artistry and musical tradition.
As recently as the 1950s, it may have been acceptable British usage to say "niggers" when referring to black people, notable in mainstream usages such as "Nigger Boy"–brand candy cigarettes, and the color "nigger brown" or simply "nigger" (dark brown);
however, by the 1970s the term was generally recognized as racist, offensive and potentially illegal along with the unambiguously offensive "nig-nog", and "golliwog". As recently as 2007, the term "nigger brown" reappeared in the model label of a Chinese-made sofa, presumably from an out-dated translation source. Agatha Christie's book " Ten Little Niggers" was first published in London in 1939 and continued to appear under that title until the early 1980s, when it became "And Then There Were None".
North American.
Cultural: Addressing the use of "nigger" by black people, Cornel West said, "There's a certain rhythmic seduction to the word. If you speak in a sentence, and you have to say "cat", "companion", or "friend", as opposed to "nigger", then the rhythmic presentation is off. That rhythmic language is a form of historical memory for black people... When Richard Pryor came back from Africa, and decided to stop using the word onstage, he would sometimes start to slip up, because he was so used to speaking that way. It was the right word at the moment to keep the rhythm together in his sentence making." Contemporarily, the implied racism of the word "nigger" has rendered its usages social taboo. In the US, magazines and newspapers often do not use it, instead printing "family-friendly" censored versions, usually "n*gg*r", "n**ger", "n——", and "the N-word"; however, historians and social activists, such as Dick Gregory, criticize the euphemisms and their usage as intellectually dishonest, because using the euphemism "the N-word" instead of "nigger" robs younger generations of Americans of the full history of Black people in America.
Political: Louisiana Governor Earl Long used "nigger" in advocating full voting rights for Black Americans; in that time, like "colored" and "negro", it was mainstream usage in the American South. In 1948, the "Washington Post" newspaper's coverage of the presidential campaign of the segregationist politician Strom Thurmond, employed the periphrasis "the less-refined word for black people". In explaining his refusal to be conscripted to fight the Vietnam War (1965–75), professional boxer Muhammed Ali said, "No Vietcong ever called me nigger"; later, his modified answer was the title "No Vietnamese Ever Called Me Nigger" (1968) of a documentary about the front-line lot of the US Army Black soldier in combat in Vietnam. An Ali biographer reports that, when interviewed by Robert Lipsyte in 1966, the boxer actually said, "I ain't got no quarrel with them Viet Cong". The word can be invoked politically for effect. When Detroit mayor Kwame Kilpatrick came under intense scrutiny for his personal conduct in 2008, he deviated from an address to city council, saying, "In the past 30 days, I've been called a nigger more than any time in my entire life." Opponents accused him of "playing the Race Card" to save his political life.
On February 28, 2007, the New York City Council symbolically banned, with a formal resolution, the use of the word "nigger"; however, there is no penalty for using it. The New York City resolution also requests excluding from Grammy Award consideration every song whose lyrics contain the word "nigger", however Ron Roecker, vice president of communication for the Recording Academy doubts that it will have any effect on actual nominations.
In 2012, the abbreviated phrase "renig", which is a combination of "nigger" and "renege", started being used as a slogan against U.S. President Barack Obama.
Sport: In the first half of the twentieth century, before Major League Baseball was racially integrated, dark-skinned and dark-complexion players were nicknamed "Nig"; examples are: Johnny Beazley (1941–49), Joe Berry (1921–22), Bobby Bragan (1940–48), Nig Clarke (1905–20), Nig Cuppy (1892–1901), Nig Fuller (1902), Johnny Grabowski (1923–31), Nig Lipscomb (1937), Charlie Niebergall (1921–24), Nig Perrine (1907), and Frank Smith (1904–15). The 1930s movie "The Bowery" with George Raft and Wallace Beery includes a NYC sports-bar named "Nigger Joe's".
Denotational extension.
The denotations of "nigger" also comprehend non-white and racially disadvantaged people; the US politician Ron Dellums said, "... it's time for somebody to lead all of America's niggers". Jerry Farber's 1967 protest, The Student as Nigger invoked the word as a metaphor for the victims of an authoritarian society. In 1969, in the UK, in the course of being interviewed by a "Nova" magazine reporter, artist Yoko Ono said, "... woman is the nigger of the world"; three years later, her husband, John Lennon, published the song "Woman is the Nigger of the World" (1972)—about the virtually universal exploitation of woman–which was socially and politically controversial to US sensibilities. In 1978 singer Patti Smith used the word in "Rock N Roll Nigger". In 1979 singer Elvis Costello used the phrase "white nigger" in "Oliver's Army", a song describing the experiences of working-class soldiers in the British military forces. Later, the producers of the British talent show "Stars in Their Eyes" forced a contestant to censor one of its lines, changing "... all it takes is one itchy trigger – One more widow, one less white nigger" to "... one less white figure". In his autobiography "White Niggers of America: The Precocious Autobiography of a Quebec "Terrorist"" (1968), Pierre Vallières, a Front de libération du Québec leader refers to the oppression of the Québécois people in North America.
In his memoir, "All Souls," Michael Patrick MacDonald describes how many white residents of the Old Colony housing project in South Boston used this meaning to degrade the people considered to be of lower status, whether white or black.
Other languages.
Many other languages have words that sound the same as nigger (are homophonic), but do not necessarily have the same meaning, while on the other hand having ethnic slurs dissimilar to 'nigger' but carrying the same meaning.
Literary.
In the US, the recurrent (reading curricula) controversy about the "vocabulary" of the novel "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" (1885), by Mark Twain — American literature (usually) taught in US schools – about the slave South, risks censorship because of 215 (counted) occurrences of the word "nigger", most refer to Jim, Huckleberry's escaped-slave raft-mate. Twain's advocates note that the novel is composed in then-contemporary vernacular usage, not racist stereotype, because Jim, the black man, is a sympathetic character in the nineteenth-century "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn". The book was re-published in 2010 with edits removing "the 'N' word" as reported in "Time" online. The "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" has been the subject of controversy in Arizona, where a parent group's attempt to have it removed from a required reading list was struck down by the court.
Moreover, unlike the literary escaped slave Jim, antebellum slaves used the artifice of self-deprecation (known as "Uncle Toms"), in pandering to societal racist assumptions about the black man's low intelligence, by advantageously using the word "nigger" to escape the violence inherent to slavery. Implicit to "Uncle Tomming" was the unspoken reminder to white folk that a presumably inferior and sub-human person could not, reasonably, be held responsible for poorly realized work, a kitchen fire, or any such catastrophic offense. The artificial self-deprecation deflected responsibility, in hope of escaping the violent wraths of overseer and master. Using "nigger" as a self-referential identity term also was a way of avoiding white suspicion, of encountering an intelligent slave, and so put whites at their ease. In context, a slave who referred to himself, or another black man, as a "nigger" presumed the master's "perceiving" him as a slave who has accepted his societally sub-ordinate role as private property, thus, not (potentially) subversive of the authority of the master's white supremacy.
Other late-nineteenth- and early twentieth-century British literary usages suggest neutral usage. The popular Victorian era entertainment, the Gilbert and Sullivan operetta "The Mikado" (1885) twice uses the word "nigger". In the song ', the executioner, Ko-ko, sings of executing the "nigger serenader and the others of his race", personified by black-faced singers singing minstrel songs. In the song ', the Mikado sings of the punishment for older women who dye their hair or wear corsets, to be "Blacked like a nigger/With permanent walnut juice." Both lyrics are usually changed for contemporary performances. In addition, "Ten Little Niggers" (1939) was the original British title of Agatha Christie's novel "And Then There Were None", which has also been known by the alternate title "Ten Little Indians".
The Reverend W. V. Awdry's "The Railway Series" (1945–72) story "Henry's Sneeze", originally described soot-covered boys with the phrase "as black as niggers". In 1972, after complaints, the description was edited to "as black as soot", in the subsequent editions. Rev. Awdry is known for Thomas the Tank Engine (1946).
"How the Leopard Got His Spots", in "Just So Stories" (1902), by Rudyard Kipling, tells of an Ethiopian man and a leopard, both originally sand-colored, deciding to camouflage themselves with painted spots, for hunting in tropical forest. The story originally included a scene wherein the leopard (now spotted) asks the Ethiopian man why he does not want spots. In contemporary editions of "How the Leopard Got His Spots", the Ethiopian's original reply: "Oh, plain black's best for a nigger", has been edited to, "Oh, plain black's best for me." Again, Kipling uses the word in "A Counting-Out Song" ("Land and Sea Tales for Scouts and Guides", 1923), the rhyme reads: "Eenie Meenie Mainee, Mo! Catch a nigger by the toe!"
In short story, "The Basement Room" (1935), by Graham Greene, the (sympathetic) servant character, Baines, tells the admiring boy, son of his employer, of his African British colony service, "You wouldn't believe it now, but I've had forty niggers under me, doing what I told them to". Replying to the boy's question: "Did you ever shoot a nigger?" Bains answers: "I never had any call to shoot. Of course I carried a gun. But you didn't need to treat them bad, that just made them stupid. Why, I loved some of those dammed niggers." The cinematic version of "The Basement Room" short story, "The Fallen Idol" (1948), directed by Carol Reed, replaced novelist Greene's "niggers" usage with "natives". 
Popular culture.
In the US and the UK, the word "nigger" featured in branding and packaging consumer products, e.g. "Nigger Hair Tobacco" and "Niggerhead Oysters", Brazil nuts were called "nigger toes", et cetera. As racism became unacceptable in mainstream culture, the tobacco brand became "Bigger Hare" and the canned goods brand became "Negro Head". The Chinese Nanhai De Xing Leather Shoes Habiliment Co., Ltd.'s online store describes the color of a model of man's leather boots as "nigger-brown".
Cinema.
The movie "Blazing Saddles" (1974) used "nigger" to ridicule US racism. In "Kentucky Fried Movie" (1977), the sequence titled "Danger Seekers" features a stuntman effecting the dangerous stunt of shouting "Niggers!" at a group of black people, then fleeing when they chased him.
The movie "Full Metal Jacket" (1987) depicts black and white U.S. Marines enduring boot camp and later fighting together in Vietnam. "Nigger" is used by soldiers of both races in jokes and as expressions of bravado ("put a nigger behind the trigger", says the black Corporal "Eightball"), with racial differences among the men seen as secondary to their shared exposure to the dangers of combat: Gunnery Sergeant Hartman (R. Lee Ermey) says, "There is no racial bigotry here. We do not look down on niggers, kikes, wops or greasers, because here you are all equally worthless."
"Die Hard with a Vengeance" (1995) featured a scene where villain Simon Peter Gruber (Jeremy Irons) required NYPD Lt. John McClane (Bruce Willis) to wear a sandwich board reading "I hate niggers" while standing on a street corner in predominantly-black Harlem, resulting in McClane meeting Zeus Carver (Samuel L. Jackson) as Carver rescued McClane from being attacked by neighborhood toughs.
Nigger was the name given to a black Labrador dog that belonged to British Royal Air Force Wing Commander Guy Gibson in the 1940s. In the Second World War Gibson led the successful Operation Chastise attack on dams in Germany. The dog's name was used as a single codeword whose transmission conveyed that the Möhne dam had been breached. In the 1955 film "The Dam Busters" about the raid the dog's name and codeword were mentioned several times. The name was not chosen to be insulting in real life or the film, it was a word common at the time.
Some of the scenes in which the dog's name is uttered were later shown in the 1982 film "Pink Floyd The Wall".
In 1999, the British television network ITV broadcast a censored version with each of the twelve utterances of "Nigger" deleted. Replying to complaints against its censorship, ITV blamed the regional broadcaster, London Weekend Television, which, in turn, blamed a junior employee as the unauthorised censor. In June 2001, when ITV re-broadcast the censored version of "The Dam Busters", the Index on Censorship criticised it as "unnecessary and ridiculous" censorship breaking the continuity of the film and the story. In January 2012 the film was shown uncensored on ITV4, but with a warning at the start that the film contained racial terms from the historical period which some people could find offensive. Versions of the film edited for US television have the dog's name altered to "Trigger".
In a remake of "The Dam Busters" by Peter Jackson announced in 2008, Stephen Fry, the writer of the screenplay, said there was "no question in America that you could ever have a dog called the N-word". In the remake the dog's name is "Digger".
American director Quentin Tarantino has been criticized by some critics for the heavy usage of the word "nigger" in his movies, especially in "Jackie Brown", where the word is used 38 times and "Django Unchained", used 110 times.
Literature.
In 1897, Joseph Conrad penned a novella titled "The Nigger of the Narcissus", whose titular character, James Wait, is a West Indian black sailor on board the merchant ship "Narcissus" sailing from Bombay to London. In the United States, the novel was first published with the title "The Children of the Sea: A Tale of the Forecastle", at the insistence by the publisher, Dodd, Mead and Company, that no one would buy or read a book with the word nigger in its title, not because the word was deemed offensive but that a book about a black man would not sell. In 2009, WordBridge Publishing published a new edition titled "The N-Word of the Narcissus", which also excised the word nigger from the text. According to the publisher, the point was to get rid of the offensive word, which may have led readers to avoid the book, and make it more accessible. Though praised in some quarters, many others denounced the change as censorship.
Mark Twain's novel "Adventures of Huckleberry Finn" has long been the subject of controversy for its racial content, including its use of the word "nigger" as applied to the escaped slave character Jim. "Huckleberry Finn" was the fifth most challenged book during the 1990s, according to the American Library Association. In 2011, a new edition of the book published by NewSouth Books replaced the word "nigger" throughout the book with the word "slave" and also removed the word "injun". The change was spearheaded by Twain scholar Alan Gribben in the hope of "countering the 'pre-emptive censorship'" that results from the book's being removed from school curricula over language concerns. The changes sparked outrage from critics and scholars.
Music.
Responding to accusations of racism after referring to "niggers" in the lyrics of the Guns N' Roses song, "One in a Million", Axl Rose stated "I was pissed off about some black people that were trying to rob me. I wanted to insult those particular black people. I didn't want to support racism."
The country music artist David Allan Coe used the racial terms "redneck", "white trash", and "nigger" in the songs "If That Ain't Country, I'll Kiss Your Ass" and "Nigger Fucker". In the 1960s, record producer J. D. "Jay" Miller published pro-racial segregation music with the "Reb Rebel" label featuring racist songs by Johnny Rebel and others, demeaning black Americans and the Black Civil Rights movement.
Contemporarily, rap groups such as N.W.A. (Niggaz with Attitudes), re-popularized the usage in their songs.
Theatre.
The musical "Show Boat" (from 1927 until 1946) features the word and "nigger" as originally integral to the lyrics of "Ol' Man River" and "Cotton Blossom"; although deleted from the cinema versions, it is included in the 1988 EMI recording of the original score. Musical theatre historian Miles Kreuger and conductor John McGlinn propose that the word was not an insult, but a blunt illustration of how white people then perceived black people.
Chinese translations.
"Nigger" or "nigger brown" were used in Britain as standard colour names, in the same way as "lime green". This may have been included in some language translation sources.
In April 2007, a dark brown leather sofa set, sold by Vanaik Furniture and Mattress Store in Toronto, Canada, was labelled as "Nigger-brown" color. Investigation determined that the Chinese manufacturer used an outdated version of Kingsoft's Chinese-to-English translation software for writing the tags; it translated the Chinese "dark-brown" characters to "Nigger-brown", and neither the Canadian supplier nor the store owner had noticed the incorrectly translated tag; subsequently, Kingsoft corrected its translation software.
In 2012, a knock off site of the clothing branch Abercrombie & Fitch based in China called abercrombie-and-fitchoutlet.com offered "nigger brown pants" for sale as the result of a faulty Chinese-to-English translator. This went viral on Twitter after people mistakenly believed that Abercrombie & Fitch were selling the product
Derivations.
Place names.
The word "nigger" features in official place-names, such as "Nigger Bill Canyon", "Nigger Hollow", and "Niggertown Marsh". In 1967, the United States Board on Geographic Names changed the word "nigger" to "Negro" in 143 place names. First changed to "Negrohead Mountain", a peak above Santa Monica, California was renamed on (February 2010) to Ballard Mountain in honor of John Ballard, a black pioneer who settled the area in the 19th century. "Nigger Head Mountain", at Burnet, Texas, was so named because the forest atop it resembled a black man's hair. In 1966, the US First Lady, Lady Bird Johnson, denounced the racist name, asking the U.S. Board on Geographic Names and the U.S. Forest Service to rename it, becoming "Colored Mountain" in 1968; and in West Texas, "Dead Nigger Creek" was renamed "Dead Negro Draw". "Nigger Nate Grade", near Temecula, California, named for Nate Harrison, an ex-slave and settler, was renamed "Nathan Harrison Grade Road" in 1955, at the request of the NAACP.
In northwestern North America, particularly in Canada and the US, there are places which feature many uses of the word "nigger". At Penticton, British Columbia, Canada, "Niggertoe Mountain" was renamed Mount Nkwala. The place-name derived from a 1908 Christmas story about three black men who died in a blizzard; the next day, the bodies of two were found at the foot of the mountain. A point on the Lower Mississippi River, in West Baton Rouge Parish, named "Free Nigger Point" until the late twentieth century, first was renamed "Free Negro Point", but currently is named "Wilkinson Point". "Nigger Head Rock", protruding from a cliff above Highway 421, north of Pennington Gap, Virginia, was renamed "Great Stone Face" in the 1970s.
Derivatives.
"The N-word" euphemism.
The euphemism "the " became mainstream American English usage during the racially contentious murder trial of ex-footballer O. J. Simpson in 1995.
Key prosecution witness Detective Mark Fuhrman, of the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) – who denied using racist language on duty – impeached himself with his prolific use of "nigger" in tape recordings about his police work. The recordings, by screenplay writer Laura McKinney, were from a 1985 research session wherein the detective assisted her with a screenplay about LAPD policewomen. Fuhrman excused his use of the word saying he used "nigger" in the context of his "bad cop" persona. Linguistically, the popular press reporting and discussing Fuhrman's testimony substituted "the N-word" in place of "nigger".
Homophones.
"Nigra" is the Latin feminine form of "niger" (black), used in biologic and anatomic names such as substantia nigra (black substance).
The word "niggardly" (miserly) is etymologically unrelated to "nigger", derived from the Old Norse word "nig" (stingy) and the Middle English word "nigon". In the US, this word has been misinterpreted as related to "nigger" and taken as offensive. In January 1999, David Howard, a white Washington, D.C. city employee, was compelled to resign after using "niggardly"—in a financial context—while speaking with black colleagues, who took umbrage. After reviewing the misunderstanding, Mayor Anthony Williams offered to reinstate Howard, who refused reinstatement for another job elsewhere in the mayor's government.
The portmanteau word "wigger" (white + nigger) denotes a white person emulating "street black behavior", hoping acceptance to the hip hop, thug, and gangsta sub-cultures.
Intragroup versus intergroup usage.
Black hearers often react differently to the term when it is used by white speakers and by black speakers. In the former case, it is regularly understood as an insult; in the latter, it may carry notes of in-group disparagement, or even be understood as neutral or affectionate, a possible instance of reappropriation.
Among the black community, the slur "nigger" is almost always rendered as "nigga", a pronunciation emphasizing the unique intra-racial dialect of black people. A self-referential pronoun in African American Vernacular English usage popularized by the rap and hip-hop music cultures. In these situations, it is used as in-group lexicon and speech, wherein it is not necessarily derogatory.
Acceptance of intra-group usage of the word "nigga" is still debated, although it has established a foothold amongst younger generations. The NAACP denounces the use of both "nigga" and "nigger". Mixed-race usage of "nigga" is still considered taboo, particularly if the speaker is white. However, trends indicate that usage of the term in intragroup settings is increasing even amongst white youth due to the popularity of rap and hip hop culture.
According to Arthur K. Spears (Diverse Issues in Higher Education, 2006)
In many African-American neighborhoods, nigga is simply the most common term used to refer to any male, of any race or ethnicity. Increasingly, the term has been applied to any person, male or female. "Where y'all niggas goin?" is said with no self-consciousness or animosity to a group of women, for the routine purpose of obtaining information. The point: Nigga is evaluatively neutral in terms of its inherent meaning; it may express positive, neutral or negative attitudes;
</ref>
