Aubrey Christina Plaza (born June 26, 1984) is an American actress and comedian who has gained popularity with her deadpan-style comedy. She is a series regular in "Parks and Recreation" portraying the role of April Ludgate.
Plaza began her career as an intern. After performing improv and sketch comedy at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater, she appeared in the Web series "The Jeannie Tate Show". Aubrey would later appear in films such as "Funny People" and "Scott Pilgrim Vs. The World".
In 2012, Plaza earned her first Lead role in a major film, starring alongside Mark Duplass in the comedy "Safety Not Guaranteed".
Early life.
Plaza was born in Wilmington, Delaware, the daughter of Bernadette, an attorney, and David Plaza, a financial advisor. She has two younger sisters, Renee and Natalie, the latter of whom she uses as inspiration for her teenage character April Ludgate on "Parks and Recreation".
Plaza was named after the song "Aubrey" by Bread. Her father is Puerto Rican and her mother is of Irish and English descent. Plaza has stated: "I was like the only diverse kid in my high school, and I'm half-Puerto Rican. But yeah, I have a huge family and tons of cousins in Puerto Rico." She participated in productions with the Wilmington Drama League.
Plaza graduated from Ursuline Academy in 2002, and New York University's Tisch School of the Arts in 2006. While at NYU in 2004, Plaza suffered a stroke that caused temporary paralysis and expressive aphasia, but she has fully recovered.
Career.
Plaza has said that she has had many internships and that she "was an intern for Samba Post-Its." One of her jobs was to "literally wallpaper a bathroom with Post-Its." She also worked as an NBC page.
She has performed improv and sketch comedy at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater since 2004. She also performed stand-up and has appeared at the Laugh Factory and The Improv. In 2008, she participated in the Improv Everywhere prank "Mobile Desktop", in which she and two other people brought desktop PCs, including a CRT monitor, tower computer, keyboard and mouse into a Starbucks and used them as people use laptops there.
Plaza starred in the online series "The Jeannie Tate Show", and stars as Robin Gibney in ESPN's "Mayne Street". She also appeared in the first episode of "Terrible Decisions with Ben Schwartz" on Funny or Die.
She played Seth Rogen's love interest, Daisy, in 2009's "Funny People" directed by Judd Apatow. She also had roles in the comedy films "Scott Pilgrim vs. the World" and Derrick Comedy's "Mystery Team", which debuted at 2009 Sundance. She appeared in a CollegeHumor short alongside Jason Bateman and Will Arnett.
She plays April Ludgate, the deadpan employee in "Parks and Recreation", and has a recurring role as "the Princess" in the comedic sci-fi web series "Troopers" on CollegeHumor.
On March 12, 2010, Plaza performed at A Night of 140 Tweets: A Celebrity Tweetathon for Haiti, produced by Rob Huebel, Paul Scheer, Ben Stiller, and Mike Rosenstein, at the Upright Citizens Brigade Theatre in Los Angeles.
In 2011, she made a guest appearance in "Portlandia".
Plaza appeared as a guest judge during a roast segment on "The Next Food Network Star" in 2011.
She appeared in Episode 199 of the "WTF with Marc Maron" podcast.
In early 2012, she was featured in Father John Misty (J. Tillman)'s music video for the song "Hollywood Forever Cemetery Sings" from the album "Fear Fun".
In the summer of 2012, Plaza earned her first starring role in a major film, alongside Mark Duplass, in the comedy, "Safety Not Guaranteed". In the film, Plaza plays Darius, a jaded intern who answers a curious want ad "seeking a companion for a time travelling adventure". Gary Thompson of the Philadelphia Inquirer questions whether this role is out of her usual "pretty slacker" range but finds her performance "compelling".
