Kenyon Lee Martin (born December 30, 1977) is an American professional basketball player who currently plays for the New York Knicks of the National Basketball Association (NBA). He previously played for the New Jersey Nets, the Denver Nuggets, and the Los Angeles Clippers of the NBA, and the Xinjiang Flying Tigers of China. He is 6'9" and 240 lbs, and was the first overall pick of the 2000 NBA Draft.
College career.
Martin played for the Cincinnati Bearcats under the direction of Bob Huggins. As a senior, he averaged 18.9 points, 9.7 rebounds and 3.5 blocks per game. He was the consensus National Player of the Year, earning numerous awards from various organizations, but suffered a broken leg in the Conference USA Tournament, keeping him out of the NCAA Tournament that year. Cincinnati retired his #4 jersey on April 25, 2000. Later that year, he was selected first overall in the 2000 NBA Draft by the New Jersey Nets. Martin is currently the last American-born college senior to have been the top overall pick. 
Martin graduated with a Bachelor's Degree in Criminal Justice.
Professional career.
New Jersey Nets.
As a rookie for the New Jersey Nets, Martin averaged 12 points, 7.4 rebounds and 1.7 blocks per game. He was named to the NBA All-Rookie First Team. In his second season, Martin averaged 14.9 points, 5.3 rebounds, 1.3 steals and 1.7 blocks per game in helping the Nets rise from last place in the Atlantic Division to an Eastern Conference title and the best season to date in the Nets' NBA history. Along with Nets stars Jason Kidd, Kerry Kittles, Keith Van Horn and Richard Jefferson, Martin led the Nets to the 2002 NBA Finals, where they were swept by the Los Angeles Lakers. In his third season Martin again helped his team into the NBA Finals, where the Nets lost in six games against the San Antonio Spurs. The next year, Martin averaged 16.7 points, 9.5 rebounds and 1.3 blocks en route to his first NBA All-Star selection, as a backup forward for the Eastern Conference All-Stars. In the 2004 NBA All-Star Game, Martin scored 17 points, grabbed 7 rebounds and had 3 assists. 
Martin and teammate Alonzo Mourning almost fought when Martin mocked Mourning's life-threatening kidney disease. Martin later admitted that he had made a mistake and apologized to Mourning. Knicks forward Tim Thomas remarked on Martin's speech impediment and eye twitching tic during a game, as well as calling Martin "fugazi", a slang term for a fake or phoney.
Denver Nuggets.
At the end of the 2003–04 season, Martin was traded to the Denver Nuggets for three future 1st round draft picks in a sign-and-trade deal.
Martin played in 70 games during the 2004–05 season, averaging 15.5 points and 7.3 rebounds. However, a problem with his knee was detected shortly into the off-season, and on May 16, 2005, Kenyon underwent microfracture surgery on his left knee.
During the 2005–06 season, Martin missed 26 games due to knee tendinitis, but was able to return in time for the playoffs. However, during that playoff series against the Los Angeles Clippers, Martin was suspended from the Denver Nuggets indefinitely for "conduct detrimental to the team." During halftime of game two of the first round series, Martin got into an argument with head coach George Karl over his playing time, and proceeded ironically to refuse to play for the second half of the game. During the offseason, Karl and Martin apparently "patched things up."
Believing injuries were behind him, Kenyon and the Nuggets were crushed to learn the swelling now occurring in his "right" knee would require another microfracture procedure. On November 15, 2006, after playing just two regular season games, Martin underwent his second knee operation in less than two years.
During the third-quarter of a 2006 game against the Chicago Bulls, a fan sitting two rows behind Martin yelled at him, "Suit up, you chump," referring to the fact Martin was in the midst of one of his increasingly frequent stints on the injured reserve and in street clothes behind the Nuggets bench. All accounts indicate that the fan did not use any profanities. At that point, Martin is said to have stood up, pointed at the heckler, and then motioned to one of his 'bodyguards' to go confront the heckling fan, ordering "shut him up". His friend then stood up and yelled at the heckler, "Shut your mouth before we take you outside and beat your ass!" He also apparently screamed at a Nuggets fan—who, along with his teenage son, happened to be sitting next to the heckler—calling him a "fat fucking white boy." Martin was subsequently fined $15,000 and cautioned to no longer bring his entourage to games.
On February 11, 2006, after a Denver win over the Dallas Mavericks, a volatile Martin was involved in a heated and profanity-laced locker room exchange with a local sports radio personality.
To symbolize a fresh and healthy restart to his career, Kenyon changed his uniform number from 6 to the number 4, which he wore in college, for the 2007–08 season.
Xinjiang Flying Tigers.
Martin became an unrestricted free agent in the summer of 2011. However, due to the 2011 NBA lockout, he opted to sign a one-year contract with the Xinjiang Flying Tigers of the Chinese Basketball Association. His contract reportedly would have made him the highest paid player in the Chinese league's history. On December 24, 2011, Martin was released from the club so that he could "take care of family affairs". Originally, he was not allowed to return to the NBA until the Flying Tigers' season ended on February 15, 2012, if not later due to the 2012 CBA Playoffs. However, the International Basketball Federation (FIBA) granted him an earlier release on February 2.
Los Angeles Clippers.
On February 3, 2012, Martin signed with the Los Angeles Clippers. In his first game with the Clippers, Martin scored 6 points and collected 4 rebounds in a loss to the Cleveland Cavaliers.
New York Knicks.
On February 21, 2013, Martin agreed to join the New York Knicks on a 10-day contract. He officially joined the team on February 23.
Off the court.
Martin is the half-brother of former-Colorado Buffaloes standout guard Richard Roby. He is also the cousin of Robert "50" Martin of AND1 Mixtape Tour fame.
Martin has three children: two sons, Kenyon Jr., Kamron; and one daughter, Cierra Reign. Martin has also been involved in philanthropic activities like donating $1,000 for each point and blocked shot in two games for the Asian Tsunami relief efforts, buying the occasional home game ticket for less financially fortunate fans, and participating in number of campaigns like "Eat Right" and "Art of Sport."
Martin started "The Kenyon Martin Foundation" to provide for families in need, especially those without a father figure in their lives.
International career statistics.
!SEASON
!LEAGUE
!TEAM
!GP
!GS
!MPG
!FG%
!3P%
!FT%
!RPG
!APG
!SPG
!BPG
!PPG
