Namaste (; ; Devanagari: ; formal: Namaskar/Namaskaram) is a common spoken valediction or salutation originating from the Indian subcontinent. It is a customary greeting when individuals meet, and a valediction upon their parting. A non-contact form of salutation is traditionally preferred in India and Nepal; Namaste is the most common form of such a salutation. 
When spoken to another person, it is commonly accompanied by a slight bow made with hands pressed together, palms touching and fingers pointed upwards, in front of the chest. This gesture, called "Añjali Mudrā" or "Pranamasana", can also be performed wordlessly and carries the same meaning.
Etymology.
Namaste is derived from Sanskrit and is a combination of two words, "Namaḥ" and "te." "Namaḥ" means 'bow,' 'obeisance,' 'reverential salutation' or 'adoration' and "te" means 'to you' (dative case of 'you'). Therefore, Namaste literally means "salutations to you." 'Namaskar' is derived from Sanskrit and is a combination of the two words, "Namaḥ" and "kaar." As noted above, "Namaḥ" is a salutation. "Kaar" means 'form' or 'shape' and refers to the phenomenon that the other entity (person) presents. Thus, the older salutation essentially means "I salute form," which implies an understanding that all beings in this existence are part of the surface phenomenology of Maya and that beyond the surface, so to say, all beings are part of Brahman, or the One ultimate essence that underlies all. In the same light, 'Namah' originates from a benevolent unselfishness or admission ("salutation") of unity in One essence, and, therefore, 'Namaste' can also be interpreted (roughly) as a way of saying "Not-myself to you" (a benevolent expression of both respect and impersonality).
Uses.
In India, Namaste is a friendly greeting in written communication, or generally between people when they meet. When used at funerals to greet the guests, the verbal part is usually omitted. When the hand position is higher, it usually means reverence for worship. Thus, The expression with hands placed on top of one's head is usually the sign of utmost reverence or respect.
The "aayubowan" (meaning: wish you a long life) gesture is also a cultural symbol of Sri Lanka and Sri Lankan hospitality.
In Nepalese culture, namaste is performed when a younger family member meets older relatives. It also varies depending upon social status and prestige. The person with lower status or prestige performs namaste first to show respect for the higher station the other person has achieved.It is also performed for praying and worshiping god.
In Sikh scripture, "Namaste", "Namastung" or "Namastvung" is referenced as salutation to the Primal being, the One God. The salutation is followed by an attribute respecting a quality of the creator of all religions, Akal. Sikhs also fold their hand as in Namaste, but their greeting is Sat Sri Akal.
In Sindh, Pakistan, the añjali mudra, though extremely rare, is still maintained even by Sindhi Muslims.
The gesture is widely used throughout Asia and beyond. It first (?) appears c.4000 years ago on the clay seals of the Indus Valley Civilization.Poor source
In Telugu culture, the gesture is known as "Namaskaramulu" or simply "Namaskaram," which are derived from Sanskrit.
In Tamil culture, the gesture is known as "Kumpiṭu" (கும்பிடு), which is composed of two words "Kumpu" (கும்பு) meaning 'to coup hands' and "Iṭu" இடு meaning 'to do'; while an equivalent of the salutation would be வணக்கம் (vaṇakkam) which is roughly translated as 'greetings.'
In Kannada culture, the gesture is "Namaskara" in South Karnataka and "Sharanu" in North Karnataka. "Namaskara" is derived from Sanskrit.
The brahmins of Tamil Nadu (India) use the Sanskrit word "Namaskaram" (नमस्कारम्) for the gesture. The usage of the same is also found across other brahmin people in southern India.
In Japan, the Namaste hand gesture is used in prayer and healing sessions and is called "Gasshō". 
In Thai Culture, the greeting is alternately known as the Wai.
In Buddhism, Namaste is used as a greeting to approach ordained monks and nuns, since it is considered inappropriate for ordained members to touch skin. In Chinese Buddhism, especially in the Pure Land traditions, Namaste is accompanied with the greeting "Namo Amitofo" (Homage to Amitabha Buddha) to signify the meaning "May the Buddha be with you." This is also a form of thanking the ordained for services rendered. Namaste does not necessarily have to be performed with both hands. For example, if one is carrying an object in one hand, one may perform a half-namaste with one hand.
Meanings and interpretation.
As it is most commonly used, namaste is roughly equivalent to "greetings" or "good day," in English, implicitly with the connotation "to be well". As opposed to shaking hands, kissing or embracing each other in other cultures, Namaste is a non-contact form of respectful greeting and can be used universally while meeting a person of different gender, age or social status.
The gesture Namaste represents the belief that there is a Divine spark within each of us that is located in the heart chakra. The gesture is an acknowledgment of the soul in one by the soul in another. In Sanskrit the word is namah + te = namaste (Devnagari/Hindi: नमः + ते = नमस्ते) which means “I bow to you” - my greetings, salutations or prostration to you. 
"Namaskār" (Devnagari/Hindi: ) literally means "I bow to form".
References.
Notes
