Kasseem David Dean (born September 13, 1978), better known by his stage name Swizz Beatz, is an American hip hop recording artist, record producer, disc jockey, creative director, fashion designer and painter from New York City. At the age of 16, he gained attention in the hip hop community through his friendship with rapper DMX. He found a protege in Philadelphia-based rapper Cassidy, who helped Dean launch his label Full Surface Records. 
About.com ranked him #27 on its list of the "Top 50 Greatest Hip-Hop Producers," while "The Source" placed him on its list of the 20 greatest producers in the magazine's 20-year history. Kanye West called him "the best rap producer of all time." He is married to American R&B singer-songwriter Alicia Keys, with whom he has one child, as well as three other children, including one with ex-wife American R&B singer-songwriter Mashonda and another with English singer Jahna Sebastian.
Life and career.
1978–1997: Early life.
As a child, Dean did not see much of his father, a postal worker, due to his parents' separation in his early life. Dean is multi-racial. He has Hungarian Puerto Rican ancestry on his mother's side and Arab African descent on his father's side. He was raised by his mother in the South Bronx, where he spent most of his childhood. This was where he first encountered hip hop. He began deejaying after he got some equipment from his stepfather and uncles. As a teenager, he later relocated to Atlanta, Georgia due to having too many fights at Harry S. Truman High School. There he started to work for his uncles, Joaquin and Darrin Dean, who were co-CEOs of the Ruff Ryders label. In his early work, he generally chose not to sample, instead using the Korg Trinity and Triton keyboards and seeking to accentuate the performance aspect of his music.
1998–2006: Career beginnings.
With his aunt and uncles (Chivon, Dee and Waah Dean) involved with the Ruff Ryders label, he began to produce tracks at the age of 16. He sold his first beat at 17 which became DMX's hit single "Ruff Ryders' Anthem". In 2001, at the age of 23 he established his own record label, Full Surface, in a joint venture with Clive Davis of J Records. The first artist signed was Philadelphia-based rapper Cassidy. It was not until Dean's first compilation album, 2002's "Swizz Beatz Presents G.H.E.T.T.O. Stories", that he started to get noticed for his production style and interesting ideas and Cassidy began to gain attention. He released two singles "Guilty" and "Bigger Business", both charted on the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and were accompanied by music videos. Dean, along with being associated with Ruff Ryders and Roc-A-Fella Records, began to produce for artists from labels such as Elektra Records, Atlantic Records, Epic Records, Def Jam Recordings, as well as Bad Boy Entertainment and his career largely grew from that point.
2006–07: "One Man Band Man".
In February 2007, Dean mixed the music for design duo Heatherette's Fall 2007 New York Fashion Week runway show.
On August 21, 2007, Swizz Beatz released his debut studio album "One Man Band Man". The album, preceded by the singles "It's Me Bitches" and "Money in the Bank", sold 45,000 copies in its first week On October 19, 2007, Swizz Beatz launched a contest called "Share the Studio", presented by Music Video 2.0 and "The Source" magazine. The contest was intended to be a continuation of the work from his debut album.
In 2007 Swizz Beatz signed longtime friends and former Ruff Ryder members Eve and Drag-On, along with legendary Cleveland-based hip hop group Bone Thugs-n-Harmony, to his Full Surface label.
2008–present: Monster Music Group and "Haute Living".
Undaunted by the disappointing sales of his last album, Swizz Beatz began working on his second studio album soon after the release of his first. In late 2007 Swizz Beatz announced the album's title to be "Life After the Party" in an interview with "Format Magazine" saying
On April 24, 2009 Swizz Beatz released a promotional song for Hennessy Black, entitled "When I Step in the Club". A music video, directed by Hype Williams, was also released.
In 2010, via his Twitter, Swizz Beatz renamed his second studio album on three occasions. He first announced he was calling it "King Issues" but later on that day settled on "The Perception of Greatness", and on August 23 while in a studio session with Mary J. Blige in New York City, Swizz revealed the album's new title to be "Haute Living", stating that it's the perfect phrase to represent what he's all about. Swizz Beatz announced while being interviewed on BBC Radio that he was planning to release it on September 13, to coincide with his birth date. The album was released under his actual contract with Everest Entertainment/Atlantic/Warner, who signed the rapper in August 2010. Confirmed guest appearances include Bono, Travis Barker, Kanye West, Lil Wayne, Jay-Z, Lenny Kravitz, Alicia Keys, Mary J. Blige and John Legend. On February 12, 2010, he and 81 other artists including Kanye West, Lil Wayne, Justin Bieber, Miley Cyrus, Jamie Foxx, Will.i.am, and Usher, debuted "We Are the World 25 for Haiti" during the Opening Ceremonies of the Winter Olympics in Vancouver. In 2010, inspired by Kanye West's "GOOD Fridays" series, Swizz Beatz launched his own series of free weekly mp3s titled "Monster Mondays". The first song, "DJ Play that Beat" featuring Estelle, was released on October 25. Other "Monster Monday" tracks include features from Rakim, Pusha T, DMX, Busta Rhymes, Pharrell and many more. 
In 2011, Swizz Beatz won his first Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group with American rapper Jay-Z, for the song "On to the Next One". The first promotional single from "Haute Living", titled "Everyday (Coolin')", was produced by Joe Lindsay and released through "monstermondays.com" on March 28, 2011. The song features a verse from female rapper Eve. During an interview with Paper Mag, Swizz Beatz revealed a few collaborations that will make their way on "Haute Living". Including one titled "Skyscrapers" featuring Kanye West and Bono. 
Swizz Beatz and his Monster Music Group recently signed a joint venture with Imagem Music USA. In a press released, Swizz Beatz said, “I’m excited to be partnering with Richard and the entire group over at Imagem Music. This partnership will enable me to further develop my group of talented producers and also introduce many new producers and writers to the world”. Swizz Beatz’s protegé Tyrone Johnson and Naki "Snagz" Levy are the first signings to Monster Music Publishing. On May 21, 2011, Swizz Beatz confirmed that Dr. Dre was working on the album with him.
On March 7, 2012, Swizz Beatz announced that he will be releasing a mixtape featuring guest appearances from DMX, Nas, Rick Ross, The LOX and ASAP Rocky, who was featured on the first release, "Sreet Knock". Swizz Beatz also stated he doesn't have a release date for "Haute Living" claiming he's a "perfectionist" who is "taking my time to get it right". On March 22, 2012, "Street Knock" featuring ASAP Rocky was premiered on "The Angie Martinez Show". The song was produced by AraabMuzik, and will be featured on the mixtape, titled "Limitless".
On Friday, November 2, 2012 Swizz Beatz released his newest single, “Everyday Birthday”. “Everyday Birthday” features Grammy Award winning artists Chris Brown and Ludacris and was produced by Swizz and Jukebox. Swizz has chosen to release a series of what he has coined “memorable moments” in this now single driven time in music.
Producing career.
Swizz Beatz has produced hit singles for many elite rap, hip-hop soul and R&B artists, such as DMX ("Party Up (Up in Here)"), Beyoncé ("Check on It", "Ring the Alarm"), T.I. ("Bring 'Em Out"), Styles P ("Good Times"), Cassidy ("Hotel", "I'm a Hustla"), Busta Rhymes ("Touch It") and many more.
In 2003 he began to expand his label; Big Tigger, Keith Sweat, Bounty Killer and Yung Wun were all in talks to signing with Full Surface but in the end only Yung Wun was signed. Yung Wun, whom Swizz Beatz took under his wing and was executive producer of his album, "The Dirtiest Thirstiest" and co-produced the lead single "Tear It Up".
In 2009, Swizz Beatz produced many popular singles including "Nasty Girl" by Ludacris featuring Plies, "Who's Real" by Jadakiss featuring OJ da Juiceman, "Million Bucks" by Maino, "Million Dollar Bill" by Whitney Houston, "I Can Transform Ya" by Chris Brown featuring Lil Wayne and "On to the Next One" by Jay-Z
Swizz Beatz also was named the first "Producer in Residence" at New York University. This lasted from the 2010-2011 academic year.
Other ventures.
Fashion designer.
In 2006 he became a partner involved in the popular clothing company Kidrobot, a creator and retailer of limited-edition art toys and clothing.
Shoe designer.
On Twitter in 2010, Swizz Beatz revealed his new sneaker line with Reebok.
Painting.
Swizz Beatz not only collects paintings but also paints in his free time. He donates the money he earns from his paintings to the Children's Cancer & Blood Foundation.
Brand promoter.
In 2010, Swizz Beatz become involved in the design and launch of the Aston Martin Rapide. In 2011, Swizz Beatz became the official face of Lotus cars until CEO Dany Bahar left the company. Subsequently, Swizz Beatz returned to Aston Martin for 2013.
Personal life.
On October 25, 2000, his first son by Nicole Levy, Prince Nasir was born. In 2004, he married Mashonda, together they have one child, Kasseem David Dean, Jr. (born January 2006). In April 2008, they announced their plans to divorce after four years of marriage. In May 2009, it was confirmed that Swizz Beatz and Alicia Keys were in a relationship after almost a year of speculation. In May 2010 Beatz confirmed he was engaged to Alicia Keys, and that she was pregnant with Beatz' fourth, and her first child. During the time of the 2010 FIFA World Cup, the couple took part of a union and had the unborn child blessed in a Zulu ceremony, which took place in the Illovo suburb of Johannesburg, South Africa. Swizz Beatz also has a daughter named Nicole Dean with a Russian singer who lives in London named Jahna Sebastian.In May of 2011, Beatz flew to London to celebrate his daughter's birthday along with two of his sons. Keys and Swizz Beatz married on the French island of Corsica on July 31, 2010. Alicia Keys gave birth to their son, Egypt Daoud Ibarr Dean, on October 14, 2010.
