The Borgias is a 2011 historical fiction television series created by Neil Jordan.
The series is set around the turn of the 16th century, and follows the Borgia family, an Italian dynasty of Spanish origin. It stars Jeremy Irons as Pope Alexander VI with François Arnaud as Cesare, Holliday Grainger as Lucrezia, David Oakes as Juan and Aidan Alexander as Gioffre Borgia. Colm Feore also stars as cardinal della Rovere.
It premiered on April 3, 2011, at 9 pm ET on Showtime in the United States and 10 pm Eastern () on Bravo! in Canada, and received its first major television network premiere on June 21, 2011 on Canada's CTV Television Network.
On April 25, 2011, Showtime ordered a second season of "The Borgias". The second season premiered on April 8, 2012.
On May 4, 2012, Showtime ordered a third season of 10 episodes to air in 2013. Season 3 is set to premiere on April 14, 2013.
Plot overview.
The series follows the rise of the Borgia family to the pinnacle of the Roman Catholic Church and their struggles to maintain their grip on power. The beginning of the first season depicts the election of Rodrigo Borgia to the papacy through simony and bribery with the help of his son, Cesare. The triumph in the papal conclave of Borgia, who becomes Pope Alexander VI, enrages his rivals in the College of Cardinals, some of whom decide to plot against him. With the help of his family, Alexander takes on his enemies while striking alliances with other European powers to strengthen his position.
Meanwhile, Alexander's great rival, Cardinal Della Rovere, travels across Italy and France to seek allies to depose the pope. He manages to persuade King Charles VIII of France to assist him in removing Pope Alexander in exchange for supporting the King's claim to the throne of Naples, an ally of the Borgias through marriage. Season one culminates with Charles and his army, accompanied by Della Rovere, marching to Rome and finally coming to a head with the Borgias.
Production.
The series is an international co-production, directed by an Irishman, filmed in Hungary, and produced in Canada. Filming in Hungary mainly took place at the Korda Studios in Etyek, just west of Budapest.
Neil Jordan was trying to direct a film about the Borgia reign for over a decade and the project had many times come close to fruition, with stars such as Colin Farrell and Scarlett Johansson attached to it. In 2010, Steven Spielberg, the head of DreamWorks Pictures (now a producer of "The Borgias"), suggested the film turned into a cable drama and Neil Jordan took the idea over to Showtime executives who, wanting to fill the void historical series "The Tudors" was going to leave after its final season, commissioned the series. Neil Jordan has stated that the ideal would be a series of four seasons so he can span at least the period of Rodrigo Borgia's papacy (1492–1503). 
For the role of Rodrigo Borgia, Neil Jordan turned to Academy Award winner Jeremy Irons, known for roles of villains and anti-heroes. The actor initially had second thoughts about his being suitable for the role who is in history described as an obese, dark complexioned Spaniard, but Jordan wanted him to focus on the aspects of the character’s obsession with power and life, which the actor could play to the hilt.
Episodes.
The first season consists of nine episodes; the premiere encompassed two episodes, with the remaining seven episodes being first-aired each week following. The second season consisted of ten episodes, the first half of which were written by creator Neil Jordan, whereas the latter half was written by the noted English writer-director David Leland, who joined the series' staff as co-showrunner and producer and directed its last two episodes.
Reception.
The show's first season received generally favorable reviews in the United States, scoring 66 out of 100 based on 25 critics on Metacritic. Robert Bianco of "USA Today" said: "... seen from a safe distance, captured by a sterling cast led in marvelous high style by Jeremy Irons, and presented with all the brio, flair and sumptuous design TV can muster, the infamous family is almost addictively entertaining". Linda Stasi of the "New York Post" gave the season a 3.5/4 rating, remarking "'The Borgias' (the series) makes 'The Tudors' look like a bunch of amateurs with bigger lips.
However, it was met with a more mixed reception in the United Kingdom. Rachel Ray of "The Daily Telegraph" called Irons' performance "disappointingly undiabolical". She added that the show is "for history buffs, not for viewers looking for another Godfather". Sarah Dempster of "The Guardian" mocked the show's dialogue and visual style: "The ridiculousness mounts. The opening double bill features impromptu palazzo brawls between priapic gadabouts in bejewelled codpieces ("Back to Spain, Borgia!") and flocks of miffed cardinals gliding along darkened corridors like motorised pepperpots". Sam Wollaston recalled the 1981 BBC miniseries of the same name, which had been widely panned, and said there was "more thought to this version, and attention to character. And Irons is proper". "The Independent"s Holly Williams praised Irons, but said elsewhere, "the acting and script feel about as substantial as a communion wafer. With power struggles, sex, assassinations and sibling rivalries, it should, at least, be racy and fun. Yet the storyline often feels curiously ungripping".
The second season's premiere was met with much more positive reviews, and currently holds a Metacritic score of 81/100, based on six reviews.
