Red Bull is an energy drink sold by Austrian company Red Bull GmbH, created in 1987. In terms of market share, Red Bull is the most popular energy drink in the world, with 4.6 billion cans sold in 2011.
Austrian entrepreneur Dietrich Mateschitz was inspired by a pre-existing energy drink named Krating Daeng (, ), which was first invented and sold in Thailand. He took this idea, modified the ingredients to suit the tastes of westerners, and, in partnership with Chaleo Yoovidhya, founded Red Bull GmbH in Austria. In Thai, "daeng" means red, and "krating" is the reddish-brown bovine called a "gaur", which is an animal slightly larger than the bison. Red Bull is sold in a tall and slim blue-silver can; in Thailand and in some parts of Asia it is sold in a wider gold can with the name of Krating Daeng or Red Bull Classic. The two are different products, produced separately.
The company slogan is "Red Bull gives you wings" and the product is marketed through advertising, events (Red Bull Air Race, Red Bull Crashed Ice), sports team ownerships (Red Bull Racing, Scuderia Toro Rosso, EC Red Bull Salzburg, FC Red Bull Salzburg, Red Bull New York, RB Leipzig, Red Bull Brasil), celebrity endorsements, and music, through its record label Red Bull Records. 
Red Bull has been the target of criticism concerning the possible health risks associated with the drink. A study by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) concluded that in the levels used in popular energy drinks, like Red Bull, taurine and glucuronolactone are safe.
History.
Chaleo Yoovidhya, the self-made Thai billionaire founded T.C. Pharmaceuticals. In the 1970s, it was first introduced in Thailand under brand called Krating Daeng, or Red Bull in English. It was popular among Thai truck drivers and laborers.
Chaleo then co-founded a company in 1984 with an Austrian partner who helped turn Red Bull into a global brand. 
The creation of Red Bull was inspired by the tonic drinks category of Japan and a drink in Thailand called "Krating Daeng". Dietrich Mateschitz, an Austrian entrepreneur, developed the Red Bull Energy Drink brand. Mateschitz was the international marketing director for Blendax, a toothpaste company, when he visited Thailand in 1982 and discovered that Krating Daeng helped to cure his jet lag. Between 1984 and 1987, Mateschitz worked with TCBG Pharmaceutical (a Blendax licensee) to adapt a flavor and marketing strategy for the European market.
At the same time Mateschitz and Chaleo Yoovidhya founded Red Bull GmbH; each investing $500,000 of savings and taking a stake in the new company. Chaleo and Dietrich each held a 49% share of the new company. They gave the remaining 2% to Chaleo's son Chalerm, but it was agreed that Mateschitz would run the company. The product was launched in 1987 in Austria, in a carbonated format.
In 1992, the product expanded to international markets: Hungary and Slovenia. It entered the United States via California in 1997 and the Middle East in 2000. In 2008, "Forbes" magazine listed both Chaleo and Mateschitz as the 250th richest people in the world with an estimated net worth of $4 billion.
Ingredients.
Red Bull contains caffeine, taurine, glucuronolactone, B-group vitamins, sucrose, and glucose. Red Bull Sugarfree is like Red Bull Energy Drink, but without sugar. The sugars sucrose and glucose have been replaced by the sweeteners acesulfame K and aspartame/sucralose.
Red Bull is sold in China in two versions: a regular-strength version in a short, wide, gold-and-red can; and an "extra-strength" version in a taller, thinner, blue-and-silver can more like the cans sold in western countries. Neither version is carbonated.
Health effects.
Typical ingredients like caffeine, taurine and glucuronolactone have been assessed by health authorities for their safety. Health Canada conducted a review of the scientific literature on caffeine concluding that the general population of healthy adults is not at risk for potential adverse effects from caffeine if they limit their consumption to 400 mg per day.
Taurine and glucuronolactone are normal body constituents and also naturally present in the human diet (e.g. scallops, fish, poultry and grain respectively). The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in its January 2009 opinion on the safety of energy drink ingredients concluded that the exposure to taurine and glucuronolactone at the levels presently used in energy drinks is not of safety concern.
A review published in 2008 found no documented reports of negative or positive health effects associated with the amount of taurine used in energy drinks, including Red Bull. Caffeine and sugar levels in Red Bull are comparable to coffee and fruit juices, respectively. Another publication found that "the number of available publications that really go into the details in this topic is also rather poor".
Caffeine.
The caffeine of a single can of Red Bull is 80 mg/250 ml (32 mg/100 ml). This is about the same as a normal coffee, or slightly less depending on the brewing method. The actual caffeine level in Red Bull can vary depending on country, as some countries have legal restrictions on how much caffeine is allowed in drinks. As is the case with other caffeinated beverages, Red Bull drinkers may experience adverse effects as a result of overuse caffeine intoxication.
Energy drinks are not sports drinks and have not been formulated to deliver re-hydration. Water should be consumed in addition to energy drinks during exercise. 
A 2008 position statement issued by the National Federation of State High School Associations made the following recommendations about general energy drink consumption for young athletes: 
Cardiovascular effects.
A review of the scientific literature on caffeine concluded that moderate caffeine intake (less than 400 mg per day) does not adversely affect cardiovascular health.
A can of Red Bull, 250ml, contains 80 mg of caffeine which is less than a cup of coffee.
There has been at least one case report of Red Bull overdose causing postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome in a young athlete.
A February 3, 2009 article in "The Daily Telegraph" called, "Red Bull 'may have triggered heart condition that killed student' "
reported the death of a 21-year-old woman who died after drinking four cans of Red Bull as well as alcohol at "social levels". It was believed, but had not been proven, that she suffered from a rare heart condition called long QT Syndrome. She was on medication for epilepsy and had an abnormally large heart. A medical examination found that there were no illegal drugs in her system. The article quoted a doctor as saying, "The coroner recorded that the 21-year-old woman died of natural causes."
Impact on driving.
Joris Verster and colleagues from Utrecht University concluded that Red Bull Energy Drink reduces driver sleepiness and enhances driving performance during prolonged highway driving.
Legal status.
Red Bull did not get market approval in France, Denmark, and Norway for several years, but the energy drink is now on sale in all 27 member states of the European Union and in 164 countries around the world. 
The French approval process started in 1996 with concerns about taurine, a normal body constituent and also naturally present in the human diet (e.g., scallops, fish, poultry). This meant the drink could not be sold as-is in France. Instead, a different recipe that did not contain the ingredient was introduced. The refusal of market approval was challenged by the European Commission and partially upheld by the European Court of Justice in 2004, before the French food safety agency relented in 2008 after being unable to prove definitively the existence of any health risk, taurine-related or not.
Advertising.
Red Bull has a diverse international marketing campaign. The numerous activities range from extreme sports like mountain biking, BMX, motocross, windsurfing, snowboarding, skateboarding, kayaking, wakeboarding, cliff-diving, surfing, skating, freestyle motocross, rally, Formula 1 racing, and breakdancing to art shows, music, and video games. In keeping with their target market of young males, Red Bull has also enlisted help from celebrities, such as Eminem that would appeal to this group (sponsoring the Red Bull "EmSee Battle Rap championships"). It also hosts events like the "Red Bull Flugtag" (German for "flight day" or "flying day") and other such contests. Red Bull also owns association football teams, with clubs in Austria, Germany, the United States and Brazil featuring the Red Bull trademark in their names. By associating the drink's image with these activities, the company seeks to promote a "cool" public image and raise brand power. Hence, this one energy drink has helped create a market for over 150 related types of merchandise, like Red Rooster and Blue Lightning.
Red Bull's slogan "gives you wings" is widely used in these marketing activities. Claims about the drink's effects and performance have been challenged on various occasions, with the UK's Advertising Standards Authority imposing advertising restrictions in 2001 in response to complaints first recorded as early as 1997. In 2011, Red Bull earned around EUR 4.2 billion in worldwide sales and was available in 164 countries globally.
In the PlayStation 3's social gaming platform, PlayStation Home, Red Bull has developed its own in-game island, specifically advertising its energy drink and the Red Bull Air Race event (for which the space is named) released in January 2009. In late November 2009, Red Bull brought out two new spaces, the Red Bull Illume space, and the Red Bull Beach space featuring the Red Bull Flugtag, both released on the same day. In January 2012, Red Bull released its first personal space called the Red Bull House of Skate featuring an indoor skate park.
In the video game "Worms 3D", Red Bull allows the worms to move more quickly. Red Bull is displayed on virtual track-side billboards during gameplay and in the opening cinematic in the video game "Wipeout 2097".
Endorsements.
In 2009, Red Bull added mainstream sport athletes to its roster of sports endorsements. Reggie Bush was the first NFL athlete to endorse the product. The announcement was made at the Super Bowl.
External links.
Jacque Demers
