Leslie Mann (born March 26, 1972) is an American actress best known for her roles in comedic films, many of which are collaborations with her husband, Judd Apatow. In 2012, "Elle" named her "Hollywood's queen of comedy".
Early life.
Mann was born in San Francisco, California, and grew up in Newport Beach. Mann was raised by her mother, a real estate agent who had married three times. Mann has stated of her father, "My dad is ... I don't really have one. I mean, he does exist, but I have zero relationship with him". Mann has two siblings and three older step-brothers. She has said that she was "very shy, kind of pent-up" during her youth. Mann graduated from Corona del Mar High School, and studied acting at the Joanne Baron / D. W. Brown Studio and with comedy improv troupe The Groundlings.
Career.
Leslie Mann began her career at 18 appearing in a number of television commercials. In a 2012 interview with "Elle" magazine, she recalled that one was for a nail polish brand called Nouvage, in which she had to dance to Prince's "Kiss" on roller skates for the audition. In 1995, Mann was chosen from an open audition of 500 candidates for her first big movie role in "The Cable Guy" (1996). Mann followed with performances including guest-starring in "Freaks & Geeks", as well as appearing in Sam Weisman's "George of The Jungle" alongside Brendan Fraser, "Big Daddy" with Adam Sandler, "Orange County" opposite Jack Black, and "The 40 Year Old Virgin" with Steve Carell. 
In 2007, Mann starred alongside Seth Rogen and Paul Rudd in Judd Apatow's comedy "Knocked Up", which grossed more than $218 million worldwide. Mann's performance in the film garnered her rave reviews as well as a "Best Supporting Actress" nomination from the Chicago Film Critics Association. The film won the People's Choice Award for "Favorite Movie Comedy", was named one of AFI's "Top Ten Films of the Year", and received a nomination from the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award for "Best Comedy". 
In 2009, Mann reunited with her "Big Daddy" co-star Adam Sandler and "Knocked Up" co-star Seth Rogen for Apatow's "Funny People". This film was named to many of the year's top ten lists including "The New Yorker" and "The New York Times". ELLE writer Mickey Rapkin said that "owns the second half of 2009's "Funny People", where her character does the most unlikely thing a woman can do in a major studio picture: has an affair with an ex-boyfriend on a whim." That same year, Mann also starred in Burr Steers' successful comedy "17 Again" opposite Zac Efron and Matthew Perry, which grossed over $125 million worldwide. She was also seen in the indie hit "I Love You Phillip Morris" alongside Jim Carrey and Ewan McGregor. The film premiered at the 2009 Sundance Film Festival and upon release was met with critical acclaim including a nomination for a 2011 Broadcast Film Critics Association Award in the category of "Best Comedy". Mann also starred alongside Elizabeth Banks in the film "What Was I Thinking?" based upon the book by Barbara Davilman and Liz Dubelman which was filmed in 2009 but never released. 
In 2011, Mann starred opposite Ryan Reynolds and Jason Bateman in David Dobkin's comedy "The Change-Up." In addition, she lent her voice to "Linda", the main human character in Carlos Saldanha's animated film "Rio", which garnered over $484 million worldwide and also featured vocal performances by Jamie Foxx and Anne Hathaway, as well as to Jonah Hill's animated FOX television series Allen Gregory, as the title character's second-grade teacher. 
Mann continued her recent voice performance work in 2012 with her role in ParaNorman, an animated 3D, stop-motion film from the team behind 2009's Oscar-nominated Coraline, including writer/director Chris Butler, Focus Features and LAIKA. Which is now up for Oscar 2012 Best Animated Feature.
In December 2012 Mann appeared opposite Paul Rudd in Judd Apatow's "This is 40", the 2012 sequel to "Knocked Up". The movie reunited the trio from the film, with Mann and Rudd reprising their characters. The film was written and directed by Judd Apatow and includes their two daughters in the cast list. In contrast to "Knocked Up", "This is 40" centered squarely on Mann's character and her family. An early response on Mann's performance from Elle Magazine states that " doesn't just walk off with scenes—she steals the show". 
Mann was nominated for "Best Actress in a Comedy" by the Broadcast Film Critics Association for "This is 40". 
In 2013, Mann will be seen in Sofia Coppola's "The Bling Ring" with Emma Watson. Inspired by actual events, the film follows a group of fame-obsessed L.A. teenagers who burgled celebrity homes by tracking their whereabouts on the internet.
Personal life.
Mann is married to producer Judd Apatow, with whom she has two daughters, Iris and Maude. The family currently lives in Los Angeles. 
In 1995, Mann auditioned for Ben Stiller's "The Cable Guy" (1996). Stiller needed a stand in for Jim Carrey during film auditions and the job fell to writer/producer Apatow, who read with all actresses including Mann. The reading was the couple's first meeting, however it was not until "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", almost 10 years later, that she and Apatow first collaborated professionally in film. 
Mann and Apatow's daughters Iris and Maude appeared in the films "Knocked Up", "Funny People", and "This Is 40" as the children of Mann's characters.
Mann and Apatow are both longtime supporters of the non-profit organization 826LA, which focuses on encouraging the writing skills of disadvantaged youth. They are also involved with the UCLA Rape Treatment Center's Stuart House, which serves the needs of sexually abused children and their families. Mann and Apatow's philanthropic contributions were honored in 2012 by the Bogart Pediatric Cancer Research Program, which awarded the couple the 2012 "Children's Choice Award" for their work with children and families, who are dealing with pediatric cancer. In 2009, the couple was also recognized by The Fulfillment Fund who honored them at their annual benefit gala.
