Diane Kruger (born 15 July 1976) is a German actress and former fashion model. She is known for roles such as Helen in "Troy", Dr. Abigail Chase in "National Treasure" and , Bridget von Hammersmark in "Inglourious Basterds", Anna in "Mr. Nobody", and Gina in "Unknown".
Early life.
She was born as Diane Heidkrüger in Algermissen, Germany, near Hildesheim, the daughter of computer specialist Hans-Heinrich Heidkrüger, and his wife, Maria-Theresa, a bank employee. She was raised Roman Catholic and attended Catholic school. She has stated that one of her grandmothers was Polish. 
She was raised in Germany with her younger brother, Stefan. Her mother sent her to student exchange programs when she was a teenager to improve her English. As a child, Kruger wanted to become a ballerina and successfully auditioned for the Royal Ballet School in London. However, after an injury ended her ballet career prematurely, Kruger moved to Paris and turned her energy toward modeling and learning French.
Modeling.
In 1992, Kruger represented Germany in the Elite Model Look and started modeling afterwards. Despite her relatively small frame for a model, she managed to add prestigious bookings such as advertisements from Yves Saint Laurent, Chanel, Salvatore Ferragamo, Giorgio Armani, Jil Sander, Christian Dior, Burberry, and Louis Vuitton; runway shows from Marc Jacobs, D&G, and Sonia Rykiel as well as appearances on the cover of "Vogue Paris", "Marie Claire" and "Cosmopolitan" to her modeling repertoire. She gradually stopped modeling after deciding to pursue a career in acting.
Acting career.
Kruger soon became interested in acting and took lessons at the Cours Florent. She landed some small appearances in several French films. She made her onscreen debut in 2002, opposite Dennis Hopper and Christopher Lambert in "The Piano Player", a TV-movie by Jean-Pierre Roux. Her first major role was the same year when she starred in her then husband's directorial debut "Mon Idole". 
She played Julie Wood in 2003's "Michel Valliant" and Lisa in "Wicker Park" (2004), alongside Josh Hartnett and Rose Byrne. One of her more high-profile roles to date is her portrayal of Helen of Sparta in Wolfgang Petersen's epic "Troy". She was ranked 50th on the "Maxim" Hot 100 Women of 2005. In 2004, Kruger starred with Nicolas Cage and Sean Bean (who co-starred with her in "Troy") in the film "National Treasure", going on to appear in movies "Joyeux Noël" (2005) and "Copying Beethoven" (2006). She reprised her role as Dr. Abigail Chase in "", released in December 2007.
Kruger was the hostess of the opening and closing ceremonies of the 2007 Cannes Film Festival.
Kruger was a jury member of the 58th Berlin International Film Festival in 2008. The festival is chaired by Costa Gavras.
In 2009, she co-starred as a German actress turned Allied spy in Quentin Tarantino's film "Inglourious Basterds". Kruger starred in 2011 in the Liam Neeson film "Unknown" alongside January Jones.
In December 2009, she announced the nominations of the 67th Golden Globe Awards and also picked up nominations from the Screen Actors Guild for Best Supporting Actress and Outstanding Performance by a Cast of a Motion Picture for her role in "Inglourious Basterds".
Kruger played Anna in Jaco Van Dormael's "Mr. Nobody". Critical response has praised the film's artistry and Kruger's acting.
Kruger made a cameo appearance in an April 2010 episode of the Fox show "Fringe", in which her boyfriend, actor Joshua Jackson is a star. In 2010, Kruger also appeared in Mark Ronson's music video for "Somebody to Love Me", where she plays Boy George. In 2011, it was announced that she had replaced Eva Green in the role of Marie Antoinette in the French-language film, "Les Adieux à la Reine".
In 2012, she was named as a member of the Jury for the Main Competition at the 2012 Cannes Film Festival.
She has completed filming for the part of "The Seeker" in the film adaptation of Stephenie Meyer's novel "The Host," to be released in March, 2013.
Endorsements.
Kruger is a brand ambassador for watch manufacturer Jaeger-LeCoultre. In December 2009, she was announced as the global spokesmodel for L'Oréal.
It was announced in May 2010 that she would become the latest face for Calvin Klein's newest fragrance line, Beauty.
Personal life.
In 1999, she began dating French actor and director Guillaume Canet. They were married on 1 September 2001. They acted together in 2005's "Joyeux Noël", but divorced in 2006, though they remain friends. Kruger later said that the marriage was not successful because their careers had kept them occupied in different parts of the world.
She has been in a relationship with Joshua Jackson since 2006. During an interview with magazine "Glamour", she said, "Without sounding pessimistic, I learned that I don't believe in marriage. I believe in a commitment that you make in your heart. There's no paper that will make you stay. A guy friend of mine said, and it made a lot of sense, that people should get married at the end of the road, not the beginning." 
Besides German, Kruger speaks English and French fluently. She is a friend of fashion designer Karl Lagerfeld. Kruger divides her time between Paris and Vancouver.
