The Miami Heat are a professional basketball team based in Miami, Miami-Dade County, Florida, United States. The team is a member of the Southeast Division in the Eastern Conference of the National Basketball Association (NBA). They play their home games at American Airlines Arena in Downtown Miami. The team owner is Micky Arison, the general manager is Pat Riley and the head coach is Erik Spoelstra. The mascot of the team is Burnie, an anthropomorphic fireball.
The Heat were formed in 1988 as an expansion franchise. Along with the Orlando Magic, the Heat are one of the two NBA franchises that represent the state of Florida. Since entering the league, Miami has fielded squads that have made the playoffs 16 out of 24 seasons, capturing nine division titles, three Eastern Conference Championships, and two NBA Championships; defeating the Dallas Mavericks 4–2 in the 2006 NBA Finals and the Oklahoma City Thunder 4–1 in the 2012 NBA Finals. Their playoff run in the 1990s was largely marked by a vicious rivalry with the New York Knicks. According to Forbes, in 2010 the value of the franchise was $425 million and $625 million in 2013.
Franchise history.
An expansion team formed in 1988, the Miami Heat began its early years with much mediocrity, only making the playoffs twice in its first eight years and falling in the first round both times, despite individual success from its players. Upon the purchasing of the franchise by Micky Arison in 1995, Pat Riley was brought in as its team president, general manager and head coach. In that same year, Riley acquired center Alonzo Mourning and point guard Tim Hardaway to serve as the centerpiece for the team, transforming the Heat into a championship contender throughout the late 1990s, even making it to the Conference Finals in 1997. Their biggest rivals were the New York Knicks, Riley's former team, who would eliminate the Heat in the first round from 1998 through 2000.
A period of mediocrity followed shortly thereafter, until shooting guard Dwyane Wade was drafted fifth overall by the Heat in 2003. In 2004, Shaquille O'Neal was traded to Miami from the Los Angeles Lakers, leading the team back to the Conference Finals in 2005, before losing to the Detroit Pistons in seven games. Miami rebounded from their previous defeat to win their first championship in 2006, with Wade earning the Bill Russell NBA Finals Most Valuable Player Award award. 
A four-year tenure of post-title struggles befell the Heat from 2007 through 2010, with Riley stepping down as coach, but remaining as team president and general manager. Erik Spoelstra replaced Riley as the head coach, leading Miami to the postseason in his first four years. In the summer blockbuster of 2010, free agents Chris Bosh and LeBron James signed with the Heat from the Toronto Raptors and the Cleveland Cavaliers, respectively. The Heat made the Finals in 2011 against the Dallas Mavericks, a rematch of 2006, but lost the series after holding a 2-1 lead. This was followed by a second consecutive Finals appearance the following year, garnering their second overall championship after defeating the Oklahoma City Thunder 4-1. 
Uniforms.
The original Miami Heat uniforms consist of simple striping, exclusive only on the right side of the jersey and shorts. The home uniforms were white with lettering in red, black and orange trim, while the away uniforms were black with red, white and orange trim; the numbers were white with red, black and orange trim, using the same font as the classic Los Angeles Lakers jerseys. The original 'flaming ball' logo is on the left leg of the shorts while the word 'Miami' is on the right leg. In the 1995–96 NBA season the Heat introduced a red alternate uniform with lettering and numbers in black, white and orange trim. The original white and red uniforms were reintroduced as throwback uniforms during the Heat's 20th and 25th anniversary seasons, respectively. 
The current Heat uniforms have been in use since the 1999–2000 season. These uniforms, though similar, have marked differences such as striping on both sides, change from orange to yellow trim, updated lettering and block numbers, and a modified 'flaming ball' logo on the right leg. The black away uniform numbers are now consistent with the lettering colors (white with red trim). The alternate red uniform was introduced during the 2001–02 NBA season, and features the city name and numbers in white with black trim. They were also the only team in the NBA to have the NBA logo on the right shoulder instead of the left, until the introduction of the Adidas Revolution 30 uniforms in 2010 which regulated all teams to have the NBA logo on the left shoulder. In the 2009–10 season, the red alternates were tweaked to include the "MH" secondary logo on the left leg; the 'MH' was also added on the beltline for the away and home uniforms, the 'flaming ball' logo was also moved to the left leg. For the 2012–13 season, the city name (Miami) replaced the team name on the black away uniforms. Similar to the Utah Jazz, Chicago Bulls and the Orlando Magic, the Heat had a dress code that prohibits players from wearing headbands on the court. Since then, however, the Heat have allowed the use of headbands, beginning with Jermaine O'Neal in 2009 and continued with the additions of LeBron James, Eddie House, Erick Dampier and Mike Bibby.
Since the 2008 season, the Heat participated in the NBA's Noche Latina promotions, or Latin Nights. In commemorating the occasion, they use their black away uniforms, but with the wordmark "El Heat".
In the 2011–12 season, the Heat planned to wear a 4th all-black alternate home jersey in addition to the existing 3 white, black and red road uniforms. These uniforms were unveiled in 2010 as exclusive fan apparel rather than for game use, but the Heat have planned to wear them in selected home games of the 2011–12 season (against higher ranked teams like the Bulls, Thunder, Knicks, Mavericks, Lakers etc.). These uniforms are in black and white trim; the lettering, logos and numbers traced only in white.
The Heat wore a variation of their current home uniforms on the opening night of the 2012–13 season, with gold accents and a patch of the Larry O'Brien Championship Trophy on the right chest. 
The Heat unveiled a new all-white home alternate uniform in the 2012–13 season. The uniform is similar to their current home uniform, but with the lettering and logos only traced in black. This was to pay tribute to their 'White Hot' promotion during their two championship runs. They began wearing the alternates on November 24, and will wear them every Saturday home game thereafter, except for the December 6 game against the Knicks, and the February 10 game against the Lakers, which falls on a Thursday and Sunday, respectively, and are nationally-televised games.
An all-red uniform, known as 'Big Color', was worn on Christmas Day against the Thunder, a rematch of the 2012 Finals. The uniform is entirely red, with the lettering and logos traced in white.
The Heat have also honored the ABA's Miami Floridians by donning throwback uniforms; first the road jerseys in the 2005–06 season, then the home jerseys in the 2011–12 season.
Rivalries.
vs. New York Knicks.
The rivalry between the New York Knicks and the expansion Miami Heat was a result of their history-making brutally physical four consecutive playoff series from 1997 to 2000. Each series went to the maximum number of games. The rivalry was heightened by a feud sparking between Pat Riley initially the coach of the Knicks from 1991 to 1995, and head coach of the Miami Heat from 1996–2003, 2005–2008 and Riley's successor Knick's head coach Jeff Van Gundy, a faithful servant of Riley's in New York. The first two years were marked by physical violence during the series, with suspensions to players that ultimately determined the outcome.
In recent years, the rivalry has reignited with the Heat signing LeBron James (after much speculation that he would join the Knicks) and Chris Bosh while the Knicks signed Amar'e Stoudemire and traded for Carmelo Anthony. They met in the first round of the 2012 NBA Playoffs, where the Heat won in five games.
vs. Chicago Bulls.
The rivalry with the Chicago Bulls began once the Miami Heat became contenders during the 1990s, a decade dominated by the Bulls, and the advent of the Michael Jordan era. During that period, the Heat were eliminated three times by the Bulls, who would go on to win the NBA championship each time. After Jordan retired and the Heat's fall in the early 2000s, the rivalry cooled but slightly picked up when the Heat faced them in the first round of the 2006 NBA playoffs, which ended in a 4–2 Heat series victory and went on to win the NBA Finals, the Bulls would sweep the defending champion Heat in the first round the next season.
The rivalry has intensified with the resurgence of the Bulls, and the emergence of Derrick Rose and the Heat re-signing Dwyane Wade (who turned down a chance of joining his hometown Bulls) with newly acquired superstars in Chris Bosh and LeBron James (who spurned a chance of teaming up with Rose in Chicago). The revived rivalry has been very physical, involving rough plays and hard fouls between players. Both teams met in the 2011 Eastern Conference Finals, with the Heat winning in five games.
vs. Boston Celtics.
The rivalry with the Boston Celtics is a recent and current one. The two teams first squared off in the playoffs in 2010, with the Celtics defeating the Heat four games to one en route to an eventual NBA Finals appearance by the Celtics. With the acquisition of the Big 3 in 2010, the Heat challenged the Celtics for dominance in the Eastern Conference, finishing with better records in 2011 and 2012 and defeating them in the playoffs both respective years en route to their own Finals appearances, winning in 2012. 
The rivalry has increased with the Miami Heat's addition of Ray Allen, a former member of Boston's Big 3, in 2012.
Radio and television.
The flagship radio stations of the Miami HEAT are WAXY (790 AM) in English, with Mike Inglis and John Crotty calling games, and WQBA (1140 AM) in Spanish, with Jose Paneda and Joe Pujala on the call.
The Heat games are televised primary by Sun Sports with Eric Reid and Tony Fiorentino. Previously, WBFS-TV, WFOR-TV, and WAMI-TV have all aired some games. Games are occasionally televised by TNT, ESPN, or ABC.
From 1988–1993, the HEAT were on WQAM. WINZ previously aired games from 1993–1996 and WIOD did from 1996–2008.
Players.
Retired numbers.
The Heat have retired three numbers, although only two of the players played for the franchise. Michael Jordan was the first player to be honored despite not having played for the Heat. Pat Riley retired Jordan's signature No. 23 before his final game in Miami during the 2002–03 season as a tribute to his career. 
During the 2005–06 season the organization honored Pro Football Hall of Fame quarterback Dan Marino's No. 13 in respect of his contributions to the Miami Dolphins of the National Football League (NFL). However, the No. 13 jersey is not retired and still available to use by the Heat players.
Honored numbers.
13 - Dan Marino - Miami Dolphins (NFL). "(The number is not retired and still available to use by the Heat players.)"
Head coaches.
There have been six head coaches for the Heat franchise. The franchise's first head coach was Ron Rothstein, who served for three seasons with the Heat. Pat Riley, having coached the Heat for eleven seasons, is the franchise's all-time leader for the most regular-season games coached (849), the most regular-season game wins (454), the most playoff games coached (50), and the most playoff-game wins (26); Stan Van Gundy is the franchise's all-time leader for the highest winning percentage in the regular season (.605). Riley is the only Heat head coach to be named one of the top 10 coaches in NBA history, to have won the NBA Coach of the Year Award, having won it in the 1996–97 season, to have won the NBA championship with the Miami Heat (2006), and to have been elected into the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame as a coach, having been elected into the Hall of Fame in 2008. Erik Spoelstra is the only Heat head coach to have spent his entire NBA coaching career with the Heat, and has been the head coach of the Heat since 2008. The Heat's general manager were Lewis Schaffel (1988–1995), Dave Wohl (1995–1996), Randy Pfund (1996–2008) and Pat Riley named NBA Executive of the Year in 2011.
Franchise accomplishments and awards.
Franchise leaders.
"All numbers as of June 28, 2012"
Individual awards.
NBA Most Valuable Player
NBA Finals MVP
NBA All-Star Game MVP
NBA Scoring Champion
NBA Defensive Player of the Year
NBA Most Improved Player Award
Best NBA Player ESPY Award
'"NBA Coach of the Year
"'NBA Executive of the Year
J. Walter Kennedy Citizenship Award
All-NBA First Team
All-NBA Second Team
All-NBA Third Team
NBA All-Defensive First Team
NBA All-Defensive Second Team
NBA All-Rookie First Team
NBA All-Rookie Second Team
NBA All-Star Skills Challenge Champion
NBA All-Star Three-point Shootout Champion
NBA All-Star Slam Dunk Contest Champion
NBA All-Star Shooting Stars Contest Champion
