Karl Pilkington (born 23 September 1972) is an English television personality, social commentator, actor, author and former radio producer. He gained prominence as the producer of Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant's radio programme on XFM. He appeared on "The Ricky Gervais Show", presented the Sky travel series "An Idiot Abroad", and made his full acting debut (following a cameo appearance in the final episode of "Extras") on Gervais' 2012 comedy-drama series "Derek". Pilkington, along with his girlfriend Suzanne Whiston, founded Round Ed Productions Ltd, a television production company that co-produced "Comedy Lab": "Karl Pilkington: Satisfied Fool" with Baby Cow Productions. Pilkington also co-founded RiSK Ltd, a television production company with his former radio show colleagues Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant.
Early life and education.
Karl Pilkington was born in Sale, Cheshire in 1972. He was educated at Ashton-on-Mersey School, Ashton upon Mersey, Sale.
Career.
Early work.
Pilkington moved to London to work with XFM as a producer and after several years he began work on "The Ricky Gervais Show", broadcast on Saturday afternoons. Initially Pilkington was solely the programme's producer. As Gervais and Merchant began to invite him to make the odd comment, Pilkington's persona came to light and his popularity increased. Pilkington was eventually included as a main element of the broadcasts, with large amounts of airtime often given over to his thoughts on various subjects, or various childhood stories. In December 2005, Pilkington stood in for two BBC 6 Music shows for Nemone, and co-presented the shows with Russell Brand.
Celebrity.
Pilkington's presence on "The Ricky Gervais Show" podcasts significantly increased his popularity. He has often been mentioned in interviews given by Gervais, and is often the butt of Gervais' practical jokes. After saying "I could eat a knob at night" on the podcast (in relation to "I'm a Celebrity, Get Me Out of Here!" contestants eating a kangaroo penis), Gervais encouraged his listeners to sample the sound bite and mix it into dance songs for night clubs. The phrase spawned several dance music mixes, T-shirts and merchandise. Many of Pilkington's quotes have since gained publicity, particularly on the Internet. Reuters, commenting on this issue, described Pilkington as a "phenomenon" who had made "Internet history".
On 23 November 2010, while appearing live on Richard Bacon's Radio 5 Live afternoon show, Gervais surprised Pilkington with an on-air phone call. This led to a conversation where Pilkington, who claimed to have been interrupted while grouting his kitchen, said he had not yet been paid for his work on "An Idiot Abroad" and concluded the interview with an off-the-cuff link into the hourly news. Pilkington has worked independently of Gervais and Merchant on several projects. He appeared as a guest on the shows "Flipside TV" and "The Culture Show", and appeared in several short films as part of the Channel 4 initiative "3 Minute Wonders".
Merchant and Gervais themselves have repeatedly denied claims that Pilkington's comic persona is their creation. In an on-air response to similar claims made by Chris Campling during a broadcast on XFM, Merchant stated that he would be "ashamed" if the radio show was scripted, adding, "If we had created Karl, I would not have squandered a character that good on this poxy radio station". Gervais concurred, pointing out that writing a single series' worth of half-hour episodes of shows such as "The Office" and "Extras" took the two of them up to a year to write. An interviewer for "The Daily Telegraph" concluded that Pilkington's persona is genuine.
Television and DVD.
In September 2010, Pilkington featured in a television series produced by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant, "An Idiot Abroad" on Sky1. The series documented a global adventure by Pilkington instigated by Gervais and Merchant in order to take Pilkington out of his comfort zone. The series consists of eight 45-minute episodes tracking Pilkington as he negotiates the Wonders of the World in an attempt to broaden his horizons. The series is accompanied by a book published by Canongate and co-written by Gervais and Merchant. The second series of "An Idiot Abroad", entitled "An Idiot Abroad: The Bucket List", debuted on 23 September 2011 on Sky1. The series involved Pilkington trying to cross items off a list of ultimate things to do before you die. In June 2011, he won the Best Presenter Award for "An Idiot Abroad" at the Factual Entertainment Awards.
Pilkington appeared in an interview on Gervais's live stand-up comedy DVD, "Politics". The DVD of Gervais's film "The Invention of Lying" contains a special feature called "Meet Karl Pilkington" which is entirely devoted to documenting Pilkington's humiliating non-speaking caveman role in another special feature, "The Dawn of Lying". He was given a small role in the final episode of "Extras". Pilkington has performed voiceover work for such clients as One Stop Office Shop, FreeView, Vodafone, HMV, Sony PSP, W H Smith, Wickes, and Unilever. He made his acting debut on 12 April 2012 in the Channel 4 comedy-drama "Derek", portraying caretaker and bus driver Dougie.
Pilkington is going to appear in a five-part Sky1 comic documentary called "The Moaning of Life", which is set to air in the autumn of 2013.
References.
<!--
Biography]". Retrieved 15 April 2007
