With the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the "Daigo Fukuryū Maru" incident still fresh in the Japanese consciousness, Godzilla was conceived as a monster created by nuclear detonations and a metaphor for nuclear weapons in general. As the film series expanded, some stories took on less serious undertones portraying Godzilla as a hero while other plots still portrayed him as a destructive monster; sometimes the lesser of two threats who plays the defender by default but is still a danger to humanity.
Name.
Godzilla's name was written in man'yōgana as , where the kanji are used for phonetic value and not for meaning. Many Japanese books on Godzilla have referenced this curious fact, including "B Media Books Special: Gojira Gahô", published by Take-Shobo in three different editions (1993, 1998, and 1999). 
The Japanese pronunciation of the name is ; the Anglicized form is , with the first syllable pronounced like the word "god", and the rest rhyming with "gorilla". When Godzilla was created (and Japanese-to-English transliteration was less familiar), it is likely that the kana representing the second syllable was misinterpreted as ; in the Hepburn romanization system, Godzilla's name would have been rendered as "Gojira", whereas in the Kunrei romanization system it would have been rendered as "Gozira".
Attributes.
Although Godzilla's appearance has changed over the years, many of his characteristics have remained constant. His roar has remained the same, only changing in pitch. Godzilla's approximate appearance, regardless of the design of the suit utilized for the creature, remains the same general shape, which is instantly recognizable: a giant, bipedal mutant dinosaur with rough, bumpy scales that change color throughout the movies, usually dark gray or black scales, a long powerful tail, and jagged, blue or dark purple dorsal fins. Godzilla's iconic character design is a blended chimera inspired by various prehistoric reptiles, gleaned from children's dinosaur books and illustrations from an issue of "Life" magazine: Godzilla has the head and lower body of a "Tyrannosaurus", a triple row of dorsal plates reminiscent of a "Stegosaurus", the neck and forearms of "Iguanodon" and the tail and skin texture of an alligator, and crocodile. Godzilla's dorsal plates have themselves altered in size and appearance over the years.
Godzilla's body and facial structure changed often from film to film. The first films depicted the creature with a more feral head and facial structure, to indicate his status as a feared threat. As the character became more of a heroic figure—particularly to children, who became a large part of Godzilla's target audience from 1965 until 1978 in the Showa era—the creature's shown as having human or near-human intelligence in most films. Godzilla was originally believed by many to be green when the original black and white film was produced, and promotional artwork in America and other English speaking countries depicted him as such. The creature was also depicted as being green in the Hanna-Barbera cartoon and a number of toys in the United States prior to the Trendmasters toy line, which depicted Godzilla in his actual coloration. Godzilla actually has a greenish hue in "Godzilla 2000" and again in "Godzilla vs. Megaguirus", but returns to his classic charcoal gray in subsequent films in the Millennium series starting with "".
Although his origins vary somewhat from film to film, he is always described as some manner of prehistoric survivor of the order of dinosaurs, who was mutated into his latter form via nuclear radiation, most likely from an atomic weapons test. Non-canonical sources (such as the Universal version of "King Kong vs. Godzilla") suggest that Japan is the ancestral home of Godzilla's kind.
The most notable of Godzilla's abilities gained by his mutation is his atomic breath: a powerful heat ray of fire from his mouth. Godzilla is also depicted as being resistant to damage thanks to a tough hide and an advanced healing factor, which itself became a focal point in "Godzilla vs. Biollante" and "Godzilla 2000". He is portrayed as being strong and dexterous, sometimes utilizing martial arts techniques in combat. Described as a transitional form between aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates in the original film, Godzilla is able to survive in the ocean for indefinite periods of time and is as adept a fighter underwater as he is on land.
These particular abilities are portrayed consistently among Godzilla's many incarnations, though he also possesses skills, often employed as weapons of last resort that are only seen on rare occasions to beat certain enemies.
Over the years the fictional mutant dinosaur Godzilla has possessed many powers and abilities to be used against his foes. Godzilla is not necessarily the single most powerful kaiju but is certainly one of the most successful in terms of his fighting history, both against other kaiju and human efforts to destroy him.
Roar.
The Godzilla roar is the copyrighted sound that Godzilla makes in most of his movies. What typifies the roar is that it sounds very mechanical and does not resemble any known animal’s sound.
The roar was present in the first "Godzilla" (1954) and was created by composer Akira Ifukube who produced the sound by rubbing a resin-covered leather glove along the loosened strings of a double bass and then slowing down the playback. Over the years the roar has become a trademark sound of the Godzilla films and is now instantly recognizable worldwide. Its fame can be compared with the Tarzan yell from the Tarzan films. It is often used in comedy when monsters or dinosaurs are featured or when a character gets extremely angry. The distinctive roar, or a parody of it, has been used in numerous non-Godzilla movies and TV shows.
Godzilla usually lets his roar be heard when he makes his first appearance in a film. During destruction and fighting sequences he roars multiple times. Film directors always use the same sound recording, but in more recent years variations on the sound have been made to express Godzilla’s emotions.
In the 1970s animated series "The Godzilla Power Hour" by the American animation studio Hanna-Barbera Godzilla’s roar was recreated by Ted Cassidy. The American remake "Godzilla" also created a different, yet similar sounding, roar for their Godzilla monster.
There were several roars recorded by composer Akira Ifukube but one in particular was used in most of the movies from its 1955 sequel through to the 1975 "Terror of Mechagodzilla". It was a rather higher pitched, squeakier variant to the ones heard over the opening few seconds of the 1954 film's credits. A remixed variant, slower and far deeper, was then used for 1984's "The Return of Godzilla" and in all the films until 1992's "Godzilla vs. Mothra" where the sound editor went back to using the squeakier variant from the 60's. Sound mixing being the complex art it is today, many different sounds are used to make Godzilla vocalise in the movies made in the 2000s, but they're mostly based on, or include, the squeaky roar of the 1960s.
Atomic breath.
Godzilla's signature weapon is his atomic breath. Godzilla's dorsal fins glow, and lets loose with a stream of radioactive fire from his jaws. The color of the ray corresponds to the glowing of the fins. Godzilla has been shown apparently being able to adjust the intensity of his breath, varying from a blast of superheated vapor (such as in the 1950s and 1960s) to a beam with explosive and concussive properties (in the 1970s and onward). In most of the films, his breath is neon-blue, although in some films it is reddish-orange.
In "Godzilla vs. Megaguirus" Godzilla's breath was shown as having incendiary properties and was strong enough to destroy an artificial miniature black hole, while in "" it possessed incredible range, power and pin-point accuracy, able to hit a target in outer space and kill most "kaiju" with a single shot. In a memorable (and somewhat infamous) scene in "Godzilla vs. Hedorah", Godzilla even used his breath to fly by aiming it at the ground and lifting off like a rocket. His breath can also power electrodes, melt steel and rock and evaporate water instantly.
Another variation of the standard blue atomic breath in the Heisei series was the powerful spiral ray which he acquired as a result of absorbing Fire Rodan's life energy. The spiral breath appeared in times when Godzilla was under extreme duress. However in "Godzilla vs. Destoroyah" the spiral atomic breath completely replaced the normal atomic breath, due to the amounts of power his nuclear heart was giving off. It is so powerful that only one blast of it was sufficient to completely destroy Super Mechagodzilla and SpaceGodzilla, though Destoroyah was barely able to withstand several hits. When Godzilla's dorsal plates began to melt and his heart was nearing the meltdown stage, the radiation increased his blast's power to the point that buildings near the blasts were destroyed. This new red breath was used on Destroyah who took fatal damage. The red spiral atomic breath was used in the Heisei films "Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II", "Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla", "Godzilla vs. Destoroyah" and the Millennium film "". The orange atomic breath seen in "Godzilla 2000" and "Godzilla vs. Megaguirus" is not the red spiral ray, but a recoloring of the classic blue ray. 
In the TriStar "Godzilla", atomic breath was omitted in place of wind breath. Fan backlash led to the filmmakers altering the scenes to make the new Godzilla's breath appear to be flammable. In the subsequent , Godzilla was given green atomic flame breath.
Nuclear pulse, magnetic aura and other powers.
In addition to his signature atomic breath, Godzilla can also emit atomic energy in all directions from every inch of his body in a short-range pulse called the nuclear pulse. Godzilla used this ability in the Heisei series. He used a more powerful version of it in "Godzilla 2000" to kill Orga. In "", after being surged with Ozaki's energy, Godzilla uses a nuclear pulse to prevent Kaiser Ghidorah from draining any more of his energy.
In "Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla" Godzilla found a way to generate powerful magnetic fields from his body after being struck several times by lightning, which proved devastating against his metallic foe. This is the only time Godzilla ever used this power.
In the Godzilla cartoon of the late 1970s by Hanna-Barbera, Godzilla was also given the ability to emit high-powered laser beams from his eyes.
Injury resistance and healing.
Godzilla has displayed an uncanny ability to resist injury. Not even the pressure and cold of deep sea trenches can kill him. Starting in the first "Godzilla" film, Godzilla displayed an immunity to conventional weaponry, virtually impervious to the military attack and he is even shown to be resistant to technology from the future. He has demonstrated the ability to survive complete submersion in magma for an extended period of time. He has even survived being at ground zero of asteroid impacts and being buried under tons of ice for years at a time, seemingly cut off from any oxygen source. His hide has been breached only occasionally (usually only by other kaiju like Gigan, Biollante, King Ghidorah, Destoroyah and MechaGodzilla).
In addition, Godzilla possesses an extremely advanced and highly efficient regenerative ability. This power was a crucial plot point in "Godzilla vs. Biollante" and "Godzilla 2000." In "Godzilla 2000" it is explained that Godzilla's regenerative abilities may have something to do with his radioactive properties. Organizer G1 (Regenerator G1 in the English version) is the name given to a substance in his cells that is responsible for Godzilla's swift healing. Even neural tissue can be rebuilt by Godzilla's regeneration. In "Godzilla vs. Biollante" Japanese scientists use samples of Godzilla cells (called G-cells throughout the Heisei series of "Godzilla" films) to help create the ANEB. This healing factor would be inherited by all creatures spawned from Godzilla's DNA, those being Biollante, SpaceGodzilla and Orga. At the very end of "", after Godzilla has been completely obliterated (or so they all think), his heart is seen beating on the ocean floor, suggesting Godzilla's Organizer G1 would allow him to completely regenerate himself from just a heart or even a single amino acid, perhaps indicating how he survived the Oxygen Destroyer in 1954.
His healing abilities have not been entirely consistent through the series. In "" for example he was still recovering from injuries received in the previous film. However, the wound that was not healing was caused by Mechagodzilla's highly powerful Absolute Zero cannon.
Physical abilities.
Godzilla has displayed varied levels of physical strength. He has been depicted lifting and throwing monsters in excess of his own weight (such as King Ghidorah, Hedorah, Mechagodzilla and others) and in "" was able to throw Kumonga clearly beyond the horizon. He is shown using various martial arts techniques in a comical fashion during the original Showa series and sprinting with astonishing velocity belying his size such as in "Zone Fighter". In the Millennium series he has been able to leap high into the air. However, many of the films show Godzilla preferring to battle his opponents from a distance, particularly in the Heisei series. But it has been shown in virtually all the films that Godzilla is effective battling either at range or close combat. He has also been known to be able to do a flying kick as it was shown in "Godzilla vs. Megalon".
Godzilla's long tail is also a formidable weapon. It has been shown to be flexible and powerful, able to lash out quickly and topple over buildings and enemy monsters. In "Godzilla vs. Megalon" he was able to slide on his tail to deliver a kick, as well as kick himself up with his tail temporarily to kick down King Kong which was seen in "King Kong vs. Godzilla". In "Godzilla vs. Biollante" Godzilla further damaged the Super X-2 with a quick tail swipe after crippling it with his atomic breath. In "Godzilla vs. Mechagodzilla II" he used his powerful tail against Mechagodzilla delivering damage that rated level 8.
In all his incarnations he has been shown to have powerful jaws and sharp teeth and claws. Rarely, Godzilla has also used his dorsal fins as weapons, such as in "Godzilla vs. Megaguirus", when he uses their jagged tips to slice off Megaguirus' claw and in "Godzilla vs. Hedorah" where he used them to cut into Hedorah in mid-flight. In "Godzilla 2000" and "Godzilla vs Megaguirus" his dorsal fins creates tremendous heat while his atomic breath and fire is being prepared.
Radiation.
Godzilla's body constantly emits its own radiation similar to that of nuclear fission. The exact nature of this radiation is unclear. It has been shown to contaminate water sources, raise ocean temperatures of a limited area and even create mutations; (the giant sea louse in "The Return of Godzilla"). His footprints as well as objects and people he has had close contact with hold traces that register on a geiger counter, while Godzilla himself will register at a distance of several hundred feet. His radiation, however, doesn't appear to be profusely destructive. In "Godzilla" an underwater scene showed Godzilla with several fish swimming in his close proximity and they were not visibly affected. Wilderness areas where Godzilla has appeared suffer no visible signs of fallout from his presence and cities he attacks are never abandoned permanently.
In the Showa series Godzilla was carnivorous (it is assumed, though he is never seen to eat anything throughout the series) while in the Heisei series it was insinuated that Godzilla feeds on radiation and the more he absorbs, the larger and more powerful he gets. It has been speculated that his heart is the theoretical equivalent of a power reactor. He is seen attacking submarines and power plants for their reactors and was once revived by a radioactive storm. While nuclear radiation is his preferred sustenance, he can also gain strength from other forms of raw energy. This canon was somewhat carried over to the Millennium series though it was not again pursued as a significant plot point.
Amphibiosity.
Godzilla is described in the original film by Doctor Yamane as a transitional form between aquatic and terrestrial vertebrates. He spends most of his time at sea, coming ashore to wreak havoc and/or save the day. He is capable of marching on the sea floor or swimming by undulating his tail like a crocodile or an alligator, sometimes with his dorsal fins breaking the surface. He possesses a biological equivalent of active sonar allowing him to navigate underwater without visual aide. Godzilla is almost certainly able to somehow extract oxygen from water, occasionally remaining in the ocean depths for periods of months or years, though there has been no official explanation or reference to this ability. Godzilla also seems to be able to control his own buoyancy, often staying on the surface of open water in an upright position and maintaining it under extreme duress, and sinking to the bottom without visible effort. Like his ability to breathe underwater this has never been explained. Being submerged apparently does not impede his atomic breath. He is as excellent a fighter underwater as he is on land and engages opponents in the sea on multiple occasions, fighting monsters either beneath or on the surface of the waves.
Intelligence.
The extent of Godzilla's intelligence varies throughout the character's history, but Godzilla is generally depicted as a monster of some level of intelligence. In the original "Godzilla" film and its early sequels he is depicted with simple animal cunning, but as the Showa series progressed he is seen as being as intelligent as a human, capable of abstract thought, relating cause and effect, and having a high level of self-awareness. Godzilla was shown to be able to figure out that his atomic breath could be used to power the electrodes needed to dry out Hedorah in "Godzilla vs. Hedorah" and able to communicate with other monsters. He can even be heard 'talking' to Anguirus in "Godzilla vs. Gigan"; (in the American release they spoke in distorted English while in the Japanese version they communicated via word balloons). Godzilla has even been depicted as having a sense of humor, as shown when he laughs at Rodan (and apparently using rude language) during "Ghidorah, the Three-Headed Monster". In addition Godzilla appears to converse with Jet Jaguar in "Godzilla vs. Megalon".
In the Heisei series Godzilla reacts on animal cunning and instinct more consistently than in his Showa counterpart, as demonstrated by his conditioned response in "The Return of Godzilla". He was still capable of independent thought, however and according to Miki Saegusa of human-like sentiments as well. This was corroborated by his mourning the death of Godzilla Junior in "Godzilla vs. Destoroyah". In "Godzilla vs Mechagodzilla II" he seems to destroy Mechagodzilla out of rage at Rodan's death. In "Godzilla vs SpaceGodzilla" he was the first to figure out that Space Godzilla was using a tower at the central of a field of crystals to draw power, prior to the JSDF. It was insinuated in "Godzilla vs. King Ghidorah" that he also remembers the distant past. The Heisei Godzilla was psychic on some level, possibly the most powerful in existence. His evasion of the JSDF in "Godzilla vs. Biollante" seemed to carry implications of precognition. Additionally, he had some manner of psychic link with Godzilla Junior and has several times demonstrated the ability to locate potential opponents from great distances.
In the Millennium series, Godzilla's behavior was again limited to a simplistic animal cunning. He was shown to be capable of abstract, even strategical thinking but displayed little to no anthropomorphism.
Weaknesses.
Despite his incredible power, Godzilla has displayed a few weaknesses over the years. In "King Kong vs. Godzilla" and "Mothra vs. Godzilla" he is shown to be vulnerable to strong voltages of electricity. As the series progressed, lightning (i.e., electricity found in nature) has been shown to have the opposite effect, at times serving to revitalize him. Godzilla has been shown to be vulnerable to freezing conditions, which can force him into suspended animation. In "The Return of Godzilla" Godzilla was shown to be vulnerable to cadmium, though Godzilla's immune system was able to overcome it. Later on, Godzilla is revealed to have a second brain in his spine with Super Mechagodzilla being able to paralyze him by destroying it. Nevertheless, he was revived by Fire Rodan and further films seem to ignore this Achilles heel. It was also suggested in "Godzilla vs. SpaceGodzilla" that Godzilla has a soft spot under each armpit. However, the validity of this claim was highly dubious and this alleged weak point was never successfully exploited. Godzilla's sheer bulk has also been depicted as a disadvantage, making it difficult for him to keep up with the more agile Megaguirus, who was able to outmaneuver him as well as forcing Godzilla to have to rely heavily on his endurance. Also, while he has an endurance level beyond measure, his enemies usually counter by trying to crush and batter him.
To date, the only weapons ever shown to be close to effective against Godzilla were Dr. Serizawa's Oxygen Destroyer and to a lesser degree, Dr. Shiragami's ANEB (Anti-Nuclear Energy Bacteria).
Anti-Godzilla weapons.
Due to Godzilla's size, super-strength and regenerative abilities, he is invulnerable to most forms of conventional attack. However, over the years, there have been some weapons that were able to damage even Godzilla. Many weapons used against Godzilla are controversial in nature, creating ethical dilemmas as to whether the use of such weapons are justifiable under any circumstances, and/or by their existence quantify an equal or greater threat as Godzilla himself.
"Note: This list is for man-made weapons. Other monsters and forces of nature don't count."
Television and printed media.
In Japan, Godzilla was a frequent guest star on the tokusatsu series "Zone Fighter". In it, Godzilla occasionally fought alongside the protagonist against other monsters, including Gigan a monster who had previously appeared in "Godzilla" films.
Godzilla made his American series debut in the 1978 Hanna-Barbera Saturday morning show "Godzilla". In this series, Godzilla had a nephew, Godzooky. In addition to his trademark atomic blast, which simply changed to fire in the cartoon, he was given the power to shoot laser beams out of his eyes. Godzilla could be summoned by his human friends, sea-explorers on the ship USS "Calico", with a signaling device or by the cry of Godzooky. The series ran until 1981. Several monsters were created for this show, including The Firebird, not the same as the one in Destroy All Monsters. That one was really an alien spacecraft that crashed through buildings and set them on fire.
A second series, based on the American "Godzilla", aired on Fox Kids. The series featured the surviving baby Godzilla from the end of the live action film, which now had grown to full size. Godzilla traveled around the world with a team called HEAT, including scientist Nick Tatopoulos, battling monsters. Godzilla had the abilities and physical forms of his parent, but the creators of the show gave him more powers and an attitude more resembling the original Japanese Godzilla.
In Japan, Godzilla (along with a plethora of other Kaiju) appeared in an animated toy show called "Godzilla Island" that ran from 1997–1998.
Godzilla has been featured in comic books, most often in American productions (from Marvel Comics in the late-1970s, and from Dark Horse Comics in the 1980s and 1990s). Japanese Godzilla manga comics are also available.
The Marvel series told original stories and attempted to fit into the official Toho continuity, while avoiding direct references to it. It integrated Godzilla into the Marvel Universe. It was published from 1977 to 1979, fitting between the Showa Period movies and the Heisei Era. This series described the adventures and confrontations of Godzilla in the United States.
Between 1996 and 1998 Random House published four books by Marc Cerasini featuring Godzilla and other kaiju of the Toho franchise: "Godzilla Returns", "Godzilla 2000" (unrelated to the film of the same name), "Godzilla at World's End", and "Godzilla vs. the Robot Monsters". The release of a fifth book, "Godzilla and the Lost Continent" was planned but was canceled when Random House's license for Godzilla expired.
On September 23, 2004 "Godzilla on My Mind: Fifty Years of the King of Monsters" by William M. Tsutsui was released by Palgrave Macmillan. The book was released to mark the fiftieth anniversary of Godzilla and looks into some of the ways Godzilla has become a simple part of everyday life for fans.
In 2010, IDW Publishing announced that they gained the rights for the license to Godzilla, and released a new series titled "Godzilla: Monster World" (since renamed "Godzilla: Kingdom of Monsters") in March 2011. Eric Powell and Tracy Marsh co-wrote Kingdom of Monsters, but were replaced with Jason Ciaramella at issue 9. Phil Hester supplied the art, but was replaced with Victor Dos Santos at issue 5. Artist Matt Frank also supplied variant covers for each issue, each focused on a specific monster, such as Anguirus, Mothra, Rodan or King Ghidorah. Other covers were drawn by Eric Powell, Jeff Zornow, Alex Ross, and David Messina.
The first issue was released in March 2011 and focused on introducing Godzilla, who destroys Japan, and the Japanese Prime Minister even orders for nuclear weapons to be dropped on him, causing his trademark atomic ray. The first issue sold out within its first day, ranking 16th for the month. The series went on for 12 issues, the last being released in February. The series was widely criticized by fans for being unfaithful to the series, as well as having misleading covers, poor art, and too many plot threads to keep track of.
DW began publishing a new series, simply titled "Godzilla" in May 2012, written by Duane Swierczynski and with art by Simon Gane.
IDW also released two 5 issue mini-series, Gangsters and Goliaths, and Legends. Gangsters and Goliaths focused on a disgraced cop trying to rid Tokyo of a gang lord with the help of Mothra. Each issue of Legends was done by different writers and artists, with issue one being co-written and illustrated by Matt Frank, and focused on a different individual monster per issue (Anguiras/Destroyah, Rodan, Titanosaurus, Hedorah/MechaGodzilla, and Kumonga).
Cultural impact.
Godzilla is one of the most recognizable symbols of Japanese popular culture worldwide and remains an important facet of Japanese films, embodying the kaiju subset of the tokusatsu genre. He has been considered a filmographic metaphor for the United States, as well as an allegory of nuclear weapons in general. The earlier "Godzilla" films, especially the original, portrayed Godzilla as a frightening, nuclear monster. Godzilla represented the fears that many Japanese held about the nuclear attacks on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the possibility of recurrence.
As the series progressed, so did Godzilla, changing into a less destructive and more heroic character as the films became geared towards children. Since then, the character has fallen somewhere in the middle, sometimes portrayed as a protector of the world from external threats and other times as a bringer of destruction. Godzilla remains one of the greatest fictional heroes in the history of film, and is also the second of only three fictional characters to have won the MTV Lifetime Achievement Award, which was awarded in 1996.
The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society christened a vessel "Gojira". Its purpose is to target and harass Japanese whalers in defence of whales in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The "Gojira" was renamed in May 2011 after complaints of copyright infringement by the owners of the "Gojira" copyright.
Gojira is the name of a French death metal band, formerly known as Godzilla.
