Elsa Lafuente Medianu (born 18 July 1976), known professionally as Elsa Pataky, is a Spanish model, actress, and film producer.
Early life.
Elsa Pataky was born in Madrid, Spain, the daughter of José Francisco Lafuente, a Spanish biochemist, and Cristina Pataky Medianu, a publicist of mixed Romanian and Hungarian ancestry. Pataky attended the Universidad de San Pablo CEU, studying journalism and taking acting classes. 
In addition to Spanish, she is fluent in English, Romanian, Italian, and French.
Career.
Pataky was a member of the Madrid theatre company "Teatro Cámara" de Ángel Gutiérrez. Eventually, she left school when she was cast in the television series "Al salir de clase". Some of her subsequent films were co-productions with the UK and France, which introduced her to working in English and French.
She was in the cast of the television series "Queen of Swords" (2000) as Señora Vera Hidalgo, trophy wife of Gaspar Hidalgo and mistress of Captain Grisham, credited in the opening titles but appearing in only 14 of the 22 episodes. She also had a recurring role in the television series "Los Serrano", playing teacher Raquel, who fell in love with her student Marcos (Fran Perea). 
Pataky has appeared in over 10 Spanish films and co-starred in the French film "Iznogoud" (2004). She was also on the cover of August 2006 issue of "Maxim". She was cast in 2009 in the Mexican series "Mujeres Asesinas" as Paula Moncada in the episode "Ana y Paula, Ultrajadas". She also starred in the action noir film "Give 'Em Hell, Malone" and Dario Argento's "Giallo". Pataky became the female face for the first collection of Time Force's jewelry line Ultimate Jewel, opposite soccer star Cristiano Ronaldo. She played Officer Elena Neves in the movie "Fast Five", with Dwayne Johnson as her partner. MTV Networks' NextMovie.com named her one of the Breakout Stars to Watch for in 2011.
Personal life.
Pataky began dating American actor Adrien Brody in 2006. For Pataky's 31st birthday in July 2007, Brody purchased her a 19th-century castle in New York state. Pataky and Brody were featured at their New York home in a 35-page spread for "HELLO!" magazine in October 2008. The pair broke up in 2009, and Pataky subsequently dated French actor Olivier Martinez that year. She then began dating Australian actor Chris Hemsworth in early 2010, after meeting through their mutual representatives. Pataky and Hemsworth married over the Christmas holidays in December 2010. They have one daughter, India Rose Hemsworth, born in May 2012 in London, England.
In September 2012 Pataky won 310,000€ in Spain's supreme court against publishing group Ediciones Zeta that owns Interviu magazine which published topless photos of Pataky, in March 2007, taken with a long lens while she was changing clothes when posing topless, but with her hands covering her breasts, for photographs that were to appear in Elle magazine. The Zeta group said it would appeal the decision.
