Whey protein is a mixture of globular proteins isolated from whey, the liquid material created as a by-product of cheese production. Some preclinical studies in rodents have suggested that whey protein may possess anti-inflammatory or anti-cancer properties. The effects of whey protein on human health are of great interest and are currently being investigated as a way of reducing disease risk, as well as a possible supplementary treatment for several diseases.
Whey protein is commonly marketed and ingested as a dietary supplement, and various health claims have been attributed to it in the alternative medicine community. Although whey proteins are responsible for some milk allergies, the major allergens in milk are the caseins.
Production.
Whey is left over when milk coagulates and contains everything that is soluble from milk. It is a 5% solution of lactose in water, with some minerals and lactalbumin. It is removed after cheese is processed. The fat is removed and then is processed for human foods. Processing can be done by simple drying, or the protein content can be increased by removing lipids and other non-protein materials. For example, spray drying after membrane filtration separates the proteins from whey.
Whey can be denatured by heat. High heat (such as the sustained high temperatures above 72 °C associated with the pasteurization process) denatures whey proteins. While native whey protein does not aggregate upon renneting or acidification of milk, denaturing the whey protein triggers hydrophobic interactions with other proteins, and the formation of a protein gel. Heat-denatured whey can still cause allergies in some people.
Composition.
Whey protein is the collection of globular proteins isolated from whey, a by-product of cheese manufactured from cow's milk. The protein in cow's milk is 20% whey protein and 80% casein protein, whereas the protein in human milk is 60% whey and 40% casein. Whey protein is typically a mixture of beta-lactoglobulin (~65%), alpha-lactalbumin (~25%), and serum albumin (~8%), which are soluble in their native forms, independent of pH. The protein fraction in whey (approximately 10% of the total dry solids within whey) comprises four major protein fractions and six minor protein fractions. The major protein fractions in whey are beta-lactoglobulin, alpha-lactalbumin, bovine serum albumin, and immunoglobulins.
Major forms.
Whey protein typically comes in three major forms: concentrate (WPC), isolate (WPI), and hydrolysate (WPH).
Whey protein and muscle building.
The effects of whey protein supplementation on muscle growth in response to resistance training are debatable. One study demonstrated some increase in lean body mass and strength in men supplementing whey protein vs. no supplementation, while another study found greater increases in strength in a group supplementing whey compared to another group supplementing casein, which could be evidence of whey protein's superior amino acid profile. However, other research exists that show little to no benefit of whey protein supplementation. The authors of one study concluded that "young adults who supplement with protein during a structured resistance training program experience minimal beneficial effects in lean tissue mass and strength,", although it did not control for other sources of protein in the participant's diets. The timing of protein supplement ingestion may not have any significant effects on strength, power, or body-composition. A study of elderly men found supplementation with whey protein after exercise improved muscle protein synthesis.
Health effects.
The use of whey protein as a source of amino acids and its effect on reducing the risks of diseases such as heart disease, cancer and diabetes is the focus of ongoing research. Whey is an abundant source of branched-chain amino acids (BCAAs), which are used to fuel working muscles and stimulate protein synthesis. In particular, leucine plays a key role in initiating the transcription of protein synthesis. When leucine is ingested in high amounts, such as with whey protein supplementation, there is greater stimulation of protein synthesis, which may speed recovery and adaptation to stress (exercise).
Whey protein contains the amino acid cysteine, which can be used to make glutathione. However, this amino acid is not essential for the synthesis of glutathione, and some studies have suggested that the amount of cysteine in the diet may have little effect on glutathione synthesis. However, another study suggested that large amounts of whey protein can increase cellular glutathione levels. Glutathione is an antioxidant that defends the body against free radical damage and some toxins, and studies in animals have suggested that milk proteins might reduce the risk of cancer.
Digestive issues.
Some people experience severe digestive issues following consumption of whey protein powder. These may include gas, bloating, cramps, tiredness, weakness, fatigue, headaches, and irritability. One of the possible causes is lactose intolerance after they ingest whey concentrate. Undigested protein in the colon will undergo bacterial fermentation which leads to the production of, among other things, gas and fatty acids.
Similar symptoms can be caused by ingredients found in lower quality protein powders such as lactose in whey protein concentrate or artificial sweeteners in most commercial protein powders. The effects of these substances can be distinguished from the effects of whey alone by switching to an unsweetened whey isolate or hydrolysate. If symptoms are not eliminated by switching to a purer form of whey protein, using alternative protein sources such as pea protein or rice protein may reduce symptoms.
