Neil deGrasse Tyson ( born October 5, 1958) is an American astrophysicist and science communicator. He is currently the Frederick P. Rose Director of the Hayden Planetarium at the Rose Center for Earth and Space and a research associate in the department of astrophysics at the American Museum of Natural History. From 2006 to 2011 he hosted the educational science television show "NOVA ScienceNow" on PBS and has been a frequent guest on "The Daily Show", "The Colbert Report", "Real Time with Bill Maher", and "Jeopardy!". It was announced on August 5, 2011, that Tyson will be hosting a new sequel to Carl Sagan's "" television series.
Early life.
Tyson was born as the second of three children in the borough of Manhattan in New York City, but was raised in the Bronx. His mother, Sunchita Feliciano Tyson, was a gerontologist, and his father, Cyril deGrasse Tyson, was a sociologist, human resource commissioner for the New York City mayor John Lindsay and the first Director of Harlem Youth Opportunities Unlimited. Tyson attended the Bronx High School of Science (1972–1976, astrophysics emphasis) where he was captain of the wrestling team and was editor-in-chief of the school's "Physical Science Journal". Tyson had an abiding interest in astronomy since he was nine years old, following his visit to the Hayden Planetarium. He obsessively studied astronomy in his teens, and eventually even gained some fame in the astronomy community by giving lectures on the subject at the age of fifteen . Tyson recalls that "so strong was that imprint the night sky that I'm certain that I had no choice in the matter, that in fact, the universe called me."
Astronomer Carl Sagan, who was a faculty member at Cornell University, tried to recruit Tyson to Cornell for undergraduate studies. During an interview with writer Daniel Simone, Tyson said, "Interestingly, when I applied to Cornell, my application dripped of my passion for the study and research of the Universe. Somehow the admissions office brought my application to the attention of the late Dr. Sagan, and he actually took the initiative and care to contact me. He was very inspirational and a most powerful influence. Dr. Sagan was as great as the universe, an effective mentor." Tyson chose to attend Harvard University, however, where he majored in physics and lived in Currier House. He was a member of the crew team during his freshman year, but returned to wrestling, eventually lettering in his senior year. In addition to wrestling and rowing in college, he was active in dance in styles including jazz, ballet, , and Latin Ballroom. Tyson earned a Bachelor of Arts in physics from Harvard in 1980 and began his graduate work at the University of Texas at Austin, where he earned a Master of Arts in astronomy in 1983. In 1985, he won a gold medal with the University of Texas dance team at a national tournament in the International Latin Ballroom style. Tyson transferred from the University of Texas at Austin to Columbia University in 1988 after his committee was dissolved. At Columbia University, in 1989, he received a Master of Philosophy in astrophysics and, in 1991, he earned a doctor of philosophy in astrophysics.
Career.
Tyson's research has focused on observations in stellar formation and evolution as well as cosmology and galactic astronomy. He has held numerous positions at institutions including University of Maryland, Princeton University, the American Museum of Natural History, and Hayden Planetarium.
Tyson has written a number of popular books on astronomy. In 1995, he began to write the "Universe" column for "Natural History" magazine. In a column he authored for the magazine in 2002, Tyson coined the term "Manhattanhenge" to describe the two days annually on which the evening sun aligns with the cross streets of the street grid in Manhattan, making the sunset visible along unobstructed side streets. Tyson's column also influenced his work as a professor with The Great Courses.
In 2001, US President George W. Bush appointed Tyson to serve on the Commission on the Future of the United States Aerospace Industry and in 2004 to serve on the President's Commission on Implementation of United States Space Exploration Policy, the latter better known as the "Moon, Mars, and Beyond" commission. Soon afterward he was awarded the NASA Distinguished Public Service Medal, the highest civilian honor bestowed by NASA.
In 2004, he hosted the four-part "Origins" miniseries of PBS's "Nova", and, with Donald Goldsmith, co-authored the companion volume for this series, "Origins: Fourteen Billion Years Of Cosmic Evolution". He again collaborated with Goldsmith as the narrator on the documentary "400 Years of the Telescope" which premiered on PBS in April 2009.
As director of the Hayden Planetarium, Tyson bucked traditional thinking in order to keep Pluto from being referred to as the ninth planet in exhibits at the center. Tyson has explained that he wanted to look at commonalities between objects, grouping the terrestrial planets together, the gas giants together, and Pluto with like objects and to get away from simply counting the planets. He has stated on "The Colbert Report", "The Daily Show", and "BBC Horizon" that this decision has resulted in large amounts of hate mail, much of it from children. In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) confirmed this assessment by changing Pluto to the dwarf planet classification. Daniel Simone wrote of the interview with Tyson describing his frustration. "For a while, we were not very popular here at the Hayden Planetarium."
Tyson has been vice-president, president, and chairman of the board of the Planetary Society. He was also the host of the PBS program "Nova ScienceNow" until 2011. He attended and was a speaker at the symposium on November 2006. In 2007, Tyson, who is known for his vibrant character, cheerful demeanor, and awe of the vastness of the universe itself, was chosen to be a regular on The History Channel's popular series "The Universe".
In May 2009, he launched a one-hour radio talk show called "StarTalk", which he co-hosted with comedienne Lynne Koplitz. The show was syndicated on Sunday afternoons on KTLK AM in Los Angeles and WHFS in Washington DC. The show lasted for thirteen weeks, but was resurrected in December 2010 and then, co-hosted with comedians Chuck Nice and Leighann Lord instead of Koplitz. Guests range from colleagues in science to celebrities such as Gza, Wil Wheaton, Sarah Silverman, and Bill Maher. The show is also available via the internet through a live stream or in the form of a podcast.
In April 2011, Tyson was the keynote speaker at the 93rd International Convention of the Phi Theta Kappa International Honor Society of the Two-year School. He and James Randi delivered a lecture entitled "Skepticism", which related directly with the convention's theme of "The Democratization of Information: Power, Peril, and Promise".
In 2012, Tyson announced that he would appear in a YouTube series based on his radio show "StarTalk". A premiere date for the show has not been announced, but it will be distributed on the Nerdist YouTube Channel.
Views.
Tyson has argued that the concept of intelligent design thwarts the advance of scientific knowledge. When asked if he believed in a higher power, Tyson responded: "Every account of a higher power that I've seen described, of all religions that I've seen, include many statements with regard to the benevolence of that power. When I look at the universe and all the ways the universe wants to kill us, I find it hard to reconcile that with statements of beneficence." In an interview on podcast "Point of Inquiry", Tyson defined himself as an agnostic.
He has written and broadcast extensively about his views of religion, spirituality, and the spirituality of science including the essays, "The Perimeter of Ignorance" and "Holy Wars," both appearing in "Natural History" magazine and the 2006 "Beyond Belief" workshop. Tyson has collaborated with evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins and presented talks with him on religion and science.
Tyson lived near the World Trade Center and was an eyewitness to the September 11, 2001 attacks. He wrote a widely circulated letter on what he saw. Footage he filmed on the day was included in the 2008 documentary film 102 Minutes That Changed America On June 6, 2008, after the conclusion of the Democratic presidential primaries, Tyson wrote an op-ed in "The New York Times" in which he presented a statistical analysis of then recent polling data. From this analysis, Tyson concluded that in a hypothetical election held on the day of the publication of his article, Barack Obama would lose to John McCain, whereas Hillary Clinton would beat McCain.
Tyson collaborated with PETA on a PSA that stated, "You don't have to be a rocket scientist to know that kindness is a virtue." He also granted PETA an interview, in which he discussed the concept of intelligence (both of human and other animals), the failure of humans to heretofore communicate meaningfully with other animals, and the need of humans to be empathetic.
Tyson is an advocate for expanding the operations of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Arguing that "the most powerful agency on the dreams of a nation is currently underfunded to do what it needs to be doing," Tyson has suggested that the general public has a tendency to overestimate how much revenue is allocated to the space agency. At a March 2010 address, he stated, "By the way, how much does NASA cost? It's a half a penny on the dollar. Did you know that? The people are saying, 'Why are we spending money up there...' I ask them, 'How much do you think we're spending?' They say 'five cents, ten cents on a dollar.' It's a half a penny."
In March 2012, Tyson testified before the United States Senate Science Committee, stating that "Right now, NASA's annual budget is half a penny on your tax dollar. For twice that—a penny on a dollar—we can transform the country from a sullen, dispirited nation, weary of economic struggle, to one where it has reclaimed its 20th century birthright to dream of tomorrow." Inspired by Tyson's advocacy and remarks, the Penny4NASA nonprofit was founded in 2012 by John Zeller and advocates the doubling of NASA's budget to one percent of the Federal Budget, or one "penny on the dollar."
Media appearances.
As a science communicator, Tyson regularly appears on television, radio, and various other media outlets. He has been a regular guest on "The Colbert Report", and host Stephen Colbert refers to him in his comedic book "I Am America (And So Can You!)", noting in his chapter on scientists that most scientists are "decent, well-intentioned people," but, presumably tongue-in-cheek, that "Neil DeGrasse Tyson is an absolute monster." He has appeared numerous times on "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart". He also has made appearances on "Late Night with Conan O'Brien", "The Tonight Show with Jay Leno", "Late Night with Jimmy Fallon", and "The Rachel Maddow Show". He served as one of the central interviewees on the various episodes of the History Channel science program, "The Universe". Tyson participated on the NPR radio quiz program "Wait Wait... Don't Tell Me!" in 2007. He has appeared several times on "Real Time with Bill Maher", and he was also featured on an episode of "Who Wants To Be A Millionaire?" as the ask the expert lifeline. Tyson has also spoken many times on Philadelphia's popular morning show, "Preston and Steve", on 93.3 WMMR.
Tyson has been featured as a guest interviewee on "The Skeptics' Guide to the Universe", "Radiolab", and "Skepticality" podcasts and has been in several of the Symphony of Science videos.
In 2007 Tyson was the keynote speaker during the dedication ceremony of Deerfield Academy's new science center, the Koch Center. He emphasized the impact science will have on the twenty-first century, as well as explaining that investments into science may be costly, but their returns in the form of knowledge gained, and piquing interest is invaluable. Tyson has also appeared as the keynote speaker at The Amazing Meeting, a science and skepticism conference hosted by the "James Randi Educational Foundation".
Tyson made a guest appearance as himself in the episode "Brain Storm" of "Stargate Atlantis" alongside Bill Nye and in the episode "The Apology Insufficiency" of "The Big Bang Theory". 
Tyson is also a frequent participant in the website Reddit's AMAs (Ask Me Anythings) where he is responsible for 3 of the top 10 most popular AMAs of all-time.
Neil deGrasse Tyson also made an appearance in an episode of Martha Speaks as himself. 
In "Action Comics" #14 (January 2013), which was published November 7, 2012, Tyson appears in the story, in which he determines that Superman's home planet, Krypton, orbited the red dwarf LHS 2520 in the constellation Corvus 27.1 lightyears from Earth. Tyson assisted DC Comics in selecting a real-life star that would be an appropriate parent star to Krypton, and picked Corvus, which is Latin for "Crow", and which is the mascot of Superman's high school, the Smallville Crows.
Personal life.
Tyson lives in Lower Manhattan with his wife and two children.
Tyson is a fine wine enthusiast whose collection was featured in the May 2000 issue of the "Wine Spectator" and the Spring 2005 issue "The World of Fine Wine".
