"Hallelujah" is a song written by Canadian singer-songwriter Leonard Cohen, originally released on his album "Various Positions" (1984). Achieving little initial success, the song found greater popular acclaim through a cover by John Cale, which later formed the basis for a cover by Jeff Buckley. It is the subject of the book "The Holy or the Broken: Leonard Cohen, Jeff Buckley & the Unlikely Ascent of "Hallelujah"" (2012) by Alan Light. In a "New York Times" review of this, Janet Maslin praises the book and the song, noting that "Cohen spent years struggling with his song 'Hallelujah.' . . . He wrote perhaps as many as 80 verses before paring the song down." Many cover versions have been performed by many and various singers, both in recordings and in concert, with over 300 versions known. The song has been used in film and television soundtracks, and televised talent contests. It is often called one of the greatest songs.
Musical composition and lyrical interpretation.
"Hallelujah", in its original version, is a song in "6/8 feel", which evokes both waltz and gospel music. Written in the key of C major, the chord progression "goes like this, the fourth, the fifth, the minor fall, and the major lift": C, F, G, A minor, F.
Cohen wrote around 80 draft verses for "Hallelujah", with one writing session at the Royalton Hotel in New York where he was reduced to sitting on the floor in his underwear, banging his head on the floor. His original version, as recorded on his "Various Positions" album, contains several biblical references, most notably evoking the stories of Samson and traitorous Delilah from the Book of Judges as well as the adulterous King David and Bathsheba: "she cut your hair" and "you saw her bathing on the roof, her beauty in the moonlight overthrew you".
Following his original 1984 studio-album version, Cohen performed the original song on his world tour in 1985, but live performances during his 1988 and 1993 tours almost invariably contained a quite different set of lyrics with only the last verse being common to the two versions. Numerous singers mix lyrics from both versions, and occasionally make direct lyric changes, such as Rufus Wainwright, a Canadian-American singer, substituting "holy dark" and Allison Crowe, a Canadian singer-songwriter, substituting "Holy Ghost" for "holy dove".
Cohen's lyrical poetry and his view that "many different hallelujahs exist" is reflected in wide-ranging covers with very different intents or tones, allowing the song to be "melancholic, fragile, uplifting joyous" depending on the performer: The Welsh singer-songwriter John Cale, the first person to record a cover version of the song (in 1991), promoted a message of "soberness and sincerity" in contrast to Cohen's dispassionate tone; The cover by Jeff Buckley, an American singer-songwriter, is more sorrowful and was described by Buckley as "a hallelujah to the orgasm"; Crowe interpreted the song as a "very sexual" composition that discussed relationships; Wainwright offered a "purifying and almost liturgical" interpretation; and Guy Garvey of the British band Elbow made the hallelujah a "stately creature" and incorporated his religious interpretation of the song into his band's recordings.
Cover versions.
Since 1991, "Hallelujah" has been performed by a wide variety of singers: over 300, and in various languages. Statistics from the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA); the Canadian Recording Industry Association; the Australian Recording Industry Association; and the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry show that, by late 2008, more than five million copies of the song sold in CD format. It has been the subject of a BBC Radio documentary and been in the soundtracks of numerous films and television programs. Different interpretations of the song may include different verses, out of the over 80 verses Cohen originally wrote.
In an April 2009 CBC Radio interview, Cohen said that he finds the number of covers of his song "ironic and amusing" given that when he first wrote it, his record company wouldn't put it out. However, he now thinks the song could benefit from a break in exposure: "I was just reading a review of a movie called "Watchmen" that uses it and the reviewer said – 'Can we please have a moratorium on "Hallelujah" in movies and television shows?' And I kind of feel the same way...I think it's a good song, but I think too many people sing it." In early 2012, during interviews advancing his latest album, "Old Ideas", and more touring, Cohen says that he's not tired of the song being covered: ""There's been a couple of times when other people have said can we have a moratorium please on Hallelujah? Must we have it at the end of every single drama and every single Idol? And once or twice I've felt maybe I should lend my voice to silencing it but on second thought no, I'm very happy that it's being sung."
John Cale.
John Cale's cover first appeared on "I'm Your Fan" (1991), a Leonard Cohen tribute album, and later on his live album "Fragments of a Rainy Season" (1992). Cale's version has vocals, piano, and lyrics that Cohen had only performed live. Cale had watched Cohen perform the song and asked Cohen to send him the lyrics. Cohen then faxed Cale fifteen pages of lyrics. Cale claims that he "went through and just picked out the cheeky verses."
Cale's version forms the basis of most subsequent performances, including Cohen's performances during his 2008–2009 world tour. It was the version used in the film "Shrek" (2001) (although it did not appear on the film's soundtrack album). It also appears on the first soundtrack album for the TV series "Scrubs".
Jeff Buckley.
Jeff Buckley, inspired by Cale's earlier cover, recorded one of the best-known versions of "Hallelujah" for his only complete album, "Grace", in 1994. Later, in 2007 was released as single.
Critical reception.
In 2004, Buckley's version was ranked number 259 on "Rolling Stone"'s "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time". The same year "Time" called Buckley's version "exquisitely sung," observing "Cohen murmured the original like a dirge, but ... Buckley treated the ... song like a tiny capsule of humanity, using his voice to careen between glory and sadness, beauty and pain... It's one of the great songs."
In September 2007, a poll of fifty songwriters conducted by the magazine "Q" listed "Hallelujah" among the all-time "Top 10 Greatest Tracks" with John Legend calling Buckley's version "as near perfect as you can get. The lyrics to 'Hallelujah' are just incredible and the melody's gorgeous and then there's Jeff's interpretation of it. It's one of the most beautiful pieces of recorded music I’ve ever heard." In July 2009, the Buckley track was ranked number three on the 2009 Triple J Hottest 100 of All Time, a listener poll held every decade by the Australian radio station "Triple J"."
Commercial performance.
Buckley's version was not an instant hit, nor did Buckley live to see the full measure of the reception his recording would ultimately have; he died in 1997. The album on which it appeared did not go Gold in the U.S. until 2002, nine years after its release. In fact, like Cohen's original, the Buckley version was never released as a single, and it first charted posthumously in 2006. In March of that year, Buckley had his first national Top 10 bestseller when "Hallelujah" was number seven in Norway. In 2007 it made the top 3 on the Swedish charts. In March 2008 it topped "Billboard"'s Hot Digital Songs in the U.S. after a performance of the song by Jason Castro in the seventh season of "American Idol". The sudden resurgence of interest provided both Gold and Platinum status, the RIAA certifying the digital track on 22 April 2008. It also hit number one in France in March 2008.
Usage in media.
The Buckley version has been widely used in film and television dramas, including the series "The West Wing", "Scrubs", "Crossing Jordan", "Without a Trace", "The O.C.", "House", "Cold Case", "Dirt", "Criminal Minds", "ER", "Third Watch", "Ugly Betty" and "LAX", and the films "Feast of Love", "The Edukators", "Vinterkyss" and "Lord of War". "Hallelujah can be joyous or bittersweet, depending on what part of it you use", "Time" quoted Buckley's publisher as saying, and the magazine opined that its liberal use in some cases was "a tacit admission that neither the writers nor the actors could convey their characters' emotions as well as Buckley."
Rufus Wainwright.
Canadian-American musician and singer Rufus Wainwright had briefly met Jeff Buckley and recorded a tribute to him after his 1997 death. That song, "Memphis Skyline", referenced Buckley's version of "Hallelujah", which Wainwright would later record, though using piano and a similar arrangement to Cale's. Wainwright's version was included in the album "", although it was Cale's version that was used in the film itself. The "Shrek" soundtrack, containing Wainwright's cover, was certified Double Platinum in the United States in 2003 as selling over two million copies.
Rufus Wainwright, his sister Martha Wainwright, and Joan Wasser performed the song in the film "".
k.d. lang.
In 2004, k.d. lang recorded a version of "Hallelujah" on her album "Hymns of the 49th Parallel". She has since sung it at several major events, such as at the Canadian Juno Awards of 2005, where it "brought the audience to its feet for a two-minute ovation." Lang also sang it at the 2006 Canadian Songwriters Hall of Fame when Cohen was inducted into the Hall of Fame. Cohen's partner, singer Anjani Thomas, said: "After hearing k.d. lang perform that song at the Canadian Songwriter's Hall of Fame in 2006 we looked at each other and said, 'well, I think we can lay that song to rest now! It's really been done to its ultimate blissful state of perfection'." Lang sang it at the opening ceremony of the 2010 Winter Olympic Games in Vancouver, before a claimed TV audience of three billion.
Espen Lind featuring Kurt Nilsen, Alejandro Fuentes and Askil Holm.
In 2006 the Norwegian quartet of Espen Lind, Kurt Nilsen, Alejandro Fuentes and Askil Holm released a cover of the song. After debuting at number 8 on the Norwegian VG-lista, the single reached number 1 in January 2007. The song remained listed on the Norwegian Top 20 for 37 (non-consecutive) weeks between 2006 and 2007.
The song also appears on the 2006 album "Hallelujah Live", credited to Espen Lind with Kurt Nilsen, Alejandro Fuentes and Askil Holm, which also reached the top of the Norwegian albums chart.
Alexandra Burke.
Alexandra Burke, the winner of the fifth series of British reality television show "The X Factor", released a condensed cover version of the song as a prize for her victory. It reached Christmas Number One on the United Kingdom charts on 21 December 2008.
Background.
The release of Burke's cover created interest in the previous versions of the song, including a Buckley fan campaign to take Buckley's cover to the top of the Christmas chart and therefore deny Burke the top spot. The campaign was fuelled by Jeff Buckley fans' dislike of "The X Factor"'s commercialism and the song's arrangement, as well as their desire to introduce younger people to Buckley's version. Burke herself was not enamoured of the choice of song, remarking "It just didn’t do anything for me."
Commercial performance.
Burke's version broke a European sales record after selling over 105,000 digital downloads in just one day, breaking the previous record set by Leona Lewis. It sold 576,000 copies in its first week, becoming the fastest selling single released by a woman in the United Kingdom and the 2008 Christmas number one, while Buckley's cover charted at #2 and Cohen's original version at #36.
On 28 December 2008, the UK Singles Chart listed Burke's version as the biggest selling single of the year, with "NME" announcing sales of over one million copies since its release. It has sold 1.24 million as of November 2012.
Other cover versions.
Bob Dylan was among the first to perform Cohen's song in concert with his earliest noted performance being in Montreal on 8 July 1988. Other notable singers who have covered "Hallelujah" include Brandi Carlile, Willie Nelson, Alter Bridge (Myles Kennedy) and Bono. Bono's version, which is mostly spoken, was included in "Tower of Song", an all-star tribute to Cohen in 1995. Bon Jovi has covered the song several times in concert, including on their 2008 "Live at Madison Square Garden" DVD.
British singer Kathryn Williams performed the song at an open-air concert in Regent's Park, and later released it on her 2004 album "Relations". English songwriter and singer Imogen Heap covered it as well. Progressive rock singer/songwriter Kevin Max covered it on his album "Between the Fence & the Universe" (2004). In 2005 blues singer and guitarist Popa Chubby released "Big Man Big Guitar" containing a live version. Rea Garvey sang it on the soundtrack to the German romantic comedy "Barfuss". Paramore covers it as an introduction to their own song of the same title in their live album "The Final Riot!".
International group Il Divo released a Spanish-language adaptation with different lyrics on their album "The Promise" (2008), which topped the charts in the UK. The song was performed by singer/songwriter Damien Rice at the 2008 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductions when Cohen was inducted. That same year Welsh mezzo-soprano Katherine Jenkins recorded a classical-crossover version for her album "Sacred Arias". Kate Voegele performed it in character as Mia Catalano in the U.S. teen drama "One Tree Hill". Also appearing on an album, her version made the Hot 100 "Billboard" charts and reached number 53 in the UK shortly after airing of the episode there. Also in 2008, the Welsh band Brigyn released a version in Welsh.
The song was covered by Jason Castro, an American Idol season 7 contestant, on 4 March 2008. His performance was well received by the judges, and it propelled Jeff Buckley's version of the song to the top of the Billboard digital song chart. His version was included in his self titled debut album and his second studio album, "Who I Am". Since then the song has become a favorite of reality singing show contestants, becoming a hit for the winner of the fifth series of "X Factor", Alexandra Burke. Unreleased versions of "Hallelujah" sung by other of the show's finalists, Diana Vickers, Eoghan Quigg, and JLS, have also leaked on the Internet. Lisa Hordijk, winner of the 2009 Dutch "X Factor" released "Hallelujah" as her debut single, which went double platinum and remained at the top of the Dutch charts for ten weeks. In May 2010 on "Australia's Got Talent" a version sung by 15-year-old Bobby Andonov led judge Dannii Minogue to declare, "Bobby, I have heard so many versions of that song, that is now my favourite version of that song and you can print that tomorrow". The song was also covered by Brian Melo during the final performance round of the fifth season of "Canadian Idol" in 2007; Melo would go on to win the title. In 2012, Carly Rose Sonenclar sang "Hallelujah" as her final song on the the US television show "The X Factor."
On 16 April 2010, the Edmonton Symphony Orchestra and the Richard Eaton Singers conducted by Jack Everly premiered a new arrangement for orchestra and chorus by Claude Lapalme. Also in 2010, the Maccabeats of Yeshiva University released "Voices from the Heights", with an "a cappella" version with the words of the Jewish liturgy "Lecha Dodi". Tangerine Dream also covered the song in their 2010 album "Under Cover – Chapter One". Neil Diamond recorded it for his 2010 album, "Dreams". Progressive metal band Pain of Salvation performed it live several times; it is on the live album "Ending Themes (On the Two Deaths of Pain of Salvation)". The Swedish singer Ulf Lundell has also contributed to a cover, titled "halleluja". A video of the song was filmed in Toronto, Canada in December 2010 by filmmaker Greg Riccio Jr. supporting the Free Hugs Campaign to promote random acts of kindness. 
German metal guitarist Axel Rudi Pell released a cover of the song on his album "The Ballads IV" and as a single in 2011. Steven Page performed the song live at the state funeral of Canadian Opposition Leader Jack Layton on 27 August 2011. The Swiss pop rock singer Bastian Baker released a cover in 2012, which charted in Switzerland and France. 
Canadian singer-songwriter Allison Crowe recorded a critically praised version of "Hallelujah" in a single take for her album "Tidings" (2003). Crowe also performed the song for a national television special broadcast annually across Canada each year from 2003 through 2008. In May 2012 Canada's Royal Winnipeg Ballet presented the World Premiere of "The Doorway – Scenes from Leonard Cohen", created and choreographed by Jorden Morris – with "Hallelujah" performed by Allison Crowe (voice and piano) and ballerinas Sophia Lee and Jo-Ann Gudilin dancing alternate dates."
The US television show "The Voice" recorded a shortened version in honor of the victims of the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting. All four coaches — Adam Levine, Blake Shelton, Cee Lo Green and Christina Aguilera — performed, with hosts Carson Daly and Christina Milian along with the show contestants singing background vocals. Each person in the ensemble held up a card that displayed the name and age of one of the people lost in the tragedy.
American entertainer Adam Sandler performed an off-color parody of "Hallelujah" in December 2012 at Madison Square Garden in New York City as part of . Sandler's version contained numerous references to Hurricane Sandy and contemporary events in local culture, sports and politics.
