An acronym is an abbreviation formed from the initial components in a phrase or a word. These components may be individual letters (as in "CEO") or parts of words (as in "Benelux" and "Ameslan"). There is no universal agreement on the precise definition of various names for such abbreviations (see "nomenclature") nor on written usage (see "orthographic styling"). In English and most other languages, such abbreviations historically had limited use, but they became much more common in the 20th century. Acronyms are a type of word formation process, and they are viewed as a subtype of blending.
Nomenclature.
The term "acronym" is the name for a word from the first letters of each word in a series of words (such as "sonar", created from SOund Navigation And Ranging). Attestations for "Akronym" in German are known from 1921, and for "acronym" in English from 1940.
Whilst an "abbreviation" is the shortened form of any initial, syllable or parts of a phrase or words, an initialism (or less commonly, alphabetism) refers to an abbreviation formed from, and used simply as, a string of initials. Although the term "acronym" is widely used to refer to any abbreviation formed from initial letters, some dictionaries define "acronym" to mean "a word" in its original sense, while some others include additional senses attributing to "acronym" the same meaning as that of "initialism". The distinction, when made, hinges on whether the abbreviation is pronounced as a word, or as a string of letters. In such cases, examples found in dictionaries include "NATO" (), "scuba" (), and "radar" () for acronyms, and "FBI" () and "HTML" () for initialism. In the rest of this Wikipedia article, this distinction is not made.
There is no agreement on what to call abbreviations whose pronunciation involves the combination of letter names and words, such as "JPEG" () and "MS-DOS" ().
There is also some disagreement as to what to call abbreviations that some speakers pronounce as letters and others pronounce as a word. For example, the terms "URL" and "IRA" can be pronounced as individual letters: and , respectively; or as a single word: and , respectively. Such constructions, however—regardless of how they are pronounced—if formed from initials, may be identified as "initialisms".
The spelled-out form of an acronym or initialism (that is, what it stands for) is called its "expansion".
Historical and current use.
Acronymy, like retronymy, is a linguistic process that has existed throughout history but for which there was little to no naming, conscious attention, or systematic analysis until relatively recent times. Like retronymy, it became much more common in the 20th century than it had formerly been.
During the mid- to late-19th century, an acronym-disseminating trend spread through the American and European business communities: abbreviating corporation names in places where space was limited for writing — such as on the sides of railroad cars (e.g., Richmond, Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad → RF&P); on the sides of barrels and crates; and on ticker tape and in the small-print newspaper stock listings that got their data from it (e.g., American Telephone and Telegraph Company → AT&T). Some well-known commercial examples dating from the 1890s through 1920s include Nabisco (National Biscuit Company), Esso (from S.O., from Standard Oil), and Sunoco (Sun Oil Company).
Another driver for the adoption of acronyms was modern warfare with its many highly technical terms. While there is no recorded use of military acronyms in documents dating from the American Civil War (acronyms such as ANV for "Army of Northern Virginia" post-date the war itself), they had become somewhat common in World War I and were very much a part even of the vernacular language of the soldiers during World War II.
The widespread, frequent use of acronyms across the whole range of registers is a relatively new linguistic phenomenon in most languages, becoming increasingly evident since the mid-20th century. As literacy rates rose, and as advances in science and technology brought with them a constant stream of new (and sometimes more complex) terms and concepts, the practice of abbreviating terms became increasingly convenient. The "Oxford English Dictionary" ("OED") records the first printed use of the word "initialism" as occurring in 1899, but it did not come into general use until 1965, well after "acronym" had become common.
By 1943, the term "acronym" had been used in English to recognize abbreviations (and contractions of phrases) that were pronounced as words. (It was formed from the Greek words ἄκρος, akros, "topmost, extreme" and ὄνομα, onoma, "name.") For example, the army offense of being "absent without official leave" was abbreviated to "A.W.O.L." in reports, but when pronounced as a word ('awol'), it became an acronym. While initial letters are commonly used to form an acronym, the original definition was "a word made from the initial letters or syllables of other words", for example UNIVAC from UNIVersal Automatic Computer.
In English, acronyms "pronounced as words" may be a 20th-century phenomenon. Linguist David Wilton in "Word Myths: Debunking Linguistic Urban Legends" claims that "forming words from acronyms is a distinctly twentieth- (and now twenty-first-) century phenomenon. There is only one known pre-twentieth-century word with an acronymic origin and it was in vogue for only a short time in 1886. The word is "colinderies" or "colinda", an acronym for the Colonial and Indian Exposition held in London in that year." However, although acronymic words seem not to have been "employed in general vocabulary" before the 20th century (as Wilton points out), the "concept of their formation" is treated as effortlessly understood (and evidently not novel) in a Poe story of the 1830s, "How to Write a Blackwood Article", which includes the contrived acronym P.R.E.T.T.Y.B.L.U.E.B.A.T.C.H. 
Current use.
Acronyms are used most often to abbreviate names of organizations and long or frequently referenced terms. The armed forces and government agencies frequently employ acronyms; some well-known examples from the United States are among the "alphabet agencies" (also jokingly referred to as "alphabet soup") created by Franklin D. Roosevelt under the New Deal. Business and industry also are prolific coiners of acronyms. The rapid advance of science and technology in recent centuries seems to be an underlying force driving the usage, as new inventions and concepts with multiword names create a demand for shorter, more manageable names. One representative example, from the U.S. Navy, is COMCRUDESPAC, which stands for "commander, cruisers destroyers Pacific"; it's also seen as "ComCruDesPac". "YABA-compatible" (where YABA stands for "yet another bloody acronym") is used to mean that a term's acronym can be pronounced but is not an offensive word (e.g., "When choosing a new name, be sure it is "YABA-compatible").
The use of acronyms has been further popularized with the emergence of Short Message Systems (SMS). To fit messages into the 160-character limit of SMS, acronyms such as "GF" (girl friend), "LOL" (laughing out loud), and "DL" (download or down low) have been popularized into the mainstream. Although prescriptivist disdain for such neologism is fashionable, and can be useful when the goal is protecting message receivers from , it is scientifically groundless when couched as preserving the "purity" or "legitimacy" of language; this neologism is merely the latest instance of a perennial linguistic principle—the same one that in the 19th century prompted the aforementioned abbreviation of corporation names in places where space for writing was limited (e.g., ticker tape, newspaper column inches).
Aids to learning the expansion without leaving a document.
The expansion is typically given at the first occurrence of the acronym within a given text, for the benefit of those readers who do not know what it stands for. The capitalization of the original term is independent of it being acronymized, being lowercase for a term such as frequently asked questions (FAQ) but uppercase for a proper name such as the United Nations (UN).
In addition to expansion at first use, some publications also have a key listing all acronyms used therein and what their expansions are. This is a convenience to readers for two reasons. The first is that if they are not reading the entire publication sequentially (which is a common mode of reading), then they may encounter an acronym without having seen its expansion. Having a key at the start or end of the publication obviates skimming over the text searching for an earlier use to find the expansion. (This is especially important in the print medium, where no search utility is available.) The second reason for the key feature is its pedagogical value in educational works such as textbooks. It gives students a way to review the meanings of the acronyms introduced in a chapter after they have done the line-by-line reading, and also a way to quiz themselves on the meanings (by covering up the expansion column and recalling the expansions from memory, then checking their answers by uncovering.) In addition, this feature enables readers possessing knowledge of the abbreviations to not have to encounter expansions (redundant to such readers).
Expansion at first use and the abbreviation-key feature are aids to the reader that originated in the print era, and they are equally useful in print and online. In addition, the online medium offers yet more aids, such as tooltips, hyperlinks, and rapid search via search engine technology.
Jargon.
Acronyms often occur in jargon. An acronym may have different meanings in different areas of industry, writing, and scholarship. The general reason for this is convenience and succinctness for specialists, although it has led some to obfuscate the meaning either intentionally, to deter those without such domain-specific knowledge, or unintentionally, by creating an acronym that already existed.
The medical literature has been struggling to control the proliferation of acronyms as their use has evolved from aiding communication to hindering it. This has become such a problem that it is even evaluated at the level of medical academies such as the American Academy of Dermatology.
As mnemonics.
Acronyms are often taught as mnemonic devices, for example in physics the colors of the visible spectrum are ROY G. BIV (red-orange-yellow-green-blue-indigo-violet). They are also used as mental checklists, for example in aviation: GUMPS, which is Gas-Undercarriage-Mixture-Propeller-Seatbelts. Other examples of mnemonic acronyms include CAN SLIM, and PAVPANIC.
Acronyms as legendary etymology.
It is not uncommon for acronyms to be cited in a kind of false etymology, called a "folk etymology", for a word. Such etymologies persist in popular culture but have no factual basis in historical linguistics, and are examples of language-related urban legends. For example, "cop" is commonly cited as being derived, it is presumed, from "constable on patrol," "posh" from "port out, starboard home", and "golf" from "gentlemen only, ladies forbidden". Taboo words in particular commonly have such false etymologies: "shit" from "ship/store high in transit" or "special high-intensity training" and "fuck" from "for unlawful carnal knowledge", or "fornication under consent/command of the king".
Orthographic styling.
Punctuation.
Showing the ellipsis of letters.
In English, abbreviations have traditionally been written with a full stop/period/point in place of the deleted part to show the ellipsis of letters, although the colon and apostrophe have also had this role. In the case of most acronyms, each letter is an abbreviation of a separate word and, in theory, should get its own termination mark. Such punctuation is diminishing with the belief that the presence of all-capital letters is sufficient to indicate that the word is an abbreviation.
Ellipsis-is-understood style.
Some influential style guides, such as that of the BBC, no longer require punctuation to show ellipsis; some even proscribe it. Larry Trask, American author of "The Penguin Guide to Punctuation", states categorically that, in British English, "this tiresome and unnecessary practice is now obsolete", though some other sources are not so absolute in their pronouncements.
Pronunciation-dependent style.
Nevertheless, some influential style guides, many of them American, still require periods in certain instances. For example, "The New York Times"’ guide recommends following each segment with a period when the letters are pronounced individually, as in "K.G.B.", but not when pronounced as a word, as in "NATO". The logic of this style is that the pronunciation is reflected graphically by the punctuation scheme.
Other conventions.
When a multiple-letter abbreviation is formed from a single word, periods are in general not used, although they may be common in informal usage. "TV", for example, may stand for a "single" word ("television" or "transvestite", for instance), and is in general spelled without punctuation (except in the plural). Although "PS" stands for the single word "postscript" (or the Latin "postscriptum"), it is often spelled with periods ("P.S.").
The slash ('/', a.k.a. virgule) is sometimes used to show the ellipsis of letters, for instance in the acronyms "N/A" ("not applicable, not available"), "c/o" ("care of") and "w/o" ("without").
Inconveniently long words used frequently in related contexts can be represented according to their letter count. For example, "i18n" abbreviates "internationalization", a computer-science term for adapting software for worldwide use. The "18" represents the 18 letters that come between the first and the last in "internationalization". "Localization" can be abbreviated "l10n", "multilingualization" "m17n", and "accessibility" "a11y". In addition to the use of a specific number replacing that amount of letters, the more general "x" can be used to replace an unspecified number of letters (e.g., Crxn for "crystallization").
Representing plurals and possessives.
Turabian (Chicago) allows for an apostrophe "only when an abbreviation contains internal periods or both capital and lowercase letters". The MLA is explicit "do not use an apostrophe to form the plural of an abbreviation". The APA is specific in "without an apostrophe". 
The traditional style of pluralizing single letters with the addition of "’s" (for example, "B’s come after A’s") was extended to some of the earliest acronyms, which tended to be written with periods to indicate the omission of letters; some writers still pluralize acronyms in this way. Some style guides continue to require such apostrophesperhaps partly to make it clear that the lower case "s" is only for pluralization and would not appear in the singular form of the word, for some acronyms and abbreviations do include lowercase letters.
However, it has become common among many writers to inflect acronyms as ordinary words, using simple "s", without an apostrophe, for the plural. In this case, "compact discs" becomes "CDs". The logic here is that the apostrophe should be restricted to possessives: for example, "the CD's label" (the label of the compact disc).
Multiple options arise when acronyms are spelled with periods and are pluralized: for example, whether "compact discs" may become "C.D.'s", "C.D.s", or "CDs". Possessive plurals that also include apostrophes for mere pluralization and periods appear especially complex: for example, "the C.D.’s’ labels" (the labels of the compact discs). This is yet another reason to use apostrophes only for possessives and not for plurals. In some instances, however, an apostrophe may increase clarity: for example, if the final letter of an abbreviation is "S", as in "SOS's" (although abbreviations ending with S can also take "-es", e.g. "SOSes"), or when pluralizing an abbreviation that has periods. (In "The New York Times", the plural possessive of "G.I.", which the newspaper prints with periods in reference to United States Army soldiers, is "G.I.'s", with no apostrophe after the "s".)
A particularly rich source of options arises when the plural of an acronym would normally be indicated in a word other than the final word if spelled out in full. A classic example is "Member of Parliament", which in plural is "Members of Parliament". It is possible then to abbreviate this as "M's P." (or similar), as used by former Australian Prime Minister Ben Chifley. This usage is less common than forms with "s" at the end, such as "MPs", and may appear dated or pedantic. In common usage, therefore, "weapons of mass destruction" becomes "WMDs", "prisoners of war" becomes "POWs", and "runs batted in" becomes "RBIs" — generally if the abbreviation ends with a tensed back vowel syllable.
The argument that acronyms should have no different plural form (for example, "If "D" can stand for "disc", it can also stand for "discs"") is in general disregarded because of the practicality in distinguishing singulars and plurals. This is not the case, however, when the abbreviation is understood to describe a plural noun already: For example, "U.S." is short for "United States", but not "United State". In this case, the options for making a possessive form of an abbreviation that is already in its plural form without a final "s" may seem awkward: for example, "U.S.’", "U.S.'s", etc. In such instances, possessive abbreviations are often foregone in favor of simple attributive usage (for example, "the U.S. economy") or expanding the abbreviation to its full form and "then" making the possessive (for example, "the United States’ economy"). On the other hand, in speech, the pronunciation "United States's" sometimes is used.
Abbreviations that come from single, rather than multiple, wordssuch as "TV" ("television")are usually pluralized without apostrophes ("two TVs"); most writers feel that the apostrophe should be reserved for the possessive ("the TV's antenna").
In some languages, the convention of doubling the letters in the acronym is used to indicate plural words: for example, the Spanish "EE. UU.", for "Estados Unidos" ("United States"). This old convention is still followed for a limited number of English abbreviations, such as "SS." for Saints, "pp." for the Latin plural of "pages", "paginae", or "MSS" for manuscripts.
Case.
All-caps style.
The most common capitalization scheme seen with acronyms is all-uppercase (all-caps), except for those few that have linguistically taken on an identity as regular words, with the acronymous etymology of the words fading into the background of common knowledge, such as has occurred with the words "scuba", "laser", and "radar" — these are known as "anacronyms".
Small-caps variant.
Small caps are sometimes used to make the run of capital letters seem less jarring to the reader. For example, the style of some American publications, including the "Atlantic Monthly" and "USA Today", is to use small caps for acronyms longer than three letters; thus "U.S." and "FDR" in normal caps, but "" in small caps. The acronyms "AD" and "BC" are often smallcapped as well, as in: "From ".
Pronunciation-dependent style.
At the copyediting end of the publishing industry, where the aforementioned distinction between acronyms (pronounced as a word) and initialisms (pronounced as a series of letters) is usually maintained, some publishers choose to use cap/lowercase (c/lc) styling for acronyms, reserving all-caps styling for initialisms. Thus "Nato" and "Aids" (c/lc), but "USA" and "FBI" (caps). For example, this is the style used in "The Guardian", and BBC News typically edits to this style (though its official style guide, dating from 2003, still recommends all-caps). The logic of this style is that the pronunciation is reflected graphically by the capitalization scheme.
Some style manuals also base the letters' case on their number. "The New York Times", for example, keeps "NATO" in all capitals (while several guides in the British press may render it "Nato"), but uses lower case in "Unicef" (from "United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund") because it is more than four letters, and to style it in caps might look ungainly (flirting with the appearance of "shouting capitals").
Numerals and constituent words.
While abbreviations typically exclude the initials of short function words (such as "and", "or", "of", or "to"), they are sometimes included in acronyms to make them pronounceable. Sometimes the letters representing these words are written in lower case, such as in the cases of TfL (Transport for London) and LotR (Lord of the Rings). This usually occurs when the acronym represents a multi-word proper noun.
Numbers (both cardinal and ordinal) in names are often represented by digits rather than initial letters: as in "4GL" (Fourth generation language) or "G77" (Group of 77). Large numbers may use metric prefixes, as with "Y2K" for "Year 2000" (sometimes written "Y2k", because the SI symbol for 1000 is "k" - not "K", which stands for "kelvin"). Exceptions using initials for numbers include "TLA" (three-letter acronym/abbreviation) and "GoF" (Gang of Four). Abbreviations using numbers for other purposes include repetitions, such as "W3C" ("World Wide Web Consortium") and "T3" ("Trends, Tips & Tools for Everyday Living"); pronunciation, such as "B2B" ("business to business"); and numeronyms, such as "i18n" ("internationalization"; "18" represents the 18 letters between the initial "i" and the final "n").
Changes to (or word play on) the expanded meaning.
Pseudo-acronyms.
In some cases, an acronym has been redefined as a non-acronymous name—creating a pseudo-acronym. The term "orphan initialism" has also been used for names that began as an acronym but lost this status. Such an apparent acronym or other abbreviation that does not stand for anything cannot be expanded to some meaning. For example, the letters of the SAT (pronounced as letters) US college entrance test no longer officially stand for anything. This is common with companies that want to retain brand recognition while moving away from an outdated image: American Telephone and Telegraph became AT&T, Kentucky Fried Chicken became KFC to de-emphasize the role of frying in the preparation of its signature dishes, British Petroleum became BP and Silicon Graphics, Incorporated became SGI.
Pseudo-acronyms may have advantages in international markets: for example, some national affiliates of International Business Machines are legally incorporated as "IBM" (or, for example, "IBM Canada") to avoid translating the full name into local languages. Likewise, "UBS" is the name of the merged Union Bank of Switzerland and Swiss Bank Corporation, and "HSBC" has replaced "The Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation."
Recursive acronyms and RAS syndrome.
Rebranding can lead to redundant acronym syndrome, as when Trustee Savings Bank became TSB Bank, or when Railway Express Agency became REA Express. A few high-tech companies have taken the redundant acronym to the extreme: for example, ISM Information Systems Management Corp. and SHL Systemhouse Ltd. An example in entertainment is the television shows "" and "Navy: NCIS", where the redundancy was likely designed to educate new viewers as to what the initials stood for. The same stood for when the Royal Bank of Canada's Canadian operations rebranded to RBC Royal Bank, or when Bank of Montreal rebranded their retail banking subsidiary BMO Bank of Montreal.
Another common example is "RAM memory", which is redundant because "RAM" ("random-access memory") includes the initial of the word "memory". "PIN" stands for "personal identification number", obviating the second word in "PIN number". Other examples include "ATM machine" ("automated teller machine machine"), "EAB bank" ("European American Bank bank"), "DC Comics" ("Detective Comics Comics"), "HIV virus" ("human immunodeficiency virus virus"), Microsoft's NT Technology ("New Technology Technology") and the formerly redundant "SAT test" ("Scholastic Achievement/Aptitude/Assessment Test test", now simply "SAT Reasoning Test"). TNN (The Nashville/National Network) also renamed itself "The New TNN" for a brief interlude.
Backronyms.
A "backronym" (or "bacronym") is a phrase that is constructed "after the fact" from a previously existing word. For example, the novelist and critic Anthony Burgess once proposed that the word "book" ought to stand for "Box Of Organized Knowledge." A classic real-world example of this in action is the name of the predecessor to the Apple Macintosh, The Apple Lisa, which was said to refer to "Local Integrated Software Architecture", but Steve Jobs' daughter, born 1978, was named Lisa.
Contrived acronyms.
Acronyms are sometimes , that is, deliberately designed to be especially apt for the thing being named (by having a dual meaning or by borrowing the positive connotations of an existing word). Some examples of contrived acronyms are "USA PATRIOT", "CAN SPAM", "CAPTCHA" and "ACT UP". The clothing company French Connection began referring to itself as "fcuk", standing for "French Connection United Kingdom." The company then created t-shirts and several advertising campaigns that exploit the acronym's similarity to the taboo word "fuck". See the list of fictional espionage organizations for more examples of contrived acronyms.
The US Department of Defense's Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) is known for developing contrived acronyms to name projects, including "RESURRECT", "NIRVANA", and "DUDE". In July 2010, Wired Magazine reported that DARPA announced programs to "..transform biology from a descriptive to a predictive field of science" named "BATMAN" and "ROBIN" for "Biochronicity and Temporal Mechanisms Arising in Nature" and "Robustness of Biologically-Inspired Networks", a reference to the Batman and Robin comic-book superheroes.
Some acronyms are chosen deliberately to avoid a name considered undesirable: For example, "Verliebt in Berlin" (ViB), a German telenovela, was first intended to be "Alles nur aus Liebe (All for Love)", but was changed to avoid the resultant acronym "ANAL". Likewise, the Computer Literacy and Internet Technology qualification is known as "CLaIT", rather than "CLIT". In Canada, the Canadian Conservative Reform Alliance (Party) was quickly renamed to the Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance when its opponents pointed out that its initials spelled CCRAP (pronounced "see crap"). (The satirical magazine "Frank" had proposed alternatives to CCRAP, namely SSHIT and NSDAP.) Two Irish Institutes of Technology (Galway and Tralee) chose different acronyms from other institutes when they were upgraded from Regional Technical colleges. Tralee RTC became the Institute of Technology Tralee (ITT), as opposed to Tralee Institute of Technology (TIT). Galway RTC became Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology (GMIT), as opposed to Galway Institute of Technology (). Team in Training is known as TNT and not TIT. Technological Institute of Textile & Sciences is still known as TITS. The war on terror was originally referred to in early Bush speeches as "The War Against Terror" (TWAT), but this was swiftly changed. Similarly, what became "Operation Iraqi Freedom" was originally known as "Operation Iraqi Liberation" (OIL).
Contrived acronyms differ from backronyms in that they were originally conceived with the artificial expanded meaning, whereas backronyms are later-invented expansions.
Macronyms/nested acronyms.
A "macronym", or "nested acronym", is an acronym in which one or more letters stand for acronyms themselves. A special type of macronym has letters that refer back to itself when expanded. These are called recursive acronyms. One of the earliest examples appears in The Hacker's Dictionary as MUNG, which stands for "MUNG Until No Good"
Non-recursive macronyms: 
Some non-recursive macronyms can be "multiply nested"—the second order acronym points to another one further down a hierarchy. In an informal competition run by the magazine New Scientist, a fully documented specimen was discovered that may be the most deeply nested of all: RARS is the "Regional ATOVS Retransmission Service", ATOVS is Advanced TOVS, TOVS is TIROS operational vertical sounder and TIROS is Television infrared observational satellite.
Non-English language.
Asian languages.
Chinese.
In English language discussion of languages with syllabic or logographic writing systems (such as Chinese, Japanese, and Korean), "acronym" describes short forms that take selected characters from a multi-character word.
For example, in Chinese, the word "大學"/"大学" ("university" in traditional/simplified Chinese, literally "big school"), when used with the name of the university, is usually abbreviated simply as "大" *"big"). So "北京大学" (Beijing University ("北京" = "Beijing", literally "north capital")) is commonly abbreviated to "北大" (literally "north big"). In this case, the first characters "北" and "大" from "北京" and "大学" are taken to compose the short form. In some cases, however, other characters than the first can be selected. For example, the local short form of "香港大學" (Hong Kong University, "香港" = "Hong Kong") is "港大" rather than "香大". 
There are also cases where some longer phrases are abbreviated drastically, especially in Chinese politics, where proper nouns were initially translated from Soviet Leninist terms. For instance, the full name of China's highest ruling council, the Politburo Standing Committee (PSC), is "Standing Committee of the Central Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China" (中国共产党中央政治局常务委员会). The term then reduced the "Communist Party of China" part of its name through acronyms, then the "Standing Committee" part, again through acronyms, to create "中共中央政治局常委". Alternatively, it omitted the "Communist Party" part altogether, creating "Politburo Standing Committee" (政治局常委会), and eventually just "Standing Committee" (常委会). The PSC's members full designations are "Member of the Standing Committee of the Central Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China" (中国共产党中央政治局常务委员会委员); this was eventually drastically reduced to simply "Changwei" (常委), with the term "Ruchang" (入常) used increasingly for officials destined for a future seat on the PSC. In another example, the word "全国人民代表大会" (National People's Congress) can be broken into four parts: "全国" = "the whole nation", "人民" = "people", "代表" = "representatives", "大会" = "conference". Yet, in its short form "人大" (literally "man/people big"), only the first characters from the second and the fourth parts are selected; the first part ("全国") and the third part ("代表") are simply ignored. In describing such abbreviations, the term "initialism" is inapplicable.
Many proper nouns become shorter and shorter over time. For example, the CCTV New Year's Gala, whose full name is literally read as "China Central Television Spring Festival Joint Celebration Evening Gala" (中国中央电视台春节联欢晚会) was first shortened to "Spring Festival Joint Celebration Evening Gala" (春节联欢晚会), but eventually referred to as simply "Chunwan" (春晚). Along the same vein, "Zhongguo Zhongyang Dianshi Tai" (中国中央电视台) was reduced to "Yangshi" (央视) in the mid-2000s.
Indonesian.
There is also a widespread use of acronyms in Indonesia in every aspect of social life. For example, the "Golkar" political party stands for Partai "Gol"ongan "Kar"ya, "Monas" stands for ""Mo"numen "Nas"ional" (National Monument), the "Angkot" public transport stands for ""Ang"kutan "Kot"a" (city public transportation), "warnet" stands for ""war"ung inter"net"" (internet cafe), and many others. Some acronyms are considered formal (or officially adopted), while many more are considered informal, slang or colloquial.
The capital's metropolitan area (Jakarta and its surrounding satellite regions), "Jabodetabek", is another infamous acronym. This stands for "Ja"karta-"Bo"gor-"De"pok-"Ta"ngerang-"Bek"asi. Many highways are also named by the acronym method; e.g. "Jalan Tol" (Toll Road) "Jagorawi" ("Ja"karta-Bo"gor"-Ci"awi") and "Purbaleunyi" ("Pur"wakarta-"Ba"ndung-Ci"leunyi"), Joglo Semar ("Jog"ja-so"lo"-"semar"ang).
In some languages, especially those that use certain alphabets, many acronyms come from the military. The Indonesian military (TNI — "Tentara Nasional Indonesia") and Indonesian police (POLRI — "Kepolisian Republik Indonesia") are infamous for heavy acronyms use. Examples include the "Kopassus" ("Ko"mando "Pas"ukan Khu"sus"; Special Forces Command), "Kopaska" ("Ko"mando "Pas"ukan "Ka"tak; Frogmen Command), "Kodim" ("Ko"mando "Di"strik "M"iliter; Military District Command — one of the Indonesian army's administrative divisions), "Serka" ("Ser"san "K"ep"a"la; Head Sergeant), "Akmil" ("Ak"ademi "Mil"iter; Military Academy — in Magelang) and many other terms regarding ranks, units, divisions, procedures, etc.
Heavy acronym use by Indonesians, makes it difficult for foreigners and learners of Bahasa Indonesia to seek information and news in Indonesian media.
German.
German tends toward acronyms that use syllables rather than letters—such as "Gestapo" rather than "GSP" (for "Geheime Staatspolizei", secret state police); "Flak" rather than "FAK" (for "Fliegerabwehrkanone", anti-aircraft gun); "Kripo" rather than "KP" (for "Kriminalpolizei", detective division police). The extension of such contraction to a pervasive or whimsical degree has been mockingly labeled "AbKüFi" (for "Abkürzfimmel", strange habit of abbreviating). Examples of AbKüFi include "Vokuhila" (for "vorne kurz, hinten lang", short in the front, long in the back, i.e., a mullet).
Hebrew.
It is common to take more than just one initial letter from each of the words composing the acronym; regardless of this, the abbreviation sign gershayim is always written between the second-last and last letters of the non-inflected form of the acronym, even if by this it separates letters of the same original word. Examples: ארה״ב (for ארצות הברית, the United States); ברה״מ (for ברית המועצות, the Soviet Union); ראשל״צ (for ראשון לציון, Rishon LeZion); ביה״ס (for בית הספר, the school). An example that takes only the initial letters from its component words is צה״ל (""Tzahal"", for , Israel Defense Forces). In inflected forms the abbreviation sign gershayim remains between the second-last and last letters of the non-inflected form of the acronym (e.g. "report", singular: "דו״ח", plural: "דו״חות"; "squad commander", masculine: "מ״כ", feminine: "מ״כית").
Swahili.
In Swahili, acronyms are common for naming organizations such as TUKI, which stands for "Taasisi ya Uchunguzi wa Kiswahili" (the institute for Swahili research). Multiple initial letters (often the initial syllable of words) are often drawn together, as seen more in some languages than others.
Declension.
The process above is similar to how, in English, hyphens are used for clarity when prefixes are added to acronyms, thus "pre-NATO policy" (rather than "preNATO").
Lenition.
In languages such as Scottish Gaelic and Irish, where lenition (initial consonant mutation) is commonplace, acronyms must also be modified in situations where case and context dictate it. In the case of Scottish Gaelic, a lower case "h" is added after the initial consonant; for example, "BBC Scotland" in the genitive case would be written as "BhBC Alba", with the acronym pronounced "VBC". Likewise, the Gaelic acronym for "television" ("gd: telebhisean") is "TBh", pronounced "TV", as in English.
