Ivy Bridge is a codename line of Intel processors based on the 22nm manufacturing process. The name is also applied more broadly to the 22 nm die shrink of the Sandy Bridge microarchitecture based on tri-gate ("3D") transistors, which is also used in the future Xeon and Core i7 "Ivy Bridge-EX", "Ivy Bridge-EP" and "Ivy Bridge-E" microprocessors due for release in 2013. Ivy Bridge processors are backwards-compatible with the Sandy Bridge platform, but might require a firmware update (vendor specific). Intel has released new 7-series Panther Point chipsets with integrated USB 3.0 to complement Ivy Bridge.
Volume production of Ivy Bridge chips began in the third quarter of 2011. Quad-core and dual-core-mobile models launched on April 29, 2012 and May 31, 2012 respectively. Core i3 desktop processors, as well as the first 22 nm Pentium, were launched and available the first week of September, 2012.
Features.
Microarchitecture features.
Low power consumption is important in embedded systems and mobile devices.
Ivy Bridge-E features.
The upcoming Ivy Bridge-E processor line in 2013 is expected to have up to 12 cores instead of 8 and an increased third level cache of up to 30 MB.
 Both Core-i7 and Xeon versions will be produced - the Xeon versions will be marketed as Xeon E5 V2 and act as drop-in replacements for the existing Sandy Bridge-EN and Sandy Bridge-EP based Xeon E5, and Core-i7 versions designated i7-4930, i7-4960, i7-4970 and i7-4990 are expected to release in the 3rd quarter of 2013 and to remain compatible with existing X79 and LGA2011 hardware.
A new Ivy Bridge-EX line marketed as Xeon E7 V2 has no corresponding predecessor using the Sandy Bridge microarchitecture but instead follows the older Westmere-EX processors.
Performance.
Thermal performance and heat issues.
Ivy Bridge's temperatures are reportedly 10°C higher compared to Sandy Bridge when overclocked, even at default voltage setting. Impress PC Watch (Japanese) performed experiments that confirmed earlier speculations that this is because Intel used a poor quality (and perhaps lower cost) thermal interface material (thermal paste, or "TIM") between the chip and the heat spreader, instead of the fluxless solder of previous generations. The mobile Ivy Bridge processors are not affected by this issue because they do not use a heat spreader between the chip and cooling system.
Enthusiast reports describe the TIM used by Intel as low-quality, and not up to scratch for a "premium" CPU, with some speculation that this is by design to encourage sales of prior processors. Further analyses caution that the processor can be damaged or void its warranty if home users attempt to remedy the matter. TIM has much lower thermal conductivity, causing heat to trap on the die. Experiments replacing this with a higher quality TIM or other heat removal methods showed a substantial improvement to the voltages and clocking sustainable by Ivy Bridge chips.
Intel claims that the smaller die of Ivy Bridge and the related increase in thermal density is expected to result in higher temperatures when the CPU is overclocked; Intel also stated that this is as expected and will likely not improve in future revisions.
Models and steppings.
All Ivy Bridge processors with one, two, or four cores report the same CPUID model 0306A9h, and are built in four different configurations differing in the number of cores, L3 cache and GPU execution units.
List of Ivy Bridge processors.
Processors featuring Intel's HD 4000 graphics (or HD P4000 for Xeon) are set in bold. Other processors feature HD 2500 graphics unless indicated by N/A.
Desktop processors.
∗ Requires a compatible Motherboard
Server processors.
∗ Requires a compatible Motherboard
Note - Additional high-end server processors based on the Ivy Bridge architecture, code named Ivytown, will arrive in 2013 per the usual one year interval between consumer and server product releases.
Roadmap.
Intel demonstrated the Haswell architecture in September 2011, planned for release in 2013 as the successor to Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge.
