"South Park" is an American animated television series created by Trey Parker and Matt Stone for the Comedy Central television network. Intended for mature audiences, the show has become infamous for its crude, surreal, satirical, and dark humor that lampoons a wide range of topics. The ongoing narrative revolves around four children, Stan Marsh, Kyle Broflovski, Eric Cartman and Kenny McCormick, and their bizarre adventures in and around the fictional and eponymous Colorado town. The town, sometimes described within the show as "a pissant white-bread mountain town", is also home to an assortment of characters who make frequent appearances in the show such as students and their family members, elementary school staff, and recurring characters.
Stan is portrayed as the everyman of the group, as the show's official website describes him as "a normal, average, American, mixed-up kid". Kyle is the lone Jew among the group, and his portrayal in this role is often dealt with satirically. Stan and Kyle are best friends, and their relationship, which is intended to reflect the real-life friendship between "South Park" creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone, is a common topic throughout the series. Cartman—loud, obnoxious, and obese—is sometimes portrayed as an antagonist, and whose anti-Semitic attitude has resulted in an ever-progressing rivalry with Kyle. Kenny, who comes from a poor family, wears his parka hood so tightly that it covers most of his face and muffles his speech. During the show's first five seasons, Kenny would die in almost every single episode before returning in the next without explanation.
Stone and Parker voice most of the male "South Park" characters. Mary Kay Bergman voiced the majority of the female characters until her death in 1999, near the end of the third season. Eliza Schneider and Mona Marshall succeeded Bergman since 1999, and respectively 2000, with Schneider leaving the show in 2003, after the seventh season. She was replaced by April Stewart, who, along with Marshall, continues to voice most of the female characters. Bergman was originally listed in the credits under the alias Shannen Cassidy to protect her reputation as the voice of several Disney characters. Stewart was originally credited under the name Gracie Lazar, while Schneider was sometimes credited under her rock opera performance pseudonym Blue Girl. Some "South Park" staff members voice other recurring characters; supervising producer Jennifer Howell voices student Bebe Stevens, writing consultant Vernon Chatman voices an anthropomorphic towel named Towelie, and production supervisor John Hansen voices Mr. Slave, the former gay lover of Mr. Garrison. "South Park" producer and storyboard artist Adrien Beard, who voices Token Black, the only black kid in "South Park", was recruited to voice the character "because he was the only black guy the building" when Parker needed to quickly find someone to voice the character during the production of the season four (2000) episode "Cartman's Silly Hate Crime 2000".
Creation and inception.
Creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone met during a film class as students at the University of Colorado, and in 1992, they came with an idea for a show that would eventually become "South Park". The two discussed filming a three-minute short film involving a boy who befriended a talking stool (feces) named Mr. Hankey. Instead, Parker and Stone created two Christmas-related animated short films called "Jesus vs. Frosty" and "Jesus vs. Santa", which served as precursors to the "South Park" series. The low-budget, crudely made "Jesus vs. Frosty" film featured prototypes of the main characters of "South Park", including characters resembling Cartman, Stan, and Kyle. Fox Broadcasting Company executive Brian Graden saw the film and in 1995 commissioned Parker and Stone to create a second short film that he could send to his friends as a video Christmas card. Titled "Jesus vs. Santa", it resembled the style of the later series more closely.
The video was popular and was widely shared, and when it began to generate interest for a possible television series, Parker and Stone originally conceived the idea of a "South Park"-like show with four children characters, but with a talking stool named Mr. Hankey as the show's main protagonist; they planned to call it "The Mr. Hankey Show". Eventually, Parker and Stone adapted their original idea into a show revolving around the South Park town and four children without Mr. Hankey as a protagonist, but as a minor supporting role in a future episode. Comedy Central later expressed interest in the series, and picked it up. The premiere episode, "Cartman Gets an Anal Probe", debuted on Comedy Central on August 13, 1997, as Mr. Hankey would debut in the tenth episode, "Mr. Hankey, the Christmas Poo".
In tradition with the show's cutout animation style, the characters are composed of simple geometrical shapes and uninflected patches of predominantly primary colors. They are not offered the same free range of motion associated with hand-drawn characters, as they are mostly shown from only one angle, and their movements are animated in an intentionally jerky fashion. Ever since the show's second episode, "Weight Gain 4000", all the characters on the show have been animated with computer software, though they are portrayed to give the impression that the show still utilizes the original technique of cutout animation.
Former characters.
A few characters have had a major role in the past episodes in the show before their death.
Merchandise.
The characters of "South Park" have spawned several merchandise items, varying from toys to apparel items. In 2004, the first action figure collection was released by Mirage Toys containing five series each with four characters. In 2006, Mezco toys released a second collection containing a total of six series, each containing six or four figures. Comedy Central itself has made available a variety of products through its website, including t-shirts, figures, hats, pants, and even shot glasses. A number of fan websites provides an even more extended amount of merchandise, ranging from posters, to magnets, ties and even skateboards, South Park Studios offer through their website the possibility of creating personalized South Park avatars. Similar possibilities have been available on multiple fansites.
