Divergent is the debut novel of American author Veronica Roth and is the first installment in a trilogy. Set within a dystopian version of Chicago, the novel has been compared to similar young adult books such as "The Hunger Games" because of its theme and target audience. Roth has said that the idea for the series was born while she was studying in college.
Summit Entertainment purchased the media rights to the book, and as of October 2012 is in the process of casting the film, also titled "Divergent". The second novel in the trilogy, "Insurgent", was released in May 2012. The third book is expected to be released in October 2013.
Plot synopsis.
From the brink of apocalypse, humanity has reorganized itself into five factions, each of which uphold and live by a single core value. Those who believe society fell apart because of greed formed the faction of Abnegation (the Selfless), sworn off of practices considered self-indulgent and pledged to act selflessly. Those who believe the collapse was due to ignorance pledged themselves to the Erudite (the Intelligent), sworn to a never-ending path of complete knowledge acquisition. Those who feel that human duplicity wreaked havoc in the world took the banner of Candor (the Honest), pledging to always speak their minds and the truth. Those who feel that aggression was the root of society’s collapse became the members of Amity (the Peaceful), taking the mantle of peace at all costs. And finally, those who feel that the root of all their problems stemmed from cowardice formed the tribe of the Dauntless (the Brave), the faction of the courageous and strong. 
Born into an Abnegation family, Beatrice has lived her life trying to uphold the ideals of her parents. Outfitted in modest grey clothing, the required style of her faction, Beatrice strives to be as selfless as the rest of her family, but faction beliefs, like giving your seat to others on public transit, do not come naturally to her. Caught between her love of her family and following her heart, Beatrice struggles in her Abnegation role. Wistfully observing the daredevil chaos of the Dauntless-born children as they crow and leap from running trains on the way to school, Beatrice feels conflicted. Society mandates that each year, all sixteen-year-olds must take an aptitude test, which determines the faction each is most suited for. The test is followed by a Choosing Ceremony, in which each person must decide which faction they would reside in for the rest of their lives, living under the guideline of "Faction Before Blood." 
Beatrice's aptitude results are inconclusive. It is revealed to her, in secret, that she is one of a very rare subset of the population: a Divergent. Her tests show that she does not fall neatly into one of the five factions, but displays traits dominant in three factions: Erudite, Abnegation, and Dauntless. Having been taught at an early age, by her father, of the ruthless and power-hungry ways of the Erudite, she immediately rules out that faction. When her time to choose arrives, she follows her heart and chooses to be selfish but brave, abandoning her family and choosing Dauntless. Initiation soon begins, leading to several major changes for her, including renaming herself "Tris". With only ten spots available in the faction and more than double that number of hopefuls, Tris struggles through a ruthless initiation trial and discovers not only what she is truly made of, but what it means to be Divergent, including the dangers of the label. She confronts her fears and uncovers her own desires with the help of her instructor, Tobias, also called Four. She is also befriended by Christina, Will, and Al, her fellow faction transfers. What follows is a physical and emotional hurricane for Tris as she copes with her secret and unearths the evils of one of the other factions.
Characters.
Beatrice "Tris" Prior.
Beatrice is the main character and narrator of "Divergent". She is described as being short and moderately attractive, with wide, blue eyes and blonde hair that falls to the small of her back; she soon trims her hair to her jawline. Tris is 16 years old and is the younger child of Andrew and Natalie Prior. She has an older brother named Caleb Prior. 
Tris comes from the faction Abegnation, which is a selfless and giving faction. When she is sixteen, she decides to leave that faction, and join the brave, daring Dauntless. Tris has to get through the initiation process before becoming a real Dauntless, and if she fails, she will be factionless. So, she fights, shoots, throws knives, and must fight her way out of her worst fears imaginable, and if she does, she will be a Dauntless forever.
While training, Tris gets three tattoos: three ravens above her collar bone, representing the three family members that she left behind; the Abnegation symbol on one shoulder; and the Dauntless symbol on the other. Tris is stubborn and tough. Thin and weak at first, she becomes muscular during training as a Dauntless initiate. She and Tobias (Four) soon fall in love but decide to keep their love life secret.
Tobias "Four" Eaton.
Four is Tris's instructor and love interest. Unlike Tris, he is tall and has short dark hair and deep blue eyes with lighter blue patches. Tris also describes him as having deep-set eyes and long eyelashes.
He is two years older than Tris and originally from the same faction, Abnegation. He transferred from Abnegation to Dauntless to escape his physically abusive father, Marcus.
He protects Tris from her often vindictive fellow initiates, as well as his superiors, by defending her when she is attacked and by keeping their romance private. "Four", the nickname he received while in the last stage of his initiation to Dauntless, refers to the fact that he has only four fears, a number far below the average of ten to fifteen. He is afraid of heights, small spaces, his father, and having to shoot a mysterious woman, who might be his mother. Tobias also has an antagonistic relationship with Eric, a Dauntless leader, who is one of many who are corrupting the Dauntless philosophy. In one of the final chapters of the book, Tris learns that Tobias is also Divergent.
Caleb Prior.
Caleb is Tris's older brother and is extremely intelligent. He has dark hair, a hooked nose, dimples, and green eyes. In the beginning of the book, he chooses to transfer to Erudite, the enemy of his old faction. When he joins Erudite, he begins to wear glasses in order to appear more intelligent, even though he has perfect vision. Later in the book, Tris flees from Dauntless and goes to Erudite to talk to him. Tris trusts Caleb very much and is sure that he would never do anything that would not be in her best interests.
Natalie Prior.
Natalie is Beatrice's mother, also a Divergent. She was born Dauntless and transferred to Abnegation.
Reception.
"Divergent" has been well received. In a review for the "New York Times", Susan Dominus wrote that it was "rich in plot and imaginative details" but compared to books also in the genre such as Hunger Games it did "not exactly distinguish itself." In a review for the "Entertainment Weekly", Breia Brissey said that it was "flimsier and less nuanced" than "The Hunger Games" which was good, giving it a B+ rating. "Kirkus Reviews" said it was "built with careful details and intriguing scope. The plot clips along at an addictive pace, with steady jolts of brutal violence and swoony romance." Common Sense Media commented on the book's "deep messages about identity and controlling societies" and on the "unstoppable plot that's remarkably original." It was rated 5 out of 5 stars and given an age 13+ rating. 
The book debuted at #6 on the New York Times Children's Chapter Books Best Seller list on May 22, 2011, and remained on the list for 11 weeks. It also spent 39 weeks on the Times's Children's Paperback Books Best Seller list in 2012, reaching number one. The Times changed its Children's Best Seller lists in December, 2012, eliminating the Children's Paperback list, and Divergent continued its run on the new Young Adult Best Seller list. It is still on the list as of February, 2013.
Film adaptation.
Summit Entertainment bought the rights to Divergent. Neil Burger has been chosen as the director, and Shailene Woodley has been cast as Beatrice Prior. Alex Pettyfer is rumored to have been cast as Four/Tobias but the rumor has been denied. Lionsgate and Summit plan to distribute the film. Lionsgate-Summit’s feature adaptation of the dystopian teen tale, with screenplay by Evan Daugherty, is in pre-production now with plans to start filming in 2013. The company also holds rights to the author’s sequel, "Insurgent". Kate Winslet has entered negotiations for a role in Divergent.
