The fifth season of American animated television series "Adventure Time", created by Pendleton Ward, originally aired on Cartoon Network in the United States. The series is based on a short produced for Frederator's Nicktoons Network animation incubator series "Random! Cartoons". The season debuted on November 12, 2012. The season follows the adventures of Finn, a 14-year-old human boy, and his best friend Jake, a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will. Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo. Along the way, they interact with the other main characters of the show: Princess Bubblegum, The Ice King, and Marceline the Vampire Queen.
The first episode of the fifth season was the two-parter episode "Finn the Human" and "Jake the Dog", both of which aired on November 12, 2012. The episode was viewed by 3.435 million viewers; this marked a dramatic increase from the previous season's premiere, as well as its finale. The season will end with "Only Wizards Allowed", schedule for an unknown date.
The season has been storyboarded and written by Tom Herpich, Jesse Moynihan, Cole Sanchez, Rebecca Sugar, Steve Wolfhard, Skyler Page, Somvilay Xayaphone, Ako Castuera, and Michael DeForge. while being produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios. The series is rated TV-PG.
Development.
Concept.
The season follows the adventures of Finn the Human, a 14-year-old boy, and his best friend Jake, a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will. Finn and Jake live in the post-apocalyptic Land of Ooo. Along the way, they interact with the other main characters of the show: Princess Bubblegum, The Ice King, and Marceline the Vampire Queen. Common storylines revolve around: Finn and Jake discovering strange creatures, battling the Ice King, and battling monsters in order to help others. Various other episodes deal with Finn and his romantic relationship with Flame Princess.
Production.
On October 12, 2012, it was announced that Cartoon Network had officially renewed "Adventure Time" for a fifth season. The episode titles were released on April 6, 2011 by Frederator Studios, while the show had just reached the end of its fourth season. Based on production numbers, "Finn the Human" was the first episode that underwent production, which was also the first episode aired.
The season also contained several important episodes. The sixth episode, "Jake the Dad," featured the birth of Jake and Lady Rainicorn's pups, which had been alluded to in the previous season episode "Lady & Peebles". The eleventh episode, entitled "Bad Little Boy" takes place in a gender bent version of Ooo. This is the second installment in the "Fionna & Cake" fantasy series—after the third season episode "Fionna and Cake".
The episode "All Your Fault" was the last to feature a "directed by" credit. The subsequent episode, "Little Dude", only credited Adam Muto as "Supervising Director" and Nick Jennings as "Art Director". Muto later explained that, "No one currently gets the 'directed by' credit." Muto had, in previous episodes, been credited as "Creative Director", but according to him, the series decided to phase the title out in favor of "Supervising Director". "Bad Little Boy", the season's eleventh episode, however, still has a "directed by" credit. This is due to the fact that the episode was produced before "Little Dude", but aired out of order.
The season has been storyboarded and written by Tom Herpich, Jesse Moynihan, Cole Sanchez, Rebecca Sugar, Steve Wolfhard, Skyler Page, Somvilay Xayaphone, Ako Castuera, and Michael DeForge. This season will be the last to feature Sugar. She left the series after storyboarding the as-of-yet unaired episode "Simon and Marcy" to create "Steven Universe". The season is produced by Cartoon Network Studios and Frederator Studios. The series is rated TV-PG.
Cast.
The voice actors include voice acting veterans John DiMaggio (who portrays Jake the Dog), Tom Kenny (who plays The Ice King), and Hynden Walch (who voices Princess Bubblegum). In addition, Jeremy Shada portrays the voice of Finn the Human, and Olivia Olson portrays Marceline the Vampire Queen. Ward himself provides the voice for several minor characters, as well as Lumpy Space Princess. Former storyboard artist Niki Yang voices the sentient video game console Beemo, as well as Jake's girlfriend, Lady Rainicorn. Polly Lou Livingston, a friend of Pendleton Ward's mother, Bettie Ward, plays the voice of the small elephant Tree Trunks. Jessica DiCicco voices Flame Princess, who becomes Finn's new romantic interest. Season four also features the reappearance The Lich, the series principal antagonist. The Lich is portrayed by Ron Perlman. The "Adventure Time" cast records their lines together in group recordings as opposed to different recording sessions with each voice actor. This is to record more natural sounding dialogue among the characters. Hynden Walch described these group recordings as like "doing a play reading – a really, really out there play."
The series also regularly employs guest voices for various characters. For instance, in "Finn the Human", Ming-Na voiced Farmworld Finn's mother, Kumail Nanjiani appeared as Prismo, and Cloris Leachman plays the role of Farmworld Marceline. In the following episode, "Jake the Dog", Nanjiani and Leachman both reappear, and M. Emmet Walsh voices the Cosmic Owl. Emo Philips reprises his fourth season character Cuber in the episode "Five More Short Graybles". In "Up a Tree", Jim Cummings voices the Porcupine and the Owl, and Marc Maron appears as the squirrel. In "Jake the Dad", Kristen Schaal lends her voice to Jake Jr.; Choe Dong-Hyun appears as T.V. and Kim Kil Whan; and Sunny Sandler voices both Charlie and Viola. Davey Johnson appears as the titular character in the episode "Davey". Both Justin Roiland and Andy Milonakis reprise their roles as the Earl of Lemongrab and NEPTR, respectively in "Mystery Dungeon". Roiland would voice both Earls of Lemongrab in the following episode, "All Your Fault", as well. In "Little Dude", Dana Snyder appears as the Ancient Sleeping Magi of Life Giving. "Bad Little Boy" featured Neil Patrick Harris returning as Prince Gumball, Madeleine Martin reprising the role of Fionna, and Roz Ryan reappearing as Cake. With the same episode, Donald Glover debuted as Marshall Lee, Marceline's male counterpart.
Reception and release.
Ratings.
The season debuted on November 12, 2012, with the two-part episode "Finn the Human"/"Jake the Dog". Together, both episodes were watched by 3.435 million viewers. This marked a drastic increase of almost one million viewers when compared to the previous season premiere, as well as the previous seaon finale. On November 14, 2012, it was reported that the shows averages roughly 3.3 million viewers an episode.
Reviews.
Eric Kohn of IndieWire praised the season for being "irreverent and narratively engaging". He called it "the ideal testament to animation's glorious pliability in an commercial arena otherwise defined by restrictions." Kohn felt that the show's exploration of "sad subtext"—such as the series' mysterious Mushroom War and the relationship between Marceline and the Ice King—and the characters' abilities to "deny the bad vibes their surrounding world invites" via "cheery songs and vibrant artwork" were some of the series strongest points. He was particularly pleased with the season opener, calling it a "interesting creative challenge".
Episodes.
Season 5 began on November 12, 2012 (with "Finn the Human"). It will contain 26 episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
