Survivor is an American version of the "Survivor" reality game show, itself derived from the Swedish television series "Expedition Robinson" originally created in 1997 by Charlie Parsons. The series premiered on May 31, 2000, on CBS. It is hosted by veteran television personality, reporter and one-time game show emcee Jeff Probst, who is also an executive producer, and also executive produced by Mark Burnett and original creator Charlie Parsons.
The show maroons a group of strangers (as one or more tribes) in a desolate locale, where they must provide food, water, fire, and shelter for themselves, while competing in challenges to earn either a reward, or an immunity from expulsion from the game in the next of the successive votes for elimination. While much rarer than elimination by vote, medical conditions, such as injury or infection, have eliminated several contestants. The last two or three survivors face a jury composed of the last seven, eight, or nine players voted off. That jury interrogates the final few, and then votes for the winner of the game, the title of Sole Survivor and a million dollar prize.
The American version has been very successful. From the 2000–01 through the 2005–06 television seasons its first eleven seasons (competitions) rated amongst the top ten most watched shows. It is commonly considered the leader of American reality TV because it was the first highly rated and profitable reality show on broadcast television in the USA, and is considered one of the best shows of the 2000s (decade). The series has been nominated for several Emmy Awards, including winning for Outstanding Sound Mixing in 2001, Outstanding Special Class Program in 2002, and was subsequently nominated four times for Outstanding Reality-Competition Program when the category was introduced in 2003. Jeff Probst has won the award for Outstanding Host for a Reality or Reality-Competition Program four consecutive times since the award was introduced in 2008.
It has been renewed for two more seasons (seasons 25 and 26) for the 2012–13 television season, with Jeff Probst confirmed to return as host and executive producer. "", the 26th season, premiered on February 13, 2013.
Format and Rules.
The first U.S. season of "Survivor" followed the same general format as the Swedish series. Sixteen or more players are split between two or more "tribes", are taken to a remote isolated location (usually in a tropical climate) and are forced to live off the land with meager supplies for roughly a month. Frequent physical challenges are used to pit the teams against each other for rewards, such as food or luxuries, or for "immunity", forcing the other tribe to attend "Tribal Council", where they must vote off one of their players. Once about half the players are remaining, the tribes are merged into a single tribe, and competitions are on an individual basis; winning immunity prevents that player from being voted out, while several that are voted out at this stage form the game's "jury". Once down to two or three people, a final Tribal Council is held where the remaining players plead their case to the jury members. The jury then votes for which player should be considered the "Sole Survivor" and win the show's prize. In all seasons for the United States version, this has included a $1 million prize in addition to the Sole Survivor title; some seasons have included additional prizes such as a car.
The U.S. version has introduced numerous modifications, or "twists", on the core rules in order to keep the players on their toes and to prevent players from relying on strategies that succeeded in prior seasons. These changes have included tribal switches, seasons starting with more than two tribes, the ability to exile a player from a tribe for a short time, hidden immunity idols that players can use to save themselves at Tribal Council and a chance to return to regular gameplay after elimination through "Redemption Island".
Series overview.
The United States version is produced by Mark Burnett and hosted by Jeff Probst. Each competition is called a season, has a unique name, and lasts from 13 to 16 episodes. The first season was broadcast as a summer replacement show in 2000. Starting with "", there have been two seasons aired during each U.S. television season.
In the first season there was a 75-person crew. By season 22 the crew had grown to 325 people.
Locations.
The American version of "Survivor" has been shot in many locations around the world since the first season, favoring warm, tropical climates.
Since "The Australian Outback", the announcement of each season's winner and subsequent reunion have been broadcast live in front of a studio audience, usually alternating between the Ed Sullivan Theater in New York City (home to CBS' "Late Show with David Letterman") and CBS Television City or the CBS Studio Center in Los Angeles.
U.S. television ratings.
"Survivor" has consistently been one of the top 20 most watched shows through its first 18 seasons and from seasons 21 to 23.
Seasonal rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of the United States version of "Survivor" on CBS.
"Note: Each U.S. network television season starts in late September and ends in late May, which coincides with the completion of May sweeps."
" doesn't have a ranking because it aired in the summer of 2000. It would have ranked #2 in the 1999–2000 U.S. television season, assuming it would have attained the exact same viewership numbers as it did in the summer of 2000."
Post-show auctions.
At the end of each U.S. "Survivor" season from "" onward, various "Survivor" props and memorabilia are auctioned online for charity. The most common recipient has been the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation. Most recently, proceeds have gone toward The Serpentine Project, a charity founded by Jeff Probst, dedicated to helping those transitioning out of foster care upon emancipation at eighteen years of age. Items up for auction have included flags, mats, tree mails, contestant torches, contestant clothing, autographed items, immunity idols and the voting urn.
Merchandise.
The wild success of "Survivor" spawned a wide range of merchandise from the very first season. While early items available were limited to buffs, water bottles, hats, t-shirts, and other typical souvenir items, the marketability of the franchise has grown tremendously. Today, fans can find innumerable items, including computer and board games, interactive online games, mugs, tribal-themed jewelry, beach towels, dog tags, magnets, multi-function tools, DVD seasons, "Survivor" party kits, insider books, soundtracks, and more.
DVD releases.
Seasons 1, 2, 7, 8, 9 and 10 were released in stores. The remaining seasons have been released exclusively on Amazon.com through their CreateSpace manufacture on demand program.
Other media.
Video games.
In the 2001 "Survivor" video game for PC, developed by Infogrames, it allows players to play and create characters for the game based on the Pulau Tiga or Australian Outback cast members. The game also includes a character creation system for making custom characters.
Gameplay consists of choosing survivors' skills (fishing, cooking, etc.), forming alliances, developing relationships with other tribe members, and voting off competitors at tribal council.
The game was very poorly received by critics. GameSpot gave the game a 'Terrible' score of 2.0 out of 10, saying "If you're harboring even a tiny urge to buy this game, please listen very carefully to this advice: Don't do it." Likewise, IGN gave the game a 'Terrible' 2.4 out of 10, stating "It is horribly boring and repetitive. The graphics are weak and even the greatest Survivor fan would break the CD in two after playing it for 20 minutes." The game was the recipient of Game Revolution's lowest score of all time, an F-. An 'interactive review' was created specially for the game, and features interactive comments like "The Survival periods are about as much fun as" followed by a drop-down menu, "watching paint dry/throbbing hemorrhoids/staring at air/being buried alive."
On November 4, 2009, it was announced that a second game based on the show would be turned into a video game. The game would require players to participate in various challenges like those in the reality shows in order to win.
Soundtracks.
Various soundtracks have been released featuring music composed by Russ Landau, including soundtracks for seasons 9 through 24 (with the exception of season 14).
Online games.
During the first Survivor seasons many online games based on forums were created. These are often referred to as "ORGs" (an acronym meaning Online Reality Games). More specific Survivor online games appeared later, such as Tengaged developed to simulate all the Survivor experiences where several online participants form tribes which will compete with each other. Participants compete for immunity to avoid being evicted while trying to get food, water and supplies for their tribes.
Thrill ride.
The Tiki Twirl thrill ride at California's Great America in Santa Clara, California was originally called "". The ride includes a rotating platform that moves along an undulating track. Riders can be sprayed by water guns hidden in oversized tribal masks. Theme elements included drums and other familiar Survivor musical accents playing in the background, Survivor memorabilia throughout the queue line and other merchandise for sale in nearby gift shops.
