George Raymond Richard Martin (born September 20, 1948), sometimes referred to as GRRM, is an American screenwriter and author of fantasy, horror, and science fiction. He is best known for "A Song of Ice and Fire", his bestselling series of epic fantasy novels that HBO adapted for their dramatic series "Game of Thrones". Martin was selected by "Time" magazine as one of the "2011 "Time" 100", a list of the "most influential people in the world".
Biography.
George R. R. Martin was born on September 20, 1948, in Bayonne, New Jersey, the son of longshoreman Raymond Collins Martin and his wife Margaret Brady Martin who also had two daughters, sisters Darleen and Janet. The family lived in a federal housing project near to the Bayonne docks. Being poor, the young Martin lived in his imagination and began writing and selling monster stories for pennies to other neighborhood children, dramatic readings included. He also wrote stories about a mythical kingdom populated by his pet turtles; the turtles died frequently in their toy castle, so he finally decided they were killing off each other in "sinister plots." Martin attended Mary Jane Donohoe School and then later Marist High School. While there he became an avid comic book fan, developing a strong interest in the innovative superheroes being published by Marvel Comics. "Fantastic Four" No. 20 (Nov 1963) printed a letter Martin wrote to the editor, the first of many (e.g., "FF" #32, #34, and others from his family's home at 35 E. First Street, Bayonne, NJ). Other fans wrote him letters, and through such contacts Martin joined the fledgling comics fandom of the era, writing fiction for various fanzines. In 1965 Martin won comic fandom's Alley Award for his prose superhero story "Powerman vs. The Blue Barrier", the first of many awards he would go on to win for his fiction.
In 1970 Martin earned a B. S. in Journalism from Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois, graduating "summa cum laude"; he went on to complete his M. S. in Journalism in 1971, also from Northwestern. Eligible for the draft during the Vietnam War, to which he objected, Martin applied for and obtained conscientious objector status; he instead did alternative service work for two years (1972-1974) as a VISTA volunteer, attached to the Cook County Legal Assistance Foundation. He also directed chess tournaments for the Continental Chess Association from 1973-1976. Then from 1976-1978 he was a journalism instructor at Clark College in Dubuque, IA, becoming Writer In Residence at the college from 1978-1979.
Martin began selling science fiction short stories professionally in 1970, at age 21. His first story, "The Hero," sold to Galaxy magazine and was published in its February, 1971 issue; other sales soon followed. The first story of his nominated for the Hugo Award and the Nebula Award was "With Morning Comes Mistfall", published in 1973 by "Analog" magazine. A member of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America (SFWA), Martin became the organization's Southwest Regional Director from 1977-1979; from 1996-1998 he served as its Vice President.
In 1976, for Kansas City's MidAmeriCon, the 34th World Science Fiction Convention (Worldcon), Martin and his friend and fellow writer-editor Gardner Dozois conceived of and organized the first Hugo Losers Party for the benefit of all past and present Hugo-losing writers, their friends, and family the evening following the convention's Hugo Awards ceremony. Martin was nominated for two Hugos that year but ultimately wound up losing both awards, for the novelette "...and Seven Times Never Kill Man" and the novella "The Storms of Windhaven", co-written with Lisa Tuttle. The Hugo Losers Party became an annual Worldcon event thereafter, its formal title eventually evolving into something a little more politically correct as both its size and prestige grew.
Although much of his work is fantasy or horror, a number of his earlier works are science fiction occurring in a loosely defined future history, known informally as 'The Thousand Worlds' or 'The manrealm'. He has also written at least one piece of political-military fiction, "Night of the Vampyres", collected in Harry Turtledove's anthology "The Best Military Science Fiction of the 20th century."
The unexpected commercial failure of Martin's fourth book, "The Armageddon Rag" (1983), "essentially destroyed my career as a novelist at the time", he recalled. It began his career in television, however, as a result of a Hollywood option on that novel that then led to him being hired, first as a staff writer and then as an Executive Story Consultant, for the revival of the "Twilight Zone". When the "CBS" series ran its course, Martin then became a producer on the dramatic fantasy series "Beauty and the Beast". In 1989 he became the show's co-supervising producer. During this same period, he also worked in print media as a book series editor, overseeing the development of the lengthy "Wild Cards" series, which takes place in a shared universe in which a small slice of post-World War II humanity gains superpowers after the release of an alien-engineered virus. In "Second Person" Martin "gives a personal account of the close-knit role-playing game (RPG) culture that gave rise to his "Wild Cards" shared-world anthologies". Martin's own contributions to the multiple-author series often feature Thomas Tudbury, "The Great and Powerful Turtle", a powerful psychokinetic whose flying "shell" consisted of an armored VW Beetle. As of June 2011 21 "Wild Cards" volumes had been published in the series; earlier that same year, Martin signed the contract for the 22nd volume, to be called "Low Ball" when eventually published by Tor Books; the following year, in early 2012, he signed another Tor contract for the 23rd volume, "High Stakes".
Martin's novella, "Nightflyers", was adapted into a 1987 feature film of the same title; he was not happy about having to cut plot elements for the screenplay's scenario in order to accommodate the film's small budget.
"A Song of Ice and Fire".
In 1991, Martin briefly returned to writing novels and began what would eventually turn into his epic fantasy series "A Song of Ice and Fire" (reportedly inspired by the Wars of the Roses and Ivanhoe), which will run to at least seven volumes. The first volume "A Game of Thrones" was published in 1996. In November 2005, "A Feast for Crows", the fourth book in this series, became "The New York Times" No. 1 Bestseller and also achieved No. 1 ranking on "The Wall Street Journal" bestseller list. In addition, in September 2006, "A Feast for Crows" was nominated for both a Quill Award and the British Fantasy Award. The fifth book, "A Dance with Dragons", was published in July 2011, quickly becoming a huge international bestseller, including a No. 1 ranking on the New York Times Bestseller list and many others; it remained on the NY Times bestseller list for more than a year. The series has received critical praise from authors, readers, and critics alike. In 2012 "A Dance With Dragons" made the final ballot for science fiction and fantasy's Hugo Award, World Fantasy Award, Locus Poll Award, and the British Fantasy Award; the novel went on to win the Locus Poll Award for Best Fantasy Novel.
HBO series production.
During completion of "A Dance With Dragons" and other projects, George R. R. Martin was also heavily involved in the production of a television series adaptation of the "A Song of Ice and Fire" books named after the first book, "A Game of Thrones". Martin's involvement included the selection of a production team and participation in scriptwriting; he is listed in the opening credits as an executive producer of the series.
HBO Productions purchased the television rights for the entire "A Song of Ice and Fire" series in 2007. HBO began airing the fantasy series (titled "Game of Thrones") on their U.S. premium cable channel April 17, 2011; it ran weekly for ten episodes, each approximately an hour long. The series was renewed shortly after the first episode aired. The first season was nominated for 13 Emmy Awards, ultimately winning two, one for its opening title credits and for Peter Dinklage as Best Supporting Actor. The second season of ten episodes, based on the second Ice and Fire novel "A Clash of Kings", began airing on HBO in the U.S. April 1, 2012; the second season was nominated for twelve Emmy Awards, including another Supporting Actor nomination for Dinklage. It went on to win six of those Emmys in the Technical Arts categories, which were awarded the week before the regular televised 2012 awards show. The first season of 10 episodes was also nominated for a 2012 Hugo Award, fantasy and science fiction's oldest award, presented by the World Science Fiction Society each year at the annual worldcon; it went on to win the 2012 Hugo for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form, at Chicon 7, the 70th World Science Fiction Convention.
Themes.
Martin's work has been described by the "Los Angeles Times" as having "complex story lines, fascinating characters, great dialogue, perfect pacing", while the "New York Times" sees it as "fantasy for grown ups", others feel it is dark and cynical. His first novel, "Dying of the Light", set the tone for some of his future work; it unfolds on a mostly abandoned planet that is slowly becoming uninhabitable as it moves away from its sun. This story has a strong sense of melancholy. His characters are often unhappy or, at least, unsatisfied – holding on to idealisms in a ruthless world. Many have elements of tragic heroes in them. Reviewer T. M. Wagner writes, "Let it never be said Martin doesn't share Shakespeare's fondness for the senselessly tragic." This gloominess can be an obstacle for some readers. The Inchoatus Group writes, "If this absence of joy is going to trouble you, or you’re looking for something more affirming, then you should probably seek elsewhere."
Martin's characters are multi-faceted—each with surprisingly intricate pasts, aspirations, and ambitions. "Publishers Weekly" writes of his ongoing epic fantasy "A Song of Ice and Fire", "The complexity of characters such as Daenerys, Arya and the Kingslayer will keep readers turning even the vast number of pages contained in this volume, for the author, like Tolkien or Jordan, makes us care about their fates." No one is given an unrealistic string of luck, however; so misfortune, injury, and death (and even false death) can befall "any" character, major or minor, no matter how attached the reader has become. Martin has described his penchant for killing off important characters as being necessary for the story's depth: "...when my characters are in danger, I want you to be afraid to turn the page, (so) you need to show right from the beginning that you're playing for keeps."
Major themes and areas of exploration in his short fiction include loneliness, connection, tragically doomed love, idealism, romanticism, and hard truth versus comforting deceit. Many of these occur in his magnum opus as well, but most of them are more abundant and obvious in his shorter works.
Relationship with fans.
Martin is known for his regular attendance through the decades at science fiction conventions and comics conventions and his accessibility to fans. In the early 1980s, critic and writer Thomas Disch identified Martin as a member of the "Labor Day Group", writers who regularly congregated at the annual Worldcon, usually held on or around the Labor Day weekend. Since the early 1970s he has also attended regional science fiction conventions, and since 1986 Martin has participated annually in Albuquerque's smaller regional convention Bubonicon, near his New Mexico home.
Martin's official fan club is the "Brotherhood Without Banners," who have a regular posting board at the Forum of the large website, westeros.org, which is focused on his "Song of Ice and Fire" fantasy series. At the annual World Science Fiction Convention every year, the "BWB" hosts a large, on-going hospitality suite that is open to all members of the Worldcon; their suite frequently wins by popular vote the convention's best party award.
Martin has been criticized by some readers for the delays between books in the Ice and Fire series, notably the six-year gap between the fourth volume, "A Feast for Crows" (2005), and the fifth volume, "A Dance with Dragons" (2011). In 2010, Martin responded to these concerns, saying he was unwilling to write his Ice and Fire series exclusively, saying that other writing and editing different projects has always been part of his working process.
Martin is strongly opposed to fan fiction, believing it to be copyright infringement and a bad exercise for aspiring writers.
Personal life.
In the early 1970s Martin was in a relationship with fellow science-fiction/fantasy author Lisa Tuttle, with whom he co-wrote "Windhaven".
While attending an east coast science fiction convention he met his first wife Gale Burnick; they were married in 1975, but the marriage ended in divorce, without children, in 1979.
On February 15, 2011, Martin married his longtime paramour Parris McBride during a small ceremony at their Santa Fe, New Mexico, home; the couple exchanged custom made, Celtic-inspired wedding rings made for them by local artisans. Area friends were in attendance and helped them celebrate the occasion. On August 19, 2011, they held a larger wedding ceremony and reception at Renovation, the 69th World Science Fiction Convention, in Reno, Nevada for their larger circle of friends within the fantasy and science fiction fields.
Martin maintains a LiveJournal account called "Not A Blog" where he posts about his works and various unrelated topics such as politics and the NFL: he is a lifelong supporter of the Democratic Party and claimed Jimmy Carter, during an interview with Authors@Google, to be "clearly the best human being to be president during my lifetime". He has recently expressed admiration for Barack Obama and strongly condemned perceived attempts at voter suppression, likening it to the behavior of Democrats of the Solid South and citing the pro-voting rights Republicans of his youth as a far better rolemodel for the conservative movement, citing youthful admiration for specifically Everett Dirksen, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr., Clifford Case and William Scranton. Martin is an avid, lifelong fan of both the New York Jets and New York Giants. His "LJ" "Not a Blog" posts have been reposted at times by someone else to a "George R. R. Martin" Facebook page, but Martin has never been a member of that online community or a reader of its posts; he also does not use Twitter.
Martin spends his spare time collecting medieval-themed miniatures, watching professional football on television, reading and collecting science fiction, fantasy, and horror books, and treasuring his comics collection, which includes the first issues of Marvel's "silver age" "Spider-Man" and "Fantastic Four".
He and his wife Parris are supporters of the Wild Spirit Wolf Sanctuary in New Mexico. Martin has noted his admiration for wolves not only in his books but also through fundraising.
In response to a question regarding his religious views, Martin replied, "I suppose I’m a lapsed Catholic. You would consider me an atheist or agnostic. I find religion and spirituality fascinating. I would like to believe this isn’t the end and there’s something more, but I can’t convince the rational part of me that that makes any sense whatsoever. That’s what Tolkien left out — there’s no priesthood, there’s no temples; nobody is worshiping anything in Rings." 
