Warehouse 13 is a U.S. television science fiction series that premiered on July 7, 2009, on the Syfy network.
Executive-produced by Jack Kenny and David Simkins, the dramatic comedy from Universal Media Studios is said to have borrowed much from the American-Canadian horror television series "" (1987–90), and has been described as "part "The X-Files", part "Raiders of the Lost Ark" and part "Moonlighting"." The series premiere was Syfy's third largest debut to date, garnering 3.5 million viewers. The first six episodes were all among the top ten highest rated series episodes on Syfy. Episode 6, "Burnout", drew 4.4 million viewers, setting the record for Syfy's highest rated show. Season 2 began July 6, 2010. It was renewed October 5, 2010, for a third season of 13 episodes, which began July 11, 2011. It was renewed for a fourth season August 11, 2011, which began July 23, 2012.
Characters from "Eureka" have crossed over to "Warehouse 13" and vice-versa, and actors from "Warehouse 13" have crossed over to "Alphas".
Premise.
The series follows U.S. Secret Service Agents Myka Bering (Joanne Kelly) and Pete Lattimer (Eddie McClintock) when they are assigned to the government's secret Warehouse 13 for supernatural artifacts. It is located in a barren landscape in South Dakota, and they initially regard the assignment as punishment. As they go about their assignments to retrieve missing artifacts and investigate reports of new ones, they come to understand the importance of what they are doing. In Season 1, Episode 4, they meet Claudia Donovan (Allison Scagliotti), who is searching for her missing brother; in Season 2, she joins the team as their techno-wiz. In Season 3, Episode 1, Steve Jinks (Aaron Ashmore), an Agent from Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives comes aboard.
Production.
Then known as SciFi, the network originally ordered a two-hour pilot episode written by "Farscape" creator Rockne S. O'Bannon, "Battlestar Galactica" co-Executive Producer Jane Espenson, and D. Brent Mote. Jace Alexander eventually directed a revised version written by Espenson, Mote, and "" executive producer David Simkins. SciFi ordered an additional nine episodes on September 19, 2008. The series premiered in the U.S. on July 7, 2009 concurrent with the name-change to Syfy. The series is filmed in and around Toronto, Ontario.
Cast and characters.
Agents of Warehouse 13 seem to be chosen either for their above-average intelligence (Artie is an expert NSA codebreaker, Myka has an eidetic memory and a wealth of encyclopedic knowledge, Claudia and H.G. Wells are both expert inventors) or because they possess a kind of extranormal ability (Pete and Mrs. Frederic both receive "vibes" regarding situations; Leena can read peoples' auras; and Jinks has the psychic ability to tell when a person is lying).
Artifacts and gadgets.
Originally, artifacts are items connected to some historical or mythological figure or event. Each artifact has been imbued with something from their creator, user, or a major event in history. Some are well known: Lewis Carroll's looking glass, which contains an evil entity called "Alice" that can possess other people's bodies (Myka in Season 1 episode "Duped"), leaving their minds trapped in the mirror; and Edgar Allan Poe's pen and a volume of his writing, which can make whatever the user writes a reality. Some are not: Lizzie Borden had a mirrored compact that today compels users to kill their loved ones with an axe; Marilyn Monroe owned a brush that now turns its user's hair platinum blonde, which Myka once used on herself while under the influence of W. C. Fields' juggling balls that induce drunkenness and blackouts. Others are just plain bizarre such as Pavlov's Bell, which will call any dog to you but causes excessive drooling for 24 hours, or a magic kettle that grants wishes but will produce a ferret if the wish is impossible. The artifacts react with electricity and can be neutralized only by immersion in a mysterious purple goo produced by Global Dynamics, a research laboratory from "Warehouse 13"s sister show, "Eureka". Artie has also mentioned that ingesting neutralizer will make you "see things". A new concept is introduced in Episode 47 (Season 4). Mrs. Frederic shows Claudia an artifact being created—a silver bracelet worn by an ordinary person who exhibits extraordinary courage—opening up new possibilities for future stories.
History.
As the name suggests, there have been twelve incarnations prior to the current warehouse in South Dakota. The oldest was Warehouse 1, which was built between 336-323 BC under Alexander the Great, as a place to keep artifacts that were obtained during war campaigns. Following the death of Alexander, the Warehouse was relocated to Egypt, establishing the practice of locating the Warehouse in the empire that is the most powerful at the time, and therefore most able to safeguard it. It was at this time that Egypt's Ptolemaic rulers appointed a group of people, known as the Regents, to oversee the Warehouse and act as its first "agents" and collectors of artifacts. Warehouse 2 lasted until the Roman conquest of Egypt. Some of the other Warehouses include: Warehouse 7 located within the Mongol Empire under Genghis Khan, Warehouse 8 in Berlin during the Holy Roman Empire (1260-1517), Warehouse 9 in the Byzantine capital of Constantinople (the inspiration for Ali Baba), Warehouse 11 in the Russian Empire under the Romanov Dynasty (the Napoleonic War with Russia in 1812 was an attempt to seize control of Warehouse 11), and Warehouse 12 located in the United Kingdom from 1830 until 1914. It was during the time of Warehouse 11 that the Regents began to employ the use of agents to gather and protect artifacts. This practice continued under Warehouse 12, with British agents traveling farther and farther searching for artifacts to add to the collection.
The next move for the Warehouse was to South Dakota in the United States. Unlike previous warehouses, which were placed in the centers of their empires, Warehouse 13 was located so as to hide it. The first Warehouse 13 was built in 1898, but the structure burnt down because of an insufficient understanding of how to safely store artifacts. The move to the rebuilt and current Warehouse 13 occurred in 1914 at the onset of World War I. The Warehouse was designed by Thomas Edison, Nikola Tesla, and M. C. Escher.
Crossovers.
Additionally, Hugo Miller spent some time in the town of Eureka, departing with Douglas Fargo at the end of episode "13.1"; he returns in "Love Sick", commenting that, "every week something seems to go 'boom'!" His presence there is off screen.
At the end of chapter 10 of the first part ("The Mother's Tale") of the novel "Queen of Wands" by John Ringo, Artie and Claudia make a brief appearance where they come to collect a dangerous artifact that was recovered by Barbara Everette.
Reception.
"Warehouse 13" series premiere was the most-watched cable show on American television that night. With 3.5 million viewers, it was also Syfy's third best premiere ever, behind "Stargate Atlantis" (2004) and "Eureka" (2006). Joanne Ostrow of "The Denver Post" described it as ""X-Files" light, with the bickering Scully and Mulder stand-ins going off on "Indiana Jones"-style adventures." IGN reviewer Ramsey Isler gave the pilot a positive review, but felt that it was not enough to give Syfy "a chance to once again boast the best sci-fi show on TV." Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly" gave it a negative review in July 2009, describing it as an "unholy cross between "The X-Files", "Bones", and "Raiders of the Lost Ark"." In July 2010, Tucker amended his opinion, stating that ""Warehouse" improved as it went along" and "grew more riveting"; he subsequently gave the show a rating of "B". In 2010, the series' composer, Edward Rogers, was nominated for an Emmy Award for Best Original Main Title Theme Music. "Warehouse 13" has received seven 2012 Portal Award nominations, including best television series, best actor (Eddie McClintock), best actress (Joanne Kelly), best supporting actor (Saul Rubinek), best supporting actress (Allison Scagliotti), best special guest (Jaime Murray), and best episode ("Emily Lake"). It was Eddie McClintock's third straight nomination and the second nomination for Saul Rubinek and Allison Scagliotti.
Media.
Comics.
The first part of a five-part comic series were released in August 2011 by Dynamite Entertainment with part five released in December 2011. A trade paperback was released in May 2012 containing all five parts.
