Kendall Nicole Jenner (born November 3, 1995) is an American reality television star, television personality, model, and brand ambassador for "Seventeen Magazine". She is best known for appearing on the E! reality TV show "Keeping Up with the Kardashians" that she shares with her family.
She has modeled for the "Sherri Hill" dress line, which specializes in dresses for proms and pageants. Jenner was featured in "People" magazine's "Beautiful People" article. Jenner is also a runway model and appears at public events.
Personal life.
Kendall Jenner is the eldest daughter from the marriage of Bruce Jenner and Kris Jenner. She has a younger sister, Kylie Jenner. Through her mother, she has three older half-sisters, Kourtney Kardashian, Kim Kardashian, and Khloé Kardashian, and one older half-brother, Rob Kardashian. Through her father, she has three older half-brothers, Burton Jenner, Brandon Jenner, and Brody Jenner, and an older half-sister, Casey Jenner. She also has a nephew and niece, Mason Dash Disick and Penelope Scotland Disick, children of her sister Kourtney and boyfriend Scott Disick. Both Jenner and her younger sister Kylie are cheerleaders at their high school.
Career.
Jenner was first featured in "Paper" magazine's "Beautiful People" article series with Kylie. She began her modeling career by signing with the Wilhelmina modelling agency at age 14. Her first modeling job was a campaign for Forever 21. She has done photo shoots with "OK!" magazine, "Teen Vogue", and photographer Nick Saglimbeni. Kendall has also expressed an interest in acting as well, but has explained that college is a greater priority. Also she has modeled for the "Sherri Hill" dress line, which specializes in dresses for proms and pageants. Once again, she pursued runway by modeling for the official Hello Kitty Launch for Forever 21 in Los Angeles. Also, Seventeen Magazine has chosen Kendall along with Kylie Jenner as Style Stars of 2011 and also the new 'Style Ambassadors' for the magazine. Kendall and Kylie have also been given the opportunity to host events such as the "Glee 3D Concert Movie" red carpet and the "Breaking Dawn Part 1" red carpet event in Los Angeles; the two also did an interview in the Bing Box at The Hunger Games premiere on March 12, 2012. 
Jenner has ventured into runway modelling, Her first runway modeling job was the Sherri Hill show in New York on September 14, 2011. She and Kyle have also hosted fashion week parties. Kendall has two nail lacquers from the Nicole O.P.I nail polish brand called "All Kendall-ed up" and "Kendall on the Katwalk". In 2012, Jenner was on the cover with her sister Kylie on "Teen Vogue". Also, she was on the cover of Seventeen Magazine's Back-To-School September issue along with her younger sister, Kylie Jenner. 
On February 8, 2013, PacSun announced it launched a women's clothing line designed and inspired by the Jenner sisters called "Kendall & Kylie" available exclusively at PacSun.
