Mark Cerny (born 1964) is a video game industry figure who has worked as a game designer, programmer, producer and business executive. As president of Cerny Games, which he founded in 1998, he now acts as a consultant in the video game industry. In 2004, he was the recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award from the International Game Developers Association, and in 2010 he was inducted into the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame.
In 2013 he was presented as the lead architect of Sony's PlayStation 4 console.
Career.
Cerny, a fan of computer programming and arcade games, started in the game industry at the age of 17 when he joined Atari in 1982. In those earlier days of professional game development, teams were small and each member was responsible for a wider range of roles than today.
Cerny's first major success is usually cited as "Marble Madness" in which he, at age 18, acted as the designer. For years he worked with Sega in Japan and the United States, where he worked on "Sonic the Hedgehog 2". He was the vice president and then president of Universal Interactive Studios. He has worked extensively with Naughty Dog (on the "Crash Bandicoot" and "Jak and Daxter" series), Insomniac Games (on the "Spyro the Dragon" and "Ratchet and Clank" series), and Sony.
From his extensive experience on the "dos and don'ts" in the game industry he has developed the "Cerny method" , a strategy for game development. His method prefers a free-form, pre-production stage that explores a game's viability prior to full development. For example, he advocates that if the first level produced does not excite customers, then the game idea should be set aside before too much effort is put into it.
The International Game Developers Association awarded Cerny with the Lifetime Achievement Award at the Game Developers Choice Awards (IGDA) in 2004. IGNA stated, "It's rare to find a 'jack-of-all-trades' who not only has the high-level vision for great game design but can act as the glue to adhere all the pieces together. His unusual but highly effective methodology has brought us some of the most entertaining games in history." He was described as the "master collaborator". His success rests not only on the number of games he's worked on, but also on their quality and commercial success (having sold several dozen million units).
In 2010, at the 13th Annual Interactive Achievement Awards, Mark Cerny was inducted into the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences Hall of Fame. "Mark Cerny is the closest we have come to a modern-day Da Vinci," said Joseph Olin, then-president of the AIAS. "What he does isn't restricted to a single aspect of game creation, he really is a Renaissance man. He is a diversely accomplished game designer, producer, programmer and technologist, fluent in Japanese and one of the foremost Western experts on the Japanese game market. He's also one of the only top-level independents in a business dominated by institutions."
On February 20 2013 at the global Sony PlayStation 4 unveiling event in New York City Mark Cerny was revealed as the console's system architect. He also showed in-game footage of his own new game which he is developing for the console called Knack.
