Jonah Hill Feldstein (born December 20, 1983), known professionally as Jonah Hill, is an American actor, producer, screenwriter, comedian and voice artist. He is best known for his roles in "Superbad" (2007), "Knocked Up" (2007), "Funny People" (2009), "Get Him to the Greek" (2010), "Moneyball" (2011), and "21 Jump Street" (2012). He made his feature film debut in "I Heart Huckabees" (2004). He also co-created and starred in the animated comedy "Allen Gregory" on Fox. Hill was first nominated for a Teen Choice Award for his role in "Accepted" (2006) as Sherman Schrader and in 2011 was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor for his dramatic turn in "Moneyball".
Early life.
Hill was born in Los Angeles, California, the son of Sharon Lyn (née Chalkin), a costume designer and fashion stylist, and Richard Feldstein, a tour accountant for Guns N' Roses. Hill was raised Jewish. His parents were originally from Long Island, New York, and the family vacationed in the Catskills. He attended The Center for Early Education, Brentwood School, and then Crossroads School, in Santa Monica. After graduating from high school, Hill left California to attend The New School, where he studied music and sports.
Career.
Acting.
While in college, Hill began writing his own plays and performing them in the "Black and White" bar in the East Village neighborhood of New York City. His plays developed a small following and helped him realize that his true desire was to act in films. Hill was befriended by Dustin Hoffman's children, Rebecca and Jake, who introduced Hill to their father. The elder Hoffman asked him to audition for a role in "I Heart Huckabees", in which Hill made his film debut.
Hill then made a brief appearance in Judd Apatow's directorial debut "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", which eventually led to him starring in a larger supporting role in the Apatow-directed "Knocked Up", an uncredited role of Dewey Cox's grown-up brother Nate Cox in "", and leading roles in the Apatow-produced "Superbad" and "Get Him to the Greek". On television, Hill played the "RA Guy" on the first season of the Oxygen Network sitcom "Campus Ladies". He also guest-starred in an episode of "Clark and Michael". He was scheduled to host "Saturday Night Live" on November 17, 2007, which would have featured musical guest Kid Rock, but the episode was canceled due to the Writers Guild of America strike which lasted from November 5, 2007, to February 12, 2008. Instead, he hosted the March 15, 2008, show, which featured musical guest Mariah Carey (who was a replacement for the originally scheduled musical guest Janet Jackson). He guest-starred in an of "Reno 911!" which aired on April 1, 2009.
Hill was in negotiations for a part in ' as Sam Witwicky's sidekick, but this did not go through. He next starred in Judd Apatow's third directorial feature, "Funny People", which also starred Adam Sandler, Eric Bana and Seth Rogen. He also was an associate producer of the 2009 Sacha Baron Cohen mockumentary "Brüno". He guest starred on an episode of "The Simpsons" called "Pranks and Greens", portraying an immature man named Andy Hamilton who was hailed the best prankster in Springfield Elementary School history. In July 2011, Hill appeared at ESPN's ESPY awards sporting a much slimmer physique. He claimed to have lost 40 pounds. In November 2011, Hill, along with Sam Worthington and Dwight Howard, starred in commercials for the video game ', making his first appearance with his new look. Hill was scheduled to guest star on the November 21, 2011 edition of "WWE Raw", but he skipped the event; a reason was not made clear.
Hill received a Golden Globe nomination, his first nomination, for Best Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Motion Picture for his performance in the 2011 sports film "Moneyball", in which he portrayed his first dramatic role as Peter Brand. In late January 2012, Hill received his first Oscar nomination for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for his role in Moneyball. In 2012, Hill co-starred with Channing Tatum in the film "21 Jump Street", and with Ben Stiller and Vince Vaughn in the film "The Watch". In 2011, it was announced that Hill was in talks to appear in Quentin Tarantino's movie "Django Unchained". Hill almost had to decline a possible role due to his prior commitment to "The Watch", lamenting that to act in a Tarantino movie was "the perfect next step" in his career. Hill later rejoined "Django Unchained", which was released in 2012.
Writing.
Hill has wanted to be a writer since he was young, dreaming of someday joining the writing teams of "The Simpsons", "Saturday Night Live" and "The Larry Sanders Show". At one point, Hill was writing a screenplay with close friend and "I Heart Huckabees" co-star Jason Schwartzman. At another, he was writing "Pure Imagination", a comedy for Sony about a man who develops an imaginary friend after a traumatic experience. Filming was expected to begin in 2008, but it has been in development since then. Hill recently co-wrote the treatment for "21 Jump Street" with screenwriter Michael Bacall.
Directing.
Hill directed his first music video, "Gonna Get Over You" by Sara Bareilles, in September 2011.
