Josep "Pep" Guardiola i Sala (; born 18 January 1971) is a Spanish football manager who will become manager of German Bundesliga club Bayern Munich at the start of the 2013–14 season. Guardiola had played as a defensive midfielder and spent the majority of his playing career with FC Barcelona. He was part of Johan Cruyff's "dream team" that won Barcelona's first European Cup. He also played for Brescia and Roma in Italy; Al-Ahli in Qatar; and for Dorados de Sinaloa in Mexico while attending managing school. While playing in Italy, he served a four-month ban for a positive drug test, although he was cleared of wrongdoing twice on appeal in 2009 before the Courts of Justice of the Italian Football Federation and the Federal Anti-Doping Courts of the Italian Olympic Committee (CONI). As an international, he played for Spain, and in friendly matches for Catalonia.
After retiring as a player, Guardiola became coach of FC Barcelona B, and mid 2008 he succeeded Frank Rijkaard as the first team manager. In his first season as manager, Barça won the treble of La Liga, the Copa del Rey, and the Champions League. In doing so, Guardiola became the youngest UEFA Champions League-winning manager ever. The following season, Guardiola and Barcelona won the Supercopa de España, the UEFA Super Cup, and the FIFA Club World Cup, bringing the manager's tally to the maximum of six trophies in six competitions in one year, thus completing six trophies sextuple in two seasons.
On 8 September 2011, Guardiola was awarded the Catalan parliament's Gold Medal, the highest honour. On 9 January 2012, Guardiola received the 2011 FIFA World Coach of the Year award for Men's Football. On 30 June 2012, Guardiola quit as Barcelona manager, after achieving 14 titles in four years in charge of the club. On 16 January 2013, the management of FC Bayern Munich declared that Guardiola will join the club for the 2013-14 season after Jupp Heynckes retires in July 2013.
Club career.
Barcelona.
Born in Santpedor, Barcelona, Catalonia, Guardiola joined La Masia at the age of 13 and rose through the ranks at the youth academy of Barcelona for six years, making his début in 1990 against Cádiz CF. As Phil Ball writes in "Morbo", 
Johan Cruyff utilised the young defensive midfielder in the absence of the suspended Guillermo Amor. He became a first team regular in the 1991–92 season and at only 20 years old, he was a key component of a side that won La Liga and the European Cup. The prestigious Italian magazine "Guerin Sportivo" heralded Guardiola as the finest player in the world under the age of 21. Cruyff's Dream Team went on to retain La Liga title in the 1992–93 and 1993–94 seasons. The side was strengthened by the recent signing of Romário, again reached the UEFA Champions League Final, but were humbled by Fabio Capello's Milan side in Athens, and lost the match 0–4. Cruyff left in 1996, with Barcelona finishing fourth in the 1994–95 season and third in the 1995–96 season, but Guardiola retained his position at the center of Barça's midfield. In the 1996–97 season, Barcelona, this time led by Bobby Robson, won three cups, the Copa del Rey, the Supercopa de España, and the Cup Winners' Cup. Much of the Dream Team had by this time left, with new signings such as Luís Figo and Ronaldo taking over from Hristo Stoichkov and Michael Laudrup. At the end of the 1997–98 season, Barcelona rejected offers from Roma and Parma (of around 300 million pesetas) for Guardiola. After prolonged and complicated contract talks, Guardiola signed a new contract with the Catalan club which extended his stay until 2001. A calf muscle injury ruled Guardiola out of most of the 1997–98 season, in which Barcelona won a league and cup double under new manager Louis van Gaal. He returned to action the following season and Barcelona once again won the league thanks largely to the performances of Rivaldo and Luís Figo. On 8 June 1998, Guardiola underwent surgery to try to solve once and for all the problems that he was experiencing with his calf which had led to him missing the 1998 FIFA World Cup for Spain. A largely disappointing 1999–00 season ended once again in surgery as Guardiola missed the last three months of the season due to a serious ankle injury. Barcelona didn't win any silverware during the 2000–01 season and finished fourth place in the league, but qualifying for the Champions League. On 11 April 2001, Barcelona's captain announced his intention to leave the club after 17 years of service. He stated that it was a personal decision and, in part, a response to what he perceived as football heading in a new, more physical, direction. On 24 June 2001, Guardiola played his last match with Barça in the last game of the season against Celta de Vigo. Guardiola played 479 games in 12 seasons for the first team, winning 16 trophies. At the press conference after the Celta game, he said, "It's been a long journey. I'm happy, proud, happy with the way people treated me and I have made many friends. I cannot ask for more. I have had many years in the elite. I did not come to make history but to make my own history." He has been called the hero of a number of Barcelona's current midfielders, as Xavi Hernández, Andrés Iniesta, and Cesc Fàbregas have all stated that Guardiola was their role model and hero.
Serie A.
After leaving Barcelona in 2001 at the age of 30, Guardiola joined Italian Serie A side Brescia and then Roma. His time in Italy, however, was unhappy and included a four-month ban after testing positive for Nandrolone. Six years later, on 23 October 2007, Guardiola was cleared on appeal of all charges that had led to the ban. CONI, however, reopened the case against the player, because it considered the argumentation of the absolution unacceptable, but he was cleared once again on 29 September 2009. His time in Italy was not nearly as successful as his career at Barcelona. He played a number of Coppa Italia games and Champions League games, finishing with 71 games in Italy.
Al-Ahli.
After his career with Brescia and Roma, in 2003, Guardiola chose to play in Qatar with Al-Ahli from Doha in the Qatar Stars League, where many fellow greats were playing, such as Gabriel Batistuta. He had rejected another offer from Manchester United, as he wanted to play elsewhere. He became a regular in the Qatar Stars League, often cited as one of the best players in the League. In 2005–06, he turned down offers from a number European sides, such as Manchester City, Manchester United and Chelsea, as he felt his playing career was coming to a close.
Dorados de Sinaloa.
In 2006, when Juan Manuel Lillo was appointed manager of Mexican club Dorados de Sinaloa, he recruited Guardiola to play for the club, while he was in managing school in Axocopán, Atlixco, Puebla. He subsequently played for six months, before retiring definitively.
International career.
Spain.
Guardiola made his senior debut on 14 October 1992 in 0–0 draw with Northern Ireland at Windsor Park in a World Cup qualifier. In the same year, Guardiola captained Spain when they won a gold medal at the Barcelona Olympic Games. It was in this year when he won the Bravo Award, voted the world's best player under the age of 21. Between 1992 and 2001, Guardiola was a regular midfield maestro, playing over 47 times and scoring five goals for the senior Spain team, as a midfield player. He was a member of the Spain team during the 1994 World Cup, where they reached the quarter-finals, losing to Italy 2–1. He fell out of favour with Javier Clemente, the Spain manager, due to difference and disagreement between the two, and missed out on Euro 1996. He suffered a career-threatening injury in 1998, which kept him out of the 1998 World Cup, but he later played at Euro 2000, where he led Spain to yet another quarter-final appearance, this time losing to France by the same margin, 2–1. He led the Spain midfield until his final appearance for Spain, in 1–0 win in a friendly against Mexico on 14 November 2001, and scoring his last international goal against Sweden in a 1–1 draw, in his 45th appearance.
Catalonia.
Guardiola has also played for and has served as an advocate of the Catalonia football team. Between 1995 and 2005, he played seven friendly games for Catalonia's national team.
Coaching career.
Barcelona.
B Team.
Guardiola was appointed coach of FC Barcelona B on 21 June 2007 with Tito Vilanova as his assistant. Under his guidance, the team subsequently won their Tercera División group and qualified for the 2008 Segunda División B playoffs, which the team won, thereby achieving promotion. FC Barcelona president Joan Laporta announced before the end of the 2007–08 season that Guardiola would be appointed manager of the senior Barcelona squad to replace Frank Rijkaard at the end of the season.
2008–09 season.
Upon being appointed, Guardiola revealed that Ronaldinho, Deco, Samuel Eto'o and others were not part of his plans for the coming season. By the time of the announcement, Guardiola had already offloaded full back Gianluca Zambrotta to AC Milan, attacking midfielder Giovani dos Santos to Tottenham Hotspur, and midfielder Edmílson to Villarreal CF. Deco went to Chelsea, while Ronaldinho joined Zambrotta in Milan. Lilian Thuram was initially going to join Paris Saint-Germain on a free transfer but the discovery of a heart condition put a stop to the move, and the veteran retired to tend to his health. Oleguer Presas signed with AFC Ajax, Santiago Ezquerro was released by Barça and Marc Crosas was sold to Celtic. The fate of Samuel Eto'o took much of the summer to unravel, with the Cameroonian linked with several clubs, but Guardiola finally declared that he would stay after his dedication in training and participation in the pre-season. In association with Barça director of sport, Txiki Begiristain, several new signings were made by Guardiola — Dani Alves and Seydou Keita arrived from Sevilla FC; Martín Cáceres from Villarreal CF by way of Recreativo de Huelva; Gerard Piqué returned from Manchester United; and Alexander Hleb was signed from Arsenal. Henrique was also signed from Palmeiras, but was immediately loaned out to Bayer Leverkusen. In interviews with the press, Guardiola stressed a harder work ethic than before, but also a more personal approach during training and a closer relationship with his players. Along with the new signings, Guardiola promoted "canteranos" Sergio Busquets, Pedro Rodríguez and Jeffrén Suárez to the first team squad.
Guardiola's first competitive game as coach was in the third qualifying round of the Champions League, in which Barça comfortably beat Polish club Wisła Kraków 4–0 in the first leg at home. They then lost 1–0 in the second leg, but progressed with a 4–1 aggregate victory. Promoted CD Numancia also defeated Barcelona in the opening match-day of the La Liga, but the team then went on an undefeated streak for over 20 matches to move to the top of the league. Barça maintained their spot atop La Liga's table, securing their first league title since 2006 when rivals Real Madrid lost at Villarreal on 16 May 2009. The most important match however was on 2 May when they defeated Real Madrid 6–2 at the Santiago Bernabéu. The league title was the second piece of silverware in Guardiola's first season at the Camp Nou. On 13 May 2009, Barcelona won the Copa del Rey, defeating Athletic Bilbao by 4–1. Guardiola finished the season by leading Barça to the final of the Champions League, where they beat Manchester United 2–0. In doing so, they became the first Spanish club to win the domestic cup, the league, and the European club titles (the treble) in the same season. The treble winning season is regarded as one of the club's finest seasons in its history Furthermore, Guardiola became the youngest man to coach a Champions League winning team.
2009–10 season.
During Guardiola's second season as manager, Barcelona traded Samuel Eto'o for Zlatan Ibrahimović of Internazionale and €46 million. Many players left the club in the same transfer window — Eiður Guðjohnsen was sold to AS Monaco; Sylvinho and Albert Jorquera's contracts ended; and other players were loaned out, including Alexander Hleb to VfB Stuttgart, Martín Cáceres to Juventus, Alberto Botía to Sporting de Gijón, and Víctor Sánchez to Xerez CD. Barcelona started the season defeating Athletic Bilbao in the Supercopa de España and Shakhtar Donetsk in the UEFA Super Cup. On 25 September 2009, Barcelona gave Guardiola his 50th professional victory, away against Málaga CF and on 19 December, they were crowned FIFA Club World Cup champions for the first time in their history. Guardiola finished the calendar year 2009 with a record six trophies, the Spanish League, Copa del Rey, Champions League, Spanish Super Cup, European Super Cup, and Club World Cup, becoming the first manager in history to do so. After winning every trophy they competed for in 2009, Barcelona. January 2010 also saw Guardiola become Barcelona's longest serving Spanish coach, overtaking the record previously held by Josep Samitier. That same month, on the 20th, he agreed to a one-year contract extension to keep him with Barcelona until the end of the 2010–11 season. February of the same year saw Guardiola coach his 100th match for Barcelona's first team. His record stood at 71 wins, 19 draws, and 10 losses with 242 goals for and 76 against. On 10 April 2010, he became the first manager in Barcelona's history to beat Real Madrid four times in a row in "El Clásico". Barcelona reached the semi-finals of the 2009–10 Champions League, but lost 3–2 on aggregate to José Mourinho's Internazionale. Despite this, they managed to win their 20th La Liga title with 99 points by beating Real Valladolid 4–0 at home. To that day, the highest points total ever gained amongst any of Europe's major leagues. The La Liga title was Guardiola's seventh trophy as manager of the club, tying Ferdinand Daučík for second behind Johan Cruyff and his 11 trophies. On 8 June 2010, the Royal Spanish Football Federation fined Guardiola €15,000 following a formal inquiry opened by the Competition Committee regarding his actions and comments during and after a match against UD Almería on 6 March 2010. Guardiola approached the fourth official with, according to the official report, malicious intent, berating the official and speaking into his microphone with phrases such as, "You are calling everything wrong." Following the match, Guardiola accused Carlos Clos Gómez and his assistant Jose Luis Gallego Galdino of "lying" in their match report. Barcelona were given 10 days to appeal the sanction. TV replays supported Guardiola's assertions. The game ended 2–2.
2010–11 season.
Guardiola's third season in charge saw the departure of two players who had arrived last season — Dmytro Chygrynskiy returned to Shakhtar Donetsk and Zlatan Ibrahimović moved to Milan on loan. Rafael Márquez and Thierry Henry were released from their contracts and both moved to New York Red Bulls in Major League Soccer; Yaya Touré also left the team and moved to Manchester City of the English Premier League. The club signed Adriano from Sevilla FC, David Villa from Valencia CF, and Javier Mascherano from Liverpool. On 14 July 2010, Guardiola signed a new contract to stay with Barcelona until June 2011. On 21 August, Barcelona beat Sevilla 5–3 on aggregate to win the 2010 Spanish Supercup, his second in a row. On 29 November 2010, Barcelona beat Real Madrid 5–0, giving Guardiola five straight wins in as many matches in "El Clásico". On 8 February 2011, Guardiola accepted the club's offer for a one-year deal extension, signing a contract until June 2012. On 16 February, in the first leg Champions League first knockout round, Barcelona were defeated by Arsenal 2–1 at the Emirates Stadium. The defeat prolonged Guardiola's record of never having won the away leg of a Champions League knockout tie. On 8 March, in the second leg of the Champions League first knockout round, Barcelona defeated Arsenal 3–1, thus winning 4–3 on aggregate, moving them into the quarter-finals. Early April saw Barcelona move eight points clear of second placed Real Madrid in their domestic league after a key away win against Villarreal CF, making the most of Real Madrid's home loss against Sporting de Gijón earlier on the same day. Barcelona managed to advance to the semi-finals of the Champions League for the fourth year — last three under Guardiola — in a row after thrashing Shakhtar Donetsk 6–1 on aggregate. Following the Champions League campaign, Barcelona continued their La Liga crusades for the second El Clásico in the Santiago Bernabéu, which ended 1–1. Lionel Messi scored for his team from penalty spot after Raúl Albiol was sent off. It was later replied by Real Madrid's Cristiano Ronaldo from a penalty kick in the 80th minute of the match. Guardiola suffered his first final defeat during the Copa del Rey final against Real Madrid. Cristiano Ronaldo scored the only goal for in the 103rd minute of the match during extra time, giving the club the first title since 2008, as well as José Mourinho's first title for his new club. In the Champions League, however, Barcelona beat Real Madrid 2–0 at the Santiago Bernabéu in the semi-final first leg, and after a 1–1 draw at Camp Nou, they proceeded to Guardiola's second Champions League final in three years as coach for Barcelona.
On 11 May 2011, Barcelona won the La Liga title and third in a row after a 1–1 draw with Levante UD. On 28 May, Barcelona beat Manchester United 3–1 to win the Champions League.
2011–12 season.
Guardiola's fourth season in charge started with the departure of three players who had been part of the team for a long time. Gabriel Milito moved back to Independiente, Jeffrén Suárez was sold to Sporting Clube de Portugal, and Bojan Krkić was sold to Roma. Two big signings were made — Alexis Sánchez came from Udinese for €26 million plus bonuses and Cesc Fàbregas, a former La Masia graduate, returned from Arsenal for €29 million plus bonuses. To complete the squad, two players where promoted from the youth system: Thiago Alcântara and Andreu Fontàs. The season started with a 5–4 aggregate win over Real Madrid for the Supercopa de España. Barcelona won their second trophy of the season on 26 August, beating FC Porto in the UEFA Super Cup final 2–0. With the trophy won against Porto, he became all-time record holder of most titles won as a coach at Barcelona. He has won now 12 trophies in only three years. November of the same year saw Guardiola coach his 200th match for Barça's first team. His record stood at 144 wins, 39 draws, and 17 losses with 500 goals for and 143 against. Barcelona ended the 2011 calendar year winning the Club World Cup, beating Santos FC 4–0, the widest margin in a Intercontinental Cup/Club World Cup final since changing to a single match format. This was Guardiola's 13th title of only 16 tournaments played. On 9 January 2012, he was named FIFA World Coach of the Year. On his 41st birthday, he led his side to a 2–1 victory over arch-rivals Real Madrid in "El Clásico", ensuring that he remained unbeaten against Real Madrid in regular time as a manager. On 21 April, Guardiola conceded the league title to leaders Real Madrid, after they beat Barcelona 2–1 and extended their lead in the table to seven points with four matches remaining. "We have to congratulate Madrid for their win and the title that they have also won tonight," said Guardiola, after what was his side's first loss at home all season. Three days later, a 2–2 draw at home against Chelsea in the second leg of the Champions League semi-final knocked Barcelona out of the competition on a 2–3 aggregate score. That effectively left the team with only the Copa del Rey to play for. Guardiola had faced criticism over his recent tactics and squad selections. On 27 April 2012, Guardiola announced he would step down as Barcelona's coach at the end of the 2011–12 season. He had been on a rolling contract that was renewed annually during his tenure as manager. Stating tiredness as the main reason for his decision, he also commented that four years at a club like Barça felt like an eternity. The team also announced that he would be succeeded by current assistant Tito Vilanova, who would begin leading the first team at the start of the 2012–13 season. Guardiola continued to lead Barcelona to wins in the remaining La Liga games of the season, followed by a 3–0 win in the 2011–12 Copa del Rey final. His record of 14 trophies in four seasons has made him the most successful coach in Barcelona's history.
Sabbatical.
After his time at Barcelona came to an end, Guardiola took a year's sabbatical to recover in New York. On 7 January 2013, Guardiola came in third place for the 2012 FIFA World Coach of the Year, behind the winner Vicente del Bosque and runner-up José Mourinho. While at a news conference at the 2012 FIFA Ballon d'Or gala in Zurich, Guardiola said, "I have taken a decision to return to coaching but beyond that no decision has been taken." Continuing to say, "I don't have a team to go to but I would like to go back to coaching." He also said that he felt it "would show a lack of respect" for him to "talk about any team that has a coach."
Bayern Munich.
On 16 January 2013, it was announced that Guardiola would take over as manager of German Bundesliga club Bayern Munich at the end of the 2012–13 season, replacing Jupp Heynckes who is due to retire.
Tactics.
Under Frank Rijkaard, FC Barcelona were known for a 4–3–3 with plenty of flair with Ronaldinho being the centre point of the attack. Under Guardiola the team became more disciplined with a greater focus on possession and a disciplined and aggressive pressing style. He often played a high defensive line with the full backs "(particularly Daniel Alves)" pushing high up down their respective sides while relying on the passing of Xavi Hernández and Andrés Iniesta to retain possession whilst employing pressing style without the ball. During Samuel Eto's time at FC Barcelona, Lionel Messi was deployed on the right hand side, however, since his departure Messi has largely played in the centre forward role fulfilling a false nine capacity. During the 2011–12 season Guardiola made increasing use of the 3–4–3 system, especially when facing two attackers. Using Cesc Fàbregas as an attacking midfielder and Javier Mascherano or Sergio Busquets as pivot on the midfield. Johan Cruyff used this system as a basic tactical approach when Guardiola played for Barcelona. Guardiola used this system in a 5–0 win against Villarreal CF because he was short on defenders, and in a later Champions League game against AC Milan, he employed this tactic with most of his players available. ""In Barcelona it is understood that you can win a thousand ways. All are valid. All work. There's little more to say,"" Guardiola wrote in a column for "El País" in March 2007, when Rijkaard experimented with a three-man backline of his own. ""But in Barcelona it is also understood that you can never win and repeat in a way that does not feel right to you—that does not feel right to the directors, coaches, players, friends of the press and the people who go every week to see them.""
Personal life.
Guardiola was born to Dolors and Valentí. He has two older sisters and a younger brother. Guardiola met his wife, Cristina, at his parents clothes store when he was 18. They have three children: Marius, Maria and Valentina. Following his tenure as FC Barcelona coach, Guardiola stated that he would move to the United States to live in Manhattan, New York City for a year, until he decides on his future.
