The family of Barack Obama, the 44th President of the United States of America, is made up of people of African American, English, Kenyan (Luo), and Irish heritage, who are known through Obama's writings and other reports. His immediate family is the First Family of the United States. The Obamas are the first First Family of African descent.
Immediate family.
'"Michelle Obama
Malia Obama and Sasha Obama
Marian Robinson
Maternal relations.
Barack Obama was raised by his mother Stanley Ann Dunham, called Ann, and grandparents Madelyn and Stanley Dunham. He often referred to his family during his candidacy and term as President.
Ann Dunham
Stanley Armour Dunham
Madelyn Lee Payne Dunham
Charles Thomas Payne
Ralph Dunham
Lolo Soetoro
Maya Soetoro-Ng
Konrad Ng
Robert Wolfley
John Punch
Jonathan Singletary Dunham
Paternal relations.
The Obamas are members of the Luo, Kenya's third-largest ethnic group, which is
part of a larger family of ethnic groups, collectively also known as Luo. Linguistically, the Luo language belongs to the Eastern Sudanic branch of the Nilo-Saharan phylum. The Obama family is largely concentrated in the western province of Nyanza.
 (Barack's half-brother), unidentified woman, Bernard Obama (Barack's half-brother), Abo Obama (Barack's half-brother).]]
 Hussein Onyango Obama
"When he returned to Alego he was very thin and dirty. He had difficulty walking, and his head was full of lice." For some time, he was too traumatized to speak about his experiences. His wife told his grandson Obama: "From that day on, I saw that he was now an old man."
 Habiba Akumu Obama
 Sarah Obama (aunt of Barack Obama)
 Barack Obama, Sr.
 Hawa Auma Hussein (aunt of Barack Obama)
 Sarah Onyango Obama
 Kezia Obama
 Malik Obama
 Auma Obama
 Abo Obama
 Bernard Obama
 Ruth (Baker) Ndesandjo
 Mark Okoth Obama Ndesandjo
 David Ndesandjo (c. 1967 – c. 1987)
 George Hussein Onyango Obama
 Omar Okech Obama
 Zeituni Onyango
 Yusuf Obama
 Sayid Obama
Michelle Robinson Obama's extended family.
Barack Obama has called his wife Michelle "the most quintessentially American woman I know." Her family is of African-American heritage, descendants of Africans and Europeans of the colonial era. Michelle Obama's family history traces from slavery to Reconstruction to the Great Migration to northern cities, in her family's case, Chicago. Some of Michelle's relatives still reside in South Carolina.
Jim Robinson
Fraser C. Robinson III
Craig Robinson
Fraser Robinson, Jr.
LaVaughn Dolores Johnson
Capers C. Funnye, Jr.
Distant relations.
According to genealogists, Barack Obama's distant cousins include the multitude of descendants of his maternal ancestors from all along the early-American Atlantic seaboard as well as paternal, Kenyan relations belonging to the Luo tribe, many descending from a 17th century ancestor named Owiny. For example, George W. Bush, the 43rd U.S. president, is the eleventh cousin of Barack Obama. "The New York Times" science writer Nicholas Wade has stated that with eleven generations leading back to their common progenitor, Samuel Hinckley, the relationship between the 43rd President and the 44th President is "genetically meaningless".
Selected genealogical relationships
Five volumes of family genealogy (as compiled at the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints' Family History Library in Salt Lake City, Utah), were presented by Mormon leaders to Obama in July 2009. In a statement, Obama said he was "looking forward to reading through the materials with my daughters. It's something our family will treasure for years to come."
Moneygall, Ireland, resident Henry Healy, Barack Obama's eighth cousin, became known for having initiated a visit by the U.S. president in May 2011 to Healy's hometown.
