Sarah Wayne Callies (born June 1, 1977) is an American actress who is best known for her roles as Sara Tancredi in the Fox television series "Prison Break" and Lori Grimes in AMC's "The Walking Dead".
Early life.
Callies was born in La Grange, Illinois and moved to Honolulu, Hawaii with her family when she was one. Her parents are professors at the University of Hawaii, Manoa, but Callies did not follow in their footsteps. Instead, she chose to pursue a career in acting. Throughout her youth, she expressed an interest in acting through participating in various school plays at the independent Punahou School. After graduating from high school, she entered Dartmouth College in Hanover, New Hampshire. In conjunction with her studies, she continued her involvement in theatre. She continued her education at Denver's National Theater Conservatory, where she obtained her Master of Fine Arts degree in 2002. She stated through a spokesperson to TV Guide in Fall 2007:"As hard as we all tried, the Prison Break powers that be and I were unable to find a way to meet both the needs of the story and the needs of my family. We parted wishing each other well. I had a wonderful time working with the creative team and have a world of respect for all of them; they took great care of Sara. I'm also enormously grateful to the fans. They've been so gracious and supportive, and I hope they continue to enjoy the show." However, in March 2008 Olmstead stated that the character of Sara is still alive and would return in Season 4 of Prison Break. Though the character Sara Tancredi appeared to have a violent death Olmstead stated "...we realized that there was actually a way she could still be alive." When asked by Kirstin of E! whether the fans' overwhelming response to her death had factored in, Executive Producer Matt Olmstead admitted it had indeed influenced the decision.
Callies has also starred in two feature films - Universal Pictures' "Whisper" and an independent film, "The Celestine Prophecy".
In April 2010, she appeared on the Fox Television drama "House M.D. " as a patient of the week whose open marriage fascinates House and the team.
She portrayed Lori Grimes in the AMC horror/drama series "The Walking Dead", based on the comic book series of the same name up until her character's death. Callies played one of the female lead roles in the upcoming Canadian thriller "Faces in the Crowd". 
In August 2010 Callies' first screenplay, an adaptation of Campbell Geeslin's children's book "Elena's Serenade", was optioned by producer Cameron Lamb and Canadian production company The Film Farm. 
Callies starred in the movie "Black Gold".
Personal life.
On June 21, 2005, Callies married Josh Winterhalt, whom she met at Dartmouth College. Winterhalt is a martial arts teacher. On January 23, 2007, her publicist announced that the couple were expecting their first child. In July 2007, Callies gave birth to a girl, Keala Winterhalt. 
She is close friends with "Prison Break" co-star Wentworth Miller, saying "I have the great privilege of working opposite someone who is also a great friend. That's something that makes my work easier, it makes my time on set more fun and I think it makes the work better". She was voted one of "Maxim"'s "The Hottest Women of Fall TV '08."
