Sunny Deol (born Ajay Singh Deol, 19 October 1956) is an Indian film actor, producer and director. Often referred to as "Action King of Bollywood". Deol was born to Bollywood actor Dharmendra. He has won two National Film Awards and two Filmfare Awards. He went to England to study acting. He joined theater called the Old Web Theater in Birmingham, England where he studied theatre and acting
Deol's films such as "Border" (1997) and ' (2001) remain some of Bollywood's biggest hits, while films like "Betaab" (1983), "Arjun (1985)", "Paap Ki Duniya" (1988), "Tridev" (1989), "Ghayal" (1990), "Damini – Lightning" (1993), Darr (1993), "Jeet" (1996), ' (1996), "Ziddi" (1997), "Indian" (2001), "" (2003), "Apne" (2007), "Yamla Pagla Deewana" (2011) are other successful films thus making him successful leading actors of Bollywood. is the second-highest grossing movie of Indian film history, if inflation is taken into account and also most watched Bollywood movie of modern era in theaters.
Early life.
Deol was born into a Punjabi Sikh family in the Sahnewal village of Punjab, India (near New Delhi) to Bollywood actor Dharmendra and Prakash Kaur. Sunny is eldest son of Dharmendra. His stepmother is Hema Malini. He has a brother Bobby Deol and two sisters Vijayta Deol and Ajeeta Deol who are settled in California, he also has two half-sisters, Esha Deol and Ahana Deol.
His cousin Abhay Deol is also a successful actor.
Career.
1980s.
Deol made his debut opposite debutant Amrita Singh in "Betaab" (1983) which was a blockbuster & launched both Sunny & Amrita Singh's career's. His performance won him his first Filmfare Best Actor Award Nomination. He then went through a lean phase for a couple of years until Rahul Rawail's "Arjun" (1985) came. He played the titular role of an unemployed youngster in "Arjun". The film went on to become a major hit and established Sunny’s status as an action hero. What followed were a bunch of hits like "Dacait" (1987), "Yateem" (1988) and "Paap Ki Duniya" (1988) In 1989, he had back to back hits with Rajiv Rai's "Tridev" and Pankaj Parashar's "Chaalbaaz".
1990s.
With his portrayal of an amateur boxer wrongly accused of his brother’s murder in Rajkumar Santoshi's "Ghayal", Sunny proved that he still ruled the industry when it came to action sequences. Produced by the home banner "Vijayta Films", the movie was an instant hit with the masses and went on to win seven Filmfare Awards. His performance won him his second Filmfare Best Actor Award and also his first National Film Award. In 1991, Sunny starred in about 5 films but only "Narsimha" was a success. Rajiv Rai's "Vishwatma" was Sunny's only release in 1992. His role of a lawyer in "Damini – Lightning" (1993) fetched him several awards and accolades in Bollywood. Shahrukh Khan shared screen space with Juhi Chawla and Sunny Deol in Yash Chopra’s blockbuster "Darr". In the mid-nineties he delivered four big hits in a row "Jeet" (1996), "" (1996), "Ziddi" (1997) and "Border" (1997) In 1999, after starring opposite Juhi Chawla in "Arjun Pandit", Sunny Deol tried his hand at direction and helmed "Dillagi". He also acted alongside younger brother Bobby Deol and Urmila Matondkar in his directorial debut, which was very well appreciated by critics
2000s.
In 2001, he starred in the film Farz opposite Preity Zinta. Sunny played the role of lorry driver Tara Singh who falls in love with a Muslim girl in Anil Sharma’s '. The partition saga went to become an all time blockbuster and was the highest grossing Bollywood film ever that time and currently 5th highest grossing Bollywood film. He was nominated for the Filmfare Best Actor Award for his portrayal. His third release that year saw him playing the title role in the action film Indian, a remake of the Tamil film Vallarasu in which Sunny essayed the character of DCP Rajshekhar Azad, an honest police officer. The movie was a success. Sunny’s next few projects were extremely patriotic in nature and struck a chord with audiences across the country. He played the role of an Indian military officer in "Maa Tujhhe Salaam" and essayed the character of freedom fighter Chandrashekhar Azad in '.
In 2003 Sunny Deol teamed up with director Anil Sharma yet again for "", which also starred Preity Zinta and Priyanka Chopra in her first onscreen appearance. which released on 11 April and was billed as Bollywood's most expensive film that time with an estimated budget of The film received mostly positive reviews from critics and became the third highest-grossing Bollywood film of that year Sunny made an appearance alongside Dharmendra and Bobby Deol in "Apne" (2007) and then yet again in "Yamla Pagla Deewana"
2010s.
Deol's first release of 2010 was "Right Yaaa Wrong". The film was critically successful, but moderately successful commercially. "Yamla Pagla Deewana" was Sunny's only release in 2011 and one of the biggest successes of the year In 2011, he started working in "Radhika Rao" and "Vinay Sapru"'s "I Love New Year" opposite Tannishtha Chatterjee and in Chandraprakash Dwivedi's Mohalla Assi opposite Sakshi Tanwar but for some reason's both films have been delayed. For the first time in his career, Sunny will lend his voice (for Bheem) in the Animated film "Mahabharata"; produced by "Jayantilal Gada" of PEN India Pvt Ltd. His future ventures includes Neeraj Pathak's "Bhaiyyaji Superhitt", Anil Sharma's "Singh Sahab The Great", Sangeeth Sivan's "Yamla Pagla Deewana 2" and Rahul Rawail's "Ghayal Returns" .
Personal life.
Sunny Deol has always maintained a low profile in the media about his personal life. He is married to Pooja Deol. His wife has never faced the media till date like other celebrity wives. The couple have two sons Karan Deol(21) and Rajvir Deol(17).His elder son is all set to make his debut
Awards and nominations.
Apart from National Film Awards, Filmfare Awards and other competitive awards which Deol won for his performances throughout the years, he has been awarded several honours for his achievements in the Indian film industry.
