Celeste Beryl Bonin (born October 7, 1986) is an American body builder, model, and professional wrestler. She works for WWE under the ring name Kaitlyn where she is the reigning WWE Divas Champion.
Bonin started her career as a body fitness model. In 2007, she won the National Physique Committee (NPC) John Sherman Classic Bodybuilding Figure and Fitness Championship, came in fifth at the Arnold Classic in the NPC Figure Class D competition, and also was in the top five at Musclemania Superbody, in the Figure Universe - Tall category. She was named Miss November in 2008, placed 16th at the NPC Junior Nationals that year in the NPC Figure category, and was part of the Hardfitnes Calendar. Bonin also made an appearance in "Flex Magazine" in 2009.
In July 2010, Bonin signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment, and was assigned to Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW), WWE's developmental territory. In September 2010, she competed in the all-female third season of "NXT" where she became the only female in history to win "NXT". Prior to her debut to the main roster in December 2010, she formed a tag team with AJ known as The Chickbusters in May 2011. After the split of the team in May 2012, she returned to singles competition which includes winning the WWE Divas Championship on the 20th anniversary episode of "Raw" in January 2013.
Early life and career.
Bonin made her body fitness debut in 2006, at the age of 19. In 2007, Bonin won the National Physique Committee (NPC) John Sherman Classic Bodybuilding Figure and Fitness Championship, and came fifth at the Arnold Classic in the NPC Figure Class D competition. She also was in the top five at Musclemania Superbody in 2007, in the Figure Universe – Tall category. In 2008, she was named Miss November at the Hardfitness Calendar, and placed 16th at the NPC Junior Nationals that same year in the NPC Figure category. In 2008 she was part of the Hardfitness Calendar and in 2009, Bonin appeared in "Flex Magazine".
World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE.
Florida Championship Wrestling (2010–2012).
In July 2010, World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) signed Bonin to a developmental contract, and she reported to Florida Championship Wrestling, WWE's developmental territory. She debuted under the ring name Celeste, competing in a bikini contest. Her name was soon changed to Ricki Vaughn, and quickly changed again to Kaitlyn, her name on "NXT". On the August 22 episode of FCW television, she would make her FCW TV debut as a lumberjill at ringside for a match between AJ Lee and Naomi Knight. On the July 3 episode of FCW television, Kaitlyn competed in singles competition against then FCW Divas Champion and Queen of FCW Aksana in a losing effort. Kaitlyn competed in her first FCW Divas Championship title match on the August 7 episode of FCW television against Aksana, but was unsuccessful in winning the title. 
On the December 25 episode of FCW television, Kaitlyn teamed with Cameron Lynn being defeated by Caylee Turner and Sofia Cortez. After no longer being on the FCW roster, she continued to make wrestling appearances feuding against the Anti-Diva Army (Sofia Cortez, Raquel Diaz, and Paige) along with Audrey Marie and Caylee Turner in various tag team matches.
NXT (2010).
On September 7, it was announced that Bonin would join season 3 of "NXT", under the name Kaitlyn, with Vickie Guerrero as her storyline pro. She was the replacement for Guerrero's original rookie, Aloisia, whom Guerrero fired in storyline. That week, she unsuccessfully competed in both a "Dance Competition" (where she performed moves like the robot and running man), and a "Capture the Flag" contest. The following week on the September 14 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn made her in-ring debut, when she teamed up with Guerrero's on-screen boyfriend Dolph Ziggler to defeat AJ and Primo in a mixed tag team match, and also won the "Obstacle Course" challenge. Kaitlyn made her first pay-per-view appearance at Night of Champions accompanying Dolph Ziggler with Vickie Guerrero for Ziggler's WWE Intercontinental Championship match, until Guerrero ordered her to leave ringside. On the September 21 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn and LayCool (Layla and Michelle McCool) lost to Kelly Kelly, Naomi, and Jamie in a six-diva tag team match after Naomi pinned Kaitlyn, and ended the show after LayCool attacked her while Guerrero berated her. That same week on the September 24 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn and Vickie Guerrero accompanied Dolph Ziggler to the ring for his match until Guerrero again ordered Kaitlyn to leave ringside, leading to Kaitlyn pushing her over before leaving. On the September 28 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn won a wheelbarrow race and lost a "Diss the Diva" challenge, which lead to Vickie Guerrero entering the ring and insulting her until Kaitlyn challenges Guerrero to a match and ending the show with the two brawling.
The next week on the October 5 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn lost the "Ride the Bull" competition, won the "Diva Talent Show" by drawing an insulting picture of Vickie Guerrero, and went on to main event the show winning her first singles match against Guerrero. On the October 12 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn lost the "WWE Name that Tune" challenge and the "Power of the Punch" challenge. The next week of "NXT", Kaitlyn lost a match against Maxine, the "WWE Who's that Body" challenge, and the "Limbo" contest. On the October 28 Halloween episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn won a costume contest impersonating Vickie Guerrero, and lost a "Halloween Candy" competition due to her choking and then accidentally throwing up on Guerrero. On the November 2 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn and Dolph Ziggler were found kissing behind a wall, and when Vickie confronted them, Kaitlyn threw a cake, which was meant for Goldust and Aksana's wedding, into her face. On the November 5 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn and Vickie Guerrero faced each other in a rematch in which Vickie was victorious after her foot was on the ropes. On the November 9 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn won an "Arm Wrestling" competition, and brawled again with Vickie Guerrero backstage. The next week on the November 16 episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn was defeated by Naomi in singles competition, and was safe from elimination. On the November 30 season finale episode of "NXT", Kaitlyn defeated Naomi in a rematch, and was later announced as the winner of season three, defeating Naomi in the final to become WWE's first ever "breakout diva".
The Chickbusters (2010–2012).
On the December 3 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn appeared in a backstage segment with Guerrero and Ziggler, announcing that SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long had signed her to the brand following her victory on "NXT". She had her first match on "SmackDown" on the January 28, 2011, episode, when she and Kelly Kelly were defeated by LayCool (Layla and Michelle McCool). Kaitlyn later lost in singles competition against Layla on the March 11 episode of "SmackDown".
On the May 27 episode of "SmackDown" Kaitlyn formed a tag team known as The Chickbusters with AJ, which led to their first match as a team being accompanied by their mentor Natalya against the team of Alicia Fox and Tamina in a losing effort. AJ and Kaitlyn lost a rematch to Fox and Tamina the following week. Her first victory came on the June 10 episode of "SmackDown", when she pinned Tamina in a singles match, a feat she repeated on the July 8 episode. AJ, Kaitlyn, and Natalya continued to feud with Fox and Tamina, who were soon joined by Rosa Mendes. Kaitlyn had her first #1 contender's match for the WWE Divas Championship on the August 1 episode of "Raw", which was ultimately won by Beth Phoenix.
On the August 5 episode of "SmackDown" AJ lost a singles match to Natalya, who then turned on her protégé, attacking her and declaring war on the "perky little princesses" that comprised the rest of the Divas division. The following week, Kaitlyn and AJ lost to The Divas of Doom (Beth Phoenix and Natalya) in a tag team match. Throughout the next few months, The Chickbusters continued to feud with the Divas of Doom, losing both singles and tag team matches to them. Kaitlyn then made her return to "NXT" on the October 19 episode of "NXT Redemption" being accompanied by fellow Chickbuster AJ in singles competition against Maxine in a winning effort via submission. Kaitlyn then had a short feud with Tamina after defeating her two weeks in a row on the October 26 and November 2 episodes of "NXT Redemption". Also in November, tension began to be teased between The Chickbusters, with Kaitlyn upset at their repeated losses to The Divas of Doom.
On the February 8, 2012 episode of "NXT Redemption", Kaitlyn lost in singles competition to Maxine, whom she has been feuding with since befriending Derrick Bateman. After weeks of feuding with Maxine over whether the latter was good for Derrick Bateman, on the February 29 episode of "NXT Redemption", Kaitlyn would kiss Bateman in an "intervention" segment also including Alicia Fox and Justin Gabriel before defeating Maxine in the main event. On the March 14 episode of "NXT Redemption", after Kaitlyn and Derrick Bateman defeated Johnny Curtis and Maxine, Bateman would then kiss Kaitlyn thus solidifying their relationship. On the March 21 episode of "NXT Redemption", Kaitlyn and Derrick Bateman were backstage with Tamina talking about her and Bateman's new found relationship, and later encountered Maxine and Johnny Curtis, who accused them of being involved with Matt Striker's disappearance. Kaitlyn and Derrick Bateman discovered Matt Striker in a janitor's closet hidden by Curt Hawkins and Tyler Reks on the April 11 episode of "NXT Redemption". Kaitlyn made her televised return on the April 23 episode of "Raw", appearing as a lumberjill in a Divas Championship match involving Beth Phoenix and Nikki Bella. 
When Kaityn made her return to "SmackDown" on the April 27 episode, she was backstage comforting fellow Chickbuster AJ, who slapped Kaitlyn after being told the Daniel Bryan was no good for her. On the May 4 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn again attempted to comfort AJ, but was again assaulted by AJ. On the May 11 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn was defeated by AJ in singles competition, and was afterwards visited by Daniel Bryan, who stated he is moving on from AJ and going after Kaitlyn. Two days later on Twitter, Kaitlyn announced she was officially breaking up The Chickbusters.
Kaitlyn then reentered into a feud with Maxine on the May 16 episode of "NXT Redemption" after she was victorious in singles competition against Maxine via submission. Two weeks later on the May 30 episode of "NXT Redemption", Kaitlyn successfully defeated Tamina Snuka in a singles match while Maxine observed on commentary, thus ending the feud. On the June 13 season finale episode of "NXT Redemption", Kaitlyn's winning streak continued as she defeated her former mentor Natalya for the first time in singles competition.
Feud with Eve Torres and Divas Champion (2012–present).
On the June 25 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn made her televised return competing in the '""Diva Beach Battle Bast"" battle royal, which was ultimately won by her former friend AJ. On the July 12 episode of "WWE Superstars", Kaitlyn teamed with Alicia Fox in a winning effort against her rival Natalya and Beth Phoenix after Kaitlyn pinned Phoenix. Kaitlyn then went on to compete in her first pay-per-view match at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view in a six diva tag team match along with Divas Champion Layla and Tamina Snuka against Beth Phoenix, Natalya, and Eve Torres, with her team coming out victorious.
On the August 10 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn asked and was given a job from SmackDown General Manager Booker T as his assistant, but was afterwards put in a match against Eve with the winner awarded the job. On the August 17 episode of "SmackDown", Kaitlyn lost to Eve, who became SmackDown Assistant General Manager to Booker T. Three days later on "Raw", Kaitlyn won a Divas battle royal to become number one contender to the Divas Championship. On the September 10 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn teamed with Layla and Eve in a six diva tag team match where they defeated Beth Phoenix, Natalya, and Alicia Fox, and afterwards Eve would hug both Layla and Kaitlyn and raise their arms in victory. At the Night of Champions pay-per-view, Kaitlyn was attacked by a masked figure injuring Kaitlyn's ankle, therefore being forced to forfeit her title shot with Layla to Eve. On September 17, it was announced that Kaitlyn has a torn tendon, and will be out of in-ring action for several weeks. 
She returned on the September 24 episode of "Raw" stating that the diva that attacked her at the Night of Champions pay-per-view was blonde, leading to Beth Phoenix becoming the suspected attacker. On the October 8 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn had her first Divas Championship match against Eve in a losing effort via submission, and was afterwards saved by Layla from Eve who attempted to re-injure her. Two weeks later on the October 22 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn confronted Eve about her attacker, revealing it to Aksana, who was e-mailed by Eve to attack Kaitlyn at the Night of Champions pay-per-view, and ended in a brawl also involving Layla. Kaitlyn received another shot for the Divas Championship at the Hell in a Cell pay-per-view, but was again defeated by Eve in a triple threat match, also involving Layla. On the November 12 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn defeated Layla in singles competition to become the #1 contender for the divas title against Eve at Survivor Series. At Survivor Series, Kaitlyn was again attacked from behind by Aksana, and went on to face Eve for the Divas Championship, but was unsuccessful. Kaitlyn would get her revenge on Aksana the following night on the November 19 episode of "Raw" and the December 14 episode of "SmackDown" defeating her in singles competition. On December 16 at the pay-per-view, Kaitlyn competed in a #1 contender "Santa's Little Helpers" diva battle royal to face Eve for the championship, but was unsuccessful in winning the match due to Eve interfering. The following night on the December 17 episode of the "Raw Slammy Awards", Kaitlyn would defeat Eve in a non-title match. The next night on the December 18 live episode of "Super SmackDown", Kaitlyn brawled backstage with old Chickbuster partner AJ, and went on to compete in singles competition for the Divas championship against Eve Torres in a winning effort via disqualification after Eve tripped the referee to keep the title. On the January 7 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn would receive another title match against Eve Torres, winning the match via countout after Eve fled the arena.
On the January 14 episode of "Raw", Kaitlyn defeated Eve in her home town of Houston, Texas to win the WWE Divas Championship with the stipulation, if that Eve got disqualified or counted-out Kaitlyn would become the Divas Champion. Kaitlyn was then placed into a feud against Tamina Snuka over Kaitlyn's championship. The two divas had a lumberjill match on the January 28 episode of "Raw" ended in a no-contest after the Lumberjills interrupted in the match. On the February 4 episode of "Raw", it was announced that Kaitlyn would face Snuka at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view for the Divas Championship, where Kaitlyn retained her belt after hitting Snuka with a spear. On the February 22 episode of "Smackdown" she teamed with Layla in a winning effort againist Snuka and Aksana. After the match for the second time Layla showed jealousy by not giving Kaitlyn the title.
Other media.
Kaitlyn also occasionally works for Hardbody.com, contributing with interviews, photo ops and blogs. In August 2012, Kaitlyn appeared in "Honour Magazine": Issue #23 about her involvement in the Money in the Bank pay-per-view.
Personal life.
Bonin is best friends with fellow professional wrestler April Mendez. In early May, Bonin was asked a series of questions by the webmaster of her official fansite; she stated that she loves the Red Hot Chili Peppers, her favorite movie is "American Psycho", she hates the CBS television series "The Big Bang Theory", and her favorite place to visit is Austin, Texas, which she described as "the coolest city ever to exist". In November 2012, Bonin was arrested in Grand Rapids, Michigan for an unpaid speeding ticket, and was released after paying a $315 bond.
