Evanna Patricia Lynch (born 16 August 1991) is an Irish actress and model. She rose to prominence playing Luna Lovegood in the "Harry Potter" film series, appearing in four "Harry Potter" films and their tie-in video games. Lynch has made fashion accessories, has recorded an audiobook, and is a member of the Board of Advisors for the non-profit organization The Harry Potter Alliance. She has appeared in photoshoots for various magazines, and modelled for Katrin Thomas and Ciaran Sweeney.
Early life and education.
Lynch was born in the Termonfeckin townland of County Louth, Ireland to Marguerite and Donal Lynch. She has two sisters, Emily and Mairead, and one brother, Patrick. As a child, Lynch read the "Harry Potter" series and became a fan, sending letters to the author, J. K. Rowling.
Lynch attended Cartown National School in Termonfeckin until June 2004, and then moved to Our Lady's College in Drogheda, where her father was the deputy principal. In 2008, Lynch studied speculative fiction and drama at the Centre for the Talented Youth of Ireland, a summer school for gifted teens, in Glasnevin. While on the "Harry Potter" set, she was tutored for at least three hours a day. From September 2010, Lynch attended the Institute of Education to repeat her Leaving Certificate.
Career.
"Harry Potter".
In 2006, Lynch auditioned at a casting call in London for the role of Luna Lovegood in "Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix", the fifth film in the series adapted from the books. After auditioning against 15,000 other girls, and a subsequent screen test with lead actor Daniel Radcliffe, she was cast at the age of 14. Producers were impressed with her affinity for the character; David Heyman said "The others could play Luna; Evanna Lynch is Luna." Although uninvolved in the casting process, Rowling believed that Lynch was perfect for the role. She had never acted professionally before the "Harry Potter" series, her experience limited to school plays.
"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix" was Lynch's debut screen performance in 2007. The film was a box office hit, taking US$938 million worldwide, and garnered generally favorable reviews. Critics praised the performances of the supporting cast, often singling out Lynch for particular acclaim; A. O. Scott of "The New York Times" called her performance "spellbinding", and Jane Watkins of "Country Life" said she " an appealing sweetness to her character that's not so developed in the book". She reprised her role as Luna in the film's tie-in video game.
Two years later, Lynch again starred as Luna in "Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince", the sixth instalment in the series. The film was critically and financially successful. Wesley Morris of "The Boston Globe" wrote that Lynch as Luna "combats the movie’s occasional sluggishness with a hilarious sluggishness of her own", and Michael Dwyer of "The Irish Times" called her the best Irish actress of 2009 for her work on the film. Her performance earned her Scream Award and Young Artist Award nominations, and she again reprised her role in the film's tie-in video game.
"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1", the first of two films adapted from the seventh and final "Harry Potter" book, was released in 2010. The film was a success at the box office and drew generally favorable reviews from critics. James Verniere of "The Boston Herald" commented that Luna "is still delightfully lunar," while Simon Miraudo of "Quickflix" criticised the film commenting that "the delightful Evanna Lynch is brutally underutilised as the loopy Luna Lovegood". She again reprised her role in the film's tie-in video game.
The following year, Lynch again appeared as Luna in the eighth and final instalment in the series, "Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2". The film opened to universal critical acclaim and went on to become the fourth highest-grossing film of all time, grossing US$1.328 billion in box-office receipts worldwide. Moira Macdonald of "The Seattle Times" wrote that Lynch "continues to be all-that-and-a-radish-earring as the ever-wafting Luna Lovegood," and Roger Moore of "The Orlando Sentinel" named her as "maybe" one of his "favorite players in the finale." She again reprised her role in the film's tie-in video game.
In August 2012 at Leakycon in Chicago she joined the cast of StarKid to play Luna Lovegood in a script reading of the third Harry Potter parody musical, A Very Potter Senior Year (the other two being 'A Very Potter Musical' and 'A Very Potter Sequel'.)
Harry Potter's author J.K.Rowling gave a speech during the final, world premiere of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 2 on the 7 July 2011 in London, England. She announced that they are seven Harry Potter's film series cast members, who she refers to as "The Big Seven", and she named Lynch as one of the seven members, alongside with Daniel Radcliffe, Rupert Grint, Emma Watson, Tom Felton, Matthew Lewis, and Bonnie Wright. Rowling has said that, of all the actors in the film series, Lynch has had the most influence on how her character was subsequently written. In 2012, she told Charlie Rose that when composing the final books, "I saw her. got in my head. I even heard her voice when I was writing Luna."
Further career.
Lynch went on to guest star as Princess Alehna (daughter of Taryn, played by Orla Brady) in the first season finale of the Sky1 television series "Sinbad". 
She was also scheduled to play Fiona Carrick-Smith in the upcoming 2013 indie crime drama film "Monster Butler", alongside her "Harry Potter" co-star Gary Oldman. The film was to have been based on the life of British serial killer and thief Archibald Hall. However, the film has been cancelled due to problems with funding. 
Evanna is also set to star in indie teen comedy "GBF", slated for release in 2013.
Other work.
Lynch has made and helped design a number of fashion accessories for the "Harry Potter" films. She has modelled for Katrin Thomas and Ciaran Sweeney, and in 2012 appeared on the cover of the Fall issue of "Runway" magazine. She has also recorded an abridged audiobook version of Claire Keegan's short story "Foster". Her charity work includes participation with the Multiple Sclerosis Society of Ireland, in which she launched their MS Readathon fundraiser in 2010. Lynch is also a member of the Board of Advisors for the non-profit organization, the Harry Potter Alliance (HPA). With the HPA, she has supported same-sex marriage in Maine, taken part in a webcast fundraiser, written an article about body image, and contributed to a fundraising book.
