Rodolfo Graziani, 1st Marquis of Neghelli (11 August 1882 – 11 January 1955), was one of Benito Mussolini's military commanders in the Italian colonial wars taking place in Libya and Ethiopia before and during World War II. Elsewhere in the world, not in Italy, Graziani is known as "the Butcher of Ethiopia" and "the Butcher of Fezzan (Libya)" because of the killings of the native civilians while he was in command; in Italy, in 2012, a monument partially financed by the Italian public funds was erected by his local supporters. Despite the atrocities committed during the Pacification of Libya, in Italy he is again being considered by his supporters as the Pacifier of Libya ("Pacificatore della Libia").
Graziani was an Italian Royal Army ("Regio Esercito") officer and Mussolini's Minister of Defence in the short-lived Fascist Republic of Salo, just before the end of World War II. Because the judgement of the national Italian tribunal was that he was only "receiving orders", he only served four months despite having been sentenced to 19 years in 1948.
Biography.
Rodolfo Graziani was born in Filettino in the province of Frosinone. In 1903, he decided to pursue a military career. He served in World War I and became the youngest Colonel ("Colonnello") in the Italian Royal Army.
Colonial wars.
Italian invasion of Libya.
During 1920s Italian invasion of Libya, under the Graziani's command thousands of native civil Libyans were put into concentration camps and labor camps where they died of starvation and diseases. The civilians involved in resistance were also killed by hanging, like Omar Mukhtar, or shot. He is remembered internationally as "the Butcher of Fezzan". From 1926–1930, Graziani was the Vice Governor of the colonial Italian Cyrenaica in Libya. During 1930–1934, he was Governor of Cyrenaica. In 1935, Graziani was made the Governor of the colonial Italian Somaliland.
Italian invasion of Ethiopia.
During the 1935–1936 Italian invasion of Ethiopia and subsequent Second Italo-Abyssinian War, under Graziani's command the Italian Royal Air Force in addition to the three columns on the ground attacked the Ethiopians on the ground at Battles of Genale Doria and the Ogaden. Graziani led the invasion from Italian Somaliland. It was secondary to the main invasion which was led by Emilio De Bono from Eritrea and then continued by Pietro Badoglio. Badoglio sent Graziani a telegram reminding him of his "strictly defensive" role. Graziani feigned compliance with Badoglio but communicated privately with Rome and urged that he be given authorization for an offensive. Graziani was rewarded for his role as commander of the southern front. When Badoglio, after his "March of the Iron Will", entered Addis Ababa on 5 May 1936, Graziani was quoted to say: "The "Duce" will have Ethiopia, with or without the Ethiopians."
Mass murdering of the civil Ethiopian population.
After the unsuccessful attempt to kill him and other members of the colonial forces by the local resistance fighters (two Ethiopians named Abraha Deboch and Mogus Asgedom) on 19 February 1937, Graziani ordered native civilian Ethiopians to be killed in great numbers. One of his officials, Guido Cortese, gave the order saying: "Comrades, today is the day when we should show our devotion to our Viceroy by reacting and destroying the Ethiopians for three days. For three days I give you "carte blanche" to destroy and kill and do what you want to the Ethiopians." Up to thirty thousand Ethiopians of Addis Ababa were killed, and more than a thousand Ethiopian notables were exiled from their homeland, what is remembered by Ethiopians as "Yekatit 12". Ethiopians' houses were set on fire, the homes of local Greeks and Armenians were broken in, their servants were lynched by Italian Fascists with daggers and truncheons to the shouts of ""Duce! Duce!"" and ""Civilta Italiana!"" Graziani earned a nickname "the Butcher of Ethiopia". In response to the Ethiopian Orthodox clergy's support to the resistance movement, the monks of the monastery of Debre Libanos and a number of pilgrims, who celebrated the founding saint of the monastery remembrance day, were among the civilian victims of the killings ordered by Graziani.
World War II.
After the death of Marshal Italo Balbo in a friendly fire incident on 28 June 1940, Graziani took his place as Commander-in-Chief of Italian North Africa and as the colonial Governor General of Libya.
As Commander-in-Chief of Italian Royal Army's General Staff he was given a deadline of 8 August by Benito Mussolini to invade Egypt with the 10th Army. Graziani expressed doubts about the ability of his largely un-mechanized force to defeat the British and postponed the invasion. However, faced with demotion, Graziani ultimately followed the Mussolini's order and invaded Egypt on 9 September. The elements of the 10th Army made modest gains into Egypt and then prepared a series of fortified camps to defend their positions. In November 1940 the British counterattacked and completely defeated the 10th Army during Operation Compass, after which Graziani resigned his commission. On 25 March 1941, Graziani was replaced by General Italo Gariboldi, and remained inactive for two years.
Graziani was the only Italian Marshal to remain loyal to Mussolini after Dino Grandi's Grand Council of Fascism coup. He was appointed Minister of Defence of the Italian Social Republic by Mussolini. and oversaw the mixed Italo-German Army Group Liguria ("Armee Ligurien") commanded by "General" Alfredo Guzzoni.
In one of the last military victories of the Axis forces, Graziani commanded Italian troops alongside the Germans at the "Battle of Garfagnana" in December 1944.
At the end of the war, Graziani spent a few days in San Vittore prison in Milan before being transferred to Allied control. He was brought back to Africa in Anglo-American custody, staying there until February 1946. Allied forces then felt the danger of assassination or lynching had passed (many thousands of fascists were murdered in Italy in summer and fall 1945), and returned him to Procida prison in Italy.
In 1948, a military tribunal sentenced Graziani to a further 19 years′ jail, as punishment for his collaboration with the Nazis; but he was released after serving only a few months of the sentence.
Trials.
International.
The League of Nations failed to bring to trial Graziani or any other Italian authorities before World War II.
In 1943 the Allied Powers agreed to create a new body to replace the League: the United Nations. The "United Nations War Crimes Commission" was created to investigate war crimes. On 4 March 1948 charges against Graziani were presented to the United Nations War Crimes Commission. The commission was given evidence of the Italian policy of systematic terrorism and Graziani’s self-admitted intention to execute all Amharas authorities, and cited a telegram from Graziani to General Nasi, in which he had written, "Keep in mind also that I have already aimed at the total destruction of Abyssinian chiefs and notables and that this should be carried out completely in your territories." The UN commission agreed that there was a prima facie case against eight Italians including Graziani.
The British Foreign Office consistently opposed Ethiopia’s inclusion in this Commission and the trial of Italian crimes committed during the 1935–36 invasion. Ethiopian efforts to bring Graziani to trial were frustrated by intransigence, by both Italy and Britain, and were finally abandoned, under pressure from the Foreign Office, whose support the Ethiopian Government considered essential for its claim to Eritrea.
National.
Because the judgement of the national Italian tribunal was that he was only "receiving orders", he only served four months despite having been condemned to 19 years in 1948.
Unprosecuted for war crimes.
He was never prosecuted for war crimes by the Allies because the British government with the beginning of Cold War saw in the fellow-Fascist Pietro Badoglio's post-war political career a guarantee of an anti-communist post-war Italy.
Graziani in the early 1950s did some political activity with the neofascist Movimento Sociale Italiano, and become the "Honorary President" of this Italian party in 1953. In January 1955, at 72, he died of natural causes in Rome.
The 2012 "Fatherland" and "Honour" monument.
In August 2012, $160,000 of public money was used to finance a monument in his honor, supplemented by private funding by Ettore Viri, the town of Affile's mayor. Engraved on the mausoleum are the words "Fatherland" and "Honour". A local moderate politician and critic reflected that "It’s as if some little village in some German province built a monument to Göring."
