The Latin adverb sic ("thus"; in full: "sic erat scriptum", "thus was it written") added immediately after a quoted word or phrase (or a longer piece of text), indicates that the quotation has been transcribed exactly as found in the original source, complete with any erroneous spelling or other nonstandard presentation. The usual purpose is to inform the reader that any errors or apparent errors in the transcribed material do not arise from transcription errors, and the errors have been repeated intentionally, i.e., that they are reproduced exactly as set down by the original writer or printer. It may also be used as a form of ridicule or as a humorous comment, drawing attention to the original writer's spelling mistakes or emphasizing his or her erroneous logic. "Sic" is generally placed inside square brackets, or in parentheses (round brackets), and traditionally in italic, as is customary when printing a foreign word.
Etymology and usage history.
Though occasionally misidentified as an abbreviated word, "sic" is a Latin adverb incorporated into the English-language similarly as an adverb (also used by some as a noun and verb).
The adverb "sic"meaning "intentionally so written", first appeared in English circa 1856. It is derived from the Latin adverb "sīc", which contains a long vowel and means "so, thus, in this manner", "as such" or "in such a manner".
According to the "Oxford English Dictionary", the verb form of "sic", meaning "to mark with a "sic"", emerged in 1889, citing E. Belfort Bax work in "The Ethics of Socialism" as one of the early examples. That piece by Bax, "On Some Forms of Modern Cant," had actually appeared even earlier in "Commonweal", published in 1887.
Usage of "sic" greatly increased in the mid-twentieth century. For example, in state-court opinions prior to 1944, the Latin loanword appeared a total of 1,239 times in the Westlaw database; in those from 1945 to 1990, it appeared 69,168 times. The "benighted use" as a form of ridicule, deserved or otherwise has been cited as a major factor for this increase.
The "immoderate" use of "sic" has created some controversy, leading some editors, including Simon Nowell-Smith and Leon Edel, to speak out against it.
False etymologies.
On occasion, "sic" has been misidentified as an acronym "s.i.c." for "spelled in context", "said in copy", "spelling is correct", "spelled incorrectly", and other phrases. These are all backronyms from "sic".
Usage.
Conventional usage.
"Sic", in its bracketed form, is most often inserted into quoted or reprinted material in order to indicate meticulous accuracy in reproducing the preceding text despite appearances to the reader of an incorrect or unusual orthography (spelling, punctuation, etc.), grammar, fact or logic. Several usage guides recommend that a bracketed "sic" be used primarily as an aid to the reader, and not as an indicator of disagreement with the source.
To denote archaisms.
A "sic" may show that an uncommon or archaic usage is reported faithfully, such as when quoting the U.S. Constitution: "The House of Representatives shall chuse their Speaker ..." However, various writing guidebooks discourage its use with regard to dialect such as in cases of American and British English spelling differences, unless of course used to convey ridicule. For instance, the appearance of a bracketed "sic" after the word "" on a book cover led Bryan A. Garner to comment, "... all the quoter (or overzealous editor) demonstrated was ignorance of British usage." Clearly the quoter would have preferred the U.S. spelling "analyze". Ironically, the spelling "analyze" is in fact of British origin, and fell into disuse after it was taken up by the US.
To denote errors of fact or logic.
When no orthographic or grammatical irregularities are apparent, use of "sic" may serve to draw the reader's attention to a factual or logical error.
Wordplay & puns.
Various wordplays regarding the word "sic" are possible, arising either from its second polysemic meaning "" or from its homophone "". The latter case is exemplified by the humorous expression "Poor grammar makes me "which has been featured on clothing and postcards. 
Another example of this kind of pun can be found in the website TV Tropes, which uses it as an article title as well as in a letter to the "American Journal of Roentgenology" criticizing their apparent overuse of "sic" as a kind of linguistic discrimination against those from a foreign-language background that "could lead readers to become 'sick of your sic.
Form of ridicule.
The use of "sic" can be seen as an example of the linguistic device of appeal to ridicule, whether intentional or not, because it highlights perceived irregularities. The application of "sic" with intent to disparage has been called the "benighted use" because it creates a "false sense of superiority" in its users. The following example from "The Times" demonstrates how the interpolation of "sic" can subtly discredit a quoted statement.
In newly generated text.
Nonetheless, a writer's use of "sic" in his or her own words may lead readers to assume the source of the "sic" to be the book's editor and is often considered unconventional even when the "sic" "ironic use" reference is correctly understood.
Formatting.
When placed within quoted material, square brackets are almost invariably used in modern U.S. usage: "name=garner2000/> Traditionally the "sic" appears after the quote in parentheses (round brackets): "(sic)", especially when the error is obvious. Traditionally the word "sic" appears italicized within the brackets: "("sic")", following the convention that usage of italic type serves to indicate foreign words. This academic usage has become rarer in recent times, perhaps because fewer academics are nowadays conversant with Latin, and cannot therefore recognise words from classical languages. While most style guidelines including "The MLA Style Manual" do not require italicization, others do, such as the "APA Style". The "APA Style" insists upon the underlining of "sic" as an alternative when italic type is not available.
Because "sic" is not an abbreviation, it is incorrect to place a period or full-stop inside the brackets after the word "sic".
Criticism.
Insensitivity.
There have been cases of the use of "sic" having been interpreted as a form of ridicule which have resulted in backlash towards the publications in which they appear. Backlash can also happen as a result of a misplaced "sic" even when there was no intent to disparage. When the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) quoted a statement referring to an afterlife, then failed to remove a "sic" after correcting the minor punctuation error it contained, the network received criticism for apparently suggesting that the religious belief expressed was odd or erroneous. By convention, when no orthographic or grammatical errors are present, the use of "sic" often indicates the presence of a fallacy or error in logic.
Alternatives.
Correction.
Various usage guides, such as "The Chicago Manual of Style", recommend "quiet copy-editing" (unless where inappropriate or uncertain) instead of inserting a bracketed "sic", such as by substituting in brackets the correct word (if known) in place of the incorrect word.
"Recte".
Alternatively, when both the original and the suggested correction are desired to be shown (as they often are in palaeography), one may give the actual form, followed by "sic" in brackets, followed by the corrected form preceded by "recte" in brackets. The word "recte", is a Latin adverb meaning "rightly", 
According to the "Journal of Seventeenth-Century Music Style Sheet", there should be no punctuation, for example no colon, before the corrected word when using "recte". Sometimes only "sic" and the correction are in the bracket, becoming as in the last example "["sic" assumed]" (i.e. "recte" is omitted).
