The "Deepwater Horizon" oil spill (also referred to as the BP oil spill, the BP oil disaster, the Gulf of Mexico oil spill, and the Macondo blowout) was an oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico on the BP-operated Macondo Prospect, considered the largest accidental marine oil spill in the history of the petroleum industry. Following the explosion and sinking of the "Deepwater Horizon" oil rig, which claimed 11 lives, a sea-floor oil gusher flowed unabated for three months in 2010. The gushing wellhead was not capped until after 87 days, on 15 July 2010. The total discharge is estimated at .
A massive response ensued to protect beaches, wetlands, and estuaries from the spreading oil, using skimmer ships, floating boom, controlled burns, and of Corexit oil dispersant. After several failed efforts to contain the flow, the well was capped and declared sealed on 19 September 2010. However, the months of spill, along with response and cleanup activities, caused extensive damage to marine and wildlife habitats and the Gulf's fishing and tourism industries, as well as human health problems. Environmental and health consequences are continuing, with study and investigation ongoing. Some reports indicate the well site may be continuing to leak.
Numerous investigations have explored the causes of the explosion and spill. Notably, the U.S. government's September 2011 report pointed to defective cement work on the well, finding BP most at fault but also faulting Deepwater Horizon operator Transocean and contractor Halliburton. Earlier in 2011, a White House commission likewise blamed BP and its partners for making a series of cost-cutting decisions and not having a system sufficient to ensure well safety, but also concluded that the spill was not an isolated incident caused by "rogue industry or government officials," but resulted from "systemic" root causes and, "absent significant reform in both industry practices and government policies, might well recur."
The disaster spawned over 130 private lawsuits as well as civil and criminal federal prosecutions. In November 2012, BP settled the federal case by pleading guilty to 11 counts of manslaughter related to the explosion and fire, and agreeing to pay a record breaking $4.525 billion in fines and other payments. BP faces other potential enormous payouts to thousands of fishermen, businesses and others harmed by the spill. In November 2012 the EPA announced that BP will be temporarily banned from seeking new contracts with the US government because of the company's "lack of business integrity" during the disaster.
Background.
"Deepwater Horizon" drilling rig.
The "Deepwater Horizon" was a 9-year-old semi-submersible, mobile, floating, dynamically positioned drilling rig that could operate in waters up to deep. Built by South Korean company Hyundai Heavy Industries and owned by Transocean, the rig operated under the Marshallese flag of convenience, and was leased to BP from March 2008 to September 2013. It was drilling a deep exploratory well in approximately of water. The well is situated in the Macondo Prospect in Mississippi Canyon Block 252 (MC252) of the Gulf of Mexico, in the United States' exclusive economic zone. The Macondo well is located roughly off the Louisiana coast. BP was the operator and principal developer of the Macondo Prospect with a 65% share, while 25% was owned by Anadarko Petroleum Corporation, and 10% by MOEX Offshore 2007, a unit of Mitsui.
Explosion.
At approximately , on 20 April 2010, high-pressure methane gas from the well expanded into the drilling riser and rose into the drilling rig, where it ignited and exploded, engulfing the platform. At the time, 126 crew members were on board: seven BP employees, 79 of Transocean and employees of various other companies. Eleven workers were never found despite a three-day Coast Guard (USCG) search operation and are believed to have died in the explosion. Ninety-four crew were rescued by lifeboat or helicopter, 17 of whom were treated for injuries.
Volume and extent of oil spill.
An oil leak was discovered on the afternoon of 22 April when a large oil slick began to spread at the former rig site. While originally BP authorities gave their best estimate of a flow rate of , according to the Flow Rate Technical Group, (FRTG) was a more realistic figure. The analysis found "5 chemicals are associated with cancer; 33 are associated with skin irritation from rashes to burns; 33 are linked to eye irritation; 11 are or are suspected of being potential respiratory toxins or irritants; 10 are suspected kidney toxins; 8 are suspected or known to be toxic to aquatic organisms; and 5 are suspected to have a moderate acute toxicity to fish".
Method and extent of use.
To spray dispersants over 400 sorties flown were employed. On 1 May 2010, two military C-130 Hercules aircraft were employed to spray oil dispersant. More than half of the of chemical dispersants were applied at the wellhead under the sea. This had never previously been tried but due to the unprecedented nature of this spill, BP along with the USCG and the EPA, decided to use "the first subsea injection of dispersant directly into oil at the source".
Dispersants are said to facilitate the digestion of the oil by microbes. Mixing the dispersants with the oil at the wellhead would keep some oil below the surface and in theory, allow microbes to digest the oil before it reached the surface. Various risks were identified and evaluated, in particular that an increase in the microbe activity might reduce the oxygen in the water. The use of dispersants at the wellhead was pursued and NOAA estimated that roughly of oil were dispersed underwater.
By 12 July 2010, BP had reported applying of Corexit on the surface and underwater (subsea). By 30 July 2010, more than of dispersant had been used, mostly Corexit 9500.
Dispersant use was said to have stopped after the cap was in place. Marine toxicologist Riki Ott wrote an open letter to the EPA in late August with evidence that dispersant use had not stopped and that it was being administered near shore. Independent testing supported her claim. New Orleans-based attorney Stuart Smith, representing the Louisiana-based United Commercial Fisherman's Association and the Louisiana Environmental Action Network said he "personally saw C-130s applying dispersants from hotel room in the Florida Panhandle. They were spraying directly adjacent to the beach right at dusk. Fishermen I've talked to say they've been sprayed. This idea they are not using this stuff near the coast is nonsense."
Environmental controversy over Corexit.
Corexit was banned from use on oil spills in the United Kingdom a decade prior to the Deepwater Horizon explosion. According to the OSHA-required Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs) for both versions of Corexit used in the Gulf, "Component substances have a low potential to bioconcentrate (defined by the EPA as "accumulation of a chemical in tissues of a fish or other organism to levels greater than in the surrounding medium")...No toxicity studies have been conducted on this product"...9500 is a simple blend of six well-established, safe ingredients that biodegrade, do not bioaccumulate and are commonly found in popular household products...Corexit products do not contain carcinogens or reproductive toxins. All the ingredients have been extensively studied for many years and have been determined safe and effective by the EPA".
However, 2-butoxyethanol, a component of Corexit EC9527A, was identified as a causal agent in the health problems experienced by cleanup workers after the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill. Warnings from the Hazardous Substance Fact Sheet for 2-Butoxyethanol include: "Cancer Hazard: 2-Butoxy Ethanol may be a carcinogen in humans since it has been shown to cause liver cancer in animals. Many scientists believe there is no safe level of exposure to a carcinogen...Reproductive Hazard: 2-Butoxy Ethanol may damage the developing fetus. There is limited evidence that 2-Butoxy Ethanol may damage the male reproductive system (including decreasing the sperm count) in animals and may affect female fertility in animals".
Environmental scientists say the dispersants, which can cause genetic mutations and cancer, add to the toxicity of a spill, and that sea turtles and bluefin tuna are exposed to an even greater risk than crude alone. According to them, the dangers are even greater for dispersants poured into the source of a spill, where they are picked up by the current and wash through the Gulf.
On 7 May 2010, Secretary Alan Levine of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality Secretary Peggy Hatch, and Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries Secretary Robert Barham sent a letter to BP outlining their concerns related to potential dispersant impact on Louisiana's wildlife and fisheries, environment, aquatic life, and public health. Officials requested that BP release information on their dispersant effects. After three underwater tests the EPA approved the injection of dispersants directly at the leak site to break up the oil before it reached the surface.
In mid-May, independent scientists suggested that underwater injection of Corexit into the leak may have been responsible for the oil plumes discovered below the surface.
On 19 May, the EPA gave BP 24 hours to choose less toxic alternatives to Corexit from the list of dispersants on the National Contingency Plan Product Schedule and begin applying the new dispersant(s) within 72 hours of EPA approval or provide a detailed reasoning why the approved products did not meet the required standards.
On 20 May, US Polychemical Corporation reportedly received an order from BP for its Dispersit SPC 1000 dispersant. US Polychemical said that it could produce a day in the first few days, increasing up to a day thereafter. Also on 20 May, BP determined that none of the alternative products met all three criteria of availability, toxicity, and effectiveness. On 24 May, EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson ordered the EPA to conduct its own evaluation of alternatives and ordered BP to scale back dispersant use.
According to analysis of daily dispersant reports provided by the Deepwater Horizon Unified Command, before 26 May, BP used of Corexit. After the EPA directive, the daily average of dispersant use dropped to , a 9% decline.
The 12 July 2010 BP report listed available stocks of Corexit which decreased by over without reported application, suggesting either stock diversion or unreported application. Under reported subsea application of would account for this discrepancy. Given the suggested dispersant to oil ratio between 1:10 and 1:50, the possible use of in subsea application could be expected to suspend between of oil below the surface of the Gulf.
On 31 July, Rep. Edward Markey, Chairman of the House Energy and Environment Subcommittee, released a letter sent to National Incident Commander Thad Allen, and documents revealing that the USCG repeatedly allowed BP to use excessive amounts of the dispersant Corexit on the surface of the ocean. Markey's letter, based on an analysis conducted by the Energy and Environment Subcommittee staff, further showed that by comparing the amounts BP reported using to Congress to the amounts contained in the company's requests for exemptions from the ban on surface dispersants it submitted to the USCG, that BP often exceeded its own requests, with little indication that it informed the USCG, or that the USCG attempted to verify whether BP was exceeding approved volumes. "Either BP was lying to Congress or to the Coast Guard about how much dispersants they were shooting onto the ocean," said Markey.
On 2 August 2010, the EPA said dispersants did no more harm to the environment than the oil itself, and that they stopped a large amount of oil from reaching the coast by making the oil break down faster. However, independent scientists and EPA's own experts continue to voice concerns regarding the use of dispersants. According to a 2012 study, Corexit made the oil 52 times more toxic and allowed polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) to more deeply penetrate beaches and possibly groundwater.
Long-term effects of Corexit.
NOAA states that toxicity tests have suggested that the acute risk of dispersant-oil mixtures is no greater than that of oil alone. However, some experts believe that all the benefits and costs may not be known for decades. A study from Georgia Tech and Universidad Autonoma de Aguascalientes (UAA), Mexico reported in late 2012 that Corexit made the oil up to 52 times more toxic than oil alone. Additionally, the dispersant made oil sink faster and more deeply into the beaches, and possibly the groundwater.
University of South Florida scientists released preliminary results on the toxicity of microscopic drops of oil in the undersea plumes, finding that they may be more toxic than previously thought. The researchers say the dispersed oil appears to be negatively affecting bacteria and phytoplankton – the microscopic plants which make up the basis of the Gulf's food web. The field-based results were consistent with shore-based laboratory studies showing that phytoplankton are more sensitive to chemical dispersants than the bacteria, which are more sensitive to oil.
Because the dispersants were applied deep under the sea, much of the oil never rose to the surface – which means it went somewhere else, said Robert Diaz, a marine scientist at the College of William and Mary, "The dispersants definitely don't make oil disappear. They take it from one area in an ecosystem and put it in another," Diaz said. One plume of dispersed oil measured at long, more than a mile wide and tall. The plume showed the oil "is persisting for longer periods than we would have expected," said researchers with the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution. "Many people speculated that subsurface oil droplets were being easily biodegraded. Well, we didn't find that. We found it was still there". In a major study on the plume, experts found the most worrisome part to be the slow pace at which the oil was breaking down in the cold, water at depths of 'making it a long-lasting but unseen threat to vulnerable marine life'. Marine Sciences at the University of Georgia reported findings of a substantial layer of oily sediment stretching for dozens of miles in all directions from the capped well.
Removal.
The three basic approaches for removing the oil from the water were: burning the oil, filtering offshore, and collecting for later processing. On 28 April 2010, the USCG announced plans to corral and burn off up to of oil each day. In November 2010 the EPA reported that "in-situ" controlled burning removed as much as of oil from the water. By other data burnings remediating approximately of oil. There were 411 fires set between April to mid-July 2010 from which cancer-causing dioxins were released. The EPA stated that the release was minimal. A second research team concluded "there was only a small added risk of cancer to people breathing polluted air or eating tainted fish".
Oil was collected by using skimmers. More than 60 open-water skimmers were deployed, including 12 purpose-built vehicles. A Taiwanese supertanker, "A Whale", was retrofitted after the Deepwater explosion for skimming large amounts of oil in the Gulf. The ship was tested in early July 2010 but failed to collect a significant amount of oil. Due to BP's use of Corexit the oil was too dispersed to collect, according to a spokesperson for shipowner TMT.
The EPA prohibited the use of skimmers that left more than 15 ppm of oil in the water. Many large-scale skimmers exceeded the limit. An urban myth developed that the U.S. government declined the offers from foreign countries because of the requirements of the Jones Act. This proved untrue and many foreign assets deployed to aid in cleanup efforts.
In mid June, BP ordered 32 machines that separate oil and water with each machine capable of extracting up to per day, After testing machines for one week, BP decided to use the technology and by 28 June, had removed of oily liquid. The USCG said of tainted water was recovered, with of that consisting of oil. BP said had been recovered or flared.
Oil budget.
The table below presents the NOAA estimates based on an estimated release of of oil (the category "chemically dispersed" includes dispersal at the surface and at the wellhead; "naturally dispersed" was mostly at the wellhead; "residual" is the oil remaining as surface sheen, floating tarballs, and oil washed ashore or buried in sediment). However, there is plus or minus 10% uncertainty in the total volume of the spill.
Two months after these numbers were released Carol Browner, director of the White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy, said they were "never meant to be a precise tool" and that the data "was simply not designed to explain, or capable of explaining, the fate of the oil. Oil that the budget classified as "dispersed", "dissolved", or "evaporate"d is not necessarily gone".
Based on these estimates, up to 75% of the oil from BP's Gulf oil disaster still remained in the Gulf environment, according to Christopher Haney, chief scientist for Defenders of Wildlife, who called the government report's conclusions misleading. Haney reiterated "terms such as 'dispersed,' 'dissolved' and 'residual' do not mean gone. That's comparable to saying the sugar dissolved in my coffee is no longer there because I can't see it. By Director Lubchenco's own acknowledgment, the oil which is out of sight is not benign. "Whether buried under beaches or settling on the ocean floor, residues from the spill will remain toxic for decades."
Appearing before Congress, Bill Lehr, a senior scientist at NOAA's Office of Response and Restoration, defended a report written by the National Incident Command on the fate of the oil. The report relied on numbers generated by government and non-government oil spill experts, using an "Oil Budget Calculator" (OBC) developed for the spill. Based upon the OBC, Lehr said 6% was burned and 4% was skimmed but he could not be confident of numbers for the amount collected from beaches. As seen in the table above, he pointed out that much of the oil has evaporated or been dispersed or dissolved into the water column. Under questioning from congressman Ed Markey, Lehr agreed that the report said the amount of oil that went into the Gulf was , noting that were siphoned off directly from the well.
NOAA was criticized by some independent scientists and Congress for the report's conclusions and for failing to explain how the scientists arrived at the calculations detailed in the table above. Ian MacDonald, an ocean scientist at Florida State University (FSU), claimed the NIC report "was not science". He accused the White House of making "sweeping and largely unsupported" claims that 3/4 of the oil in the Gulf was gone and called the report "misleading". "The imprint will be there in the Gulf of Mexico for the rest of my life. It is not gone and it will not go away quickly", he concluded.
A formally peer-reviewed report documenting the OBC was scheduled for release in early October. Markey told Lehr the NIC report had given the public a false sense of confidence. "You shouldn't have released it until you knew it was right," he said.
By late July, two weeks after the flow of oil had stopped, oil on the surface of the Gulf had largely dissipated but concern still remained for underwater oil and ecological damage.
Markus Huettel, a benthic ecologist at FSU who has been studying the spill since 2010, maintains that while much of BP's oil was degraded or evaporated, as least 60% remains unaccounted for. Huettel cautions that only one category from NOAA's "oil budget", the 17% directly recovered from the wellhead, is actually known. "All the other categories, like oil burned, skimmed, chemically dispersed, or evaporated, are guesses that could change by a factor or two or even more in some cases". Huettel stressed that even after much research, some categories, like how much oil was dispersed at depth, will never be accurately known. "That oil is somewhere, but nobody knows where, and nobody knows how much has settled on the seafloor."
Oil eating microbes.
Several studies suggest that bacteria has consumed a part of oil in the sea. In August, 2010, a study of bacterial activity in the Gulf led by Terry Hazen of the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, found a previously unknown bacterial species and reported in the journal Science that it was able to break down the oil without depleting oxygen levels. Hazen's interpretation had its skeptics. John Kessler, a chemical oceanographer at Texas A&M University says "what Hazen was measuring was a component of the entire hydrocarbon matrix," which is a mix of thousands of different molecules. Although the few molecules described in the new paper in Science may well have degraded within weeks, Kessler says, "there are others that have much longer half-lives – on the order of years, sometimes even decades." He noted that the missing oil has been found in the form of large oil plumes, one the size of Manhattan, which do not appear to be biodegrading very fast.
By mid-September, research showed these microbes mainly digested natural gas spewing from the wellhead – propane, ethane, and butane – rather than oil, according to a subsequent study. David L. Valentine, a professor of microbial geochemistry at UC Santa Barbara, said that the oil-gobbling properties of the microbes had been grossly overstated. Methane was the most abundant hydrocarbon released during the spill. It has been suggested that vigorous deepwater bacterial bloom respired nearly all the released methane within 4 months, leaving behind a residual microbial community containing methanotrophic bacteria.
Some experts suggested that the oil eating bacteria may have caused health issues for residents of the Gulf. Local physicians noted an outbreak of mysterious skin rashes which, according to marine toxicologist Riki Ott, could be the result of proliferation of the bacteria in Gulf waters. In order to eat the oil faster, oil eating bacteria like "Alcanivorax borkumensis" has been genetically modified. Ott claims to have spoken with numerous residents and tourists of the Gulf who have experienced symptoms like rashes and "peeling palms" after contact with the water in the Gulf.
Consequences.
Environmental impact.
The greatest impact was on marine species. The spill area hosted 8,332 species, including more than 1,200 fish, 200 birds, 1,400 molluscs, 1,500 crustaceans, 4 sea turtles and 29 marine mammals. In addition to the 14 species under federal protection, the spill threatened 39 more ranging from "whale sharks to seagrass". Damage to the ocean floor especially endangered the Louisiana pancake batfish whose range is entirely contained within the spill-affected area. The oil contained approximately 40% methane by weight, compared to about 5% found in typical oil deposits. Methane can potentially suffocate marine life and create "dead zones" where oxygen is depleted. During a January 2013 flyover, former NASA physicist Bonny Schumaker noted a "dearth of marine life" in a radius around the well. In March 2012, a definitive link was found between the death of a Gulf coral community and the spill.
The spill waters contained 40 times more Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) than before the spill. PAH is often linked to oil spills and includes carcinogens and chemicals that pose various human health risks. The PAHs were most concentrated near the Louisiana Coast, but levels also jumped 2-3 fold in areas off Alabama, Mississippi and Florida. PAHs can harm marine species directly and microbes used to consume the oil would reduce marine oxygen levels. Estimates state that only 2% of the carcasses of killed mammals were recovered. In the first birthing season for dolphins after the spill, dead baby dolphins washed up along Mississippi and Alabama shorelines at about 10 times the normal number. Oil was discovered on dead dolphins along the Gulf Coast. Fifteen of the 406 dolphins that washed ashore in the first 14 months had oil on their bodies; the oil found on eight was linked to the spill. A NOAA/BP study in the summer of 2011 found that "many of the 32 dolphins studied were underweight, anemic and suffering from lung and liver disease, while nearly half had low levels of a hormone that helps the mammals deal with stress as well as regulating their metabolism and immune systems". Other conditions included drastically low weight and low blood sugar.
The oil and dispersant mixture, including PAHs, permeated the food chain through zooplankton. Signs of an oil-and-dispersant mix were found under the shells of tiny blue crab larvae. The use of dispersant made oil sink faster and more deeply into beaches, and possibly groundwater supplies. Corexit allowed the PAHs to permeate sand where, due to a lack of sunlight, degradation is slowed. Some types of spiders and other insects became far less numerous. Migratory birds carried chemicals from the spill as far as Minnesota. The vast majority of a small sample of Pelican eggs tested contained "petroleum compounds and Corexit".
In the summer of 2010, scientists reported immense underwater plumes of dissolved oil in addition to an "kill zone" surrounding the blown well. Fish with oozing sores and lesions were first noted by fishermen in November 2010. Dispersant and PAHs from oil are believed to have caused "disturbing numbers" of mutated fish that scientists and commercial fishers began seeing in 2012, including 50% of shrimp found lacking eyes and eye sockets. Prior to the spill, approximately 1/10 of 1% of Gulf fish had lesions or sores. A report from the University of Florida said that many locations showed 20% of fish with lesions, while later estimates reach 50%. Fishermen say they've never seen deformities like these, as does Louisiana State University's Dr Jim Cowan, who has 20 years' experience working with red snapper.
NOAA stated that dolphins and whales were dying at twice the normal rate in 2011. Scientists in 2012 reported finding "alarming numbers" of mutated crab, shrimp and fish resulting from chemicals released during the spill.
Environmental impacts continue, and research is ongoing. In July 2011, a year after the well was capped, roughly of coastline in Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama and Florida remained contaminated by oil. Two years after the spill began, tar balls continued to wash up along the Gulf coast. After Hurricane Issac hit the Gulf in September 2012, about of oiled material traced to the spill was brought to land. Huge tar mats were uncovered during the storm, prompting beach closures. In 2013, researchers found that oil on the bottom of the seafloor does not seem to be degrading, and observed a phenomenon called "dirty blizzard": oil caused deep ocean sediments to clump together, falling to the ocean floor at ten times the normal rate in an "underwater rain of oily particles." The result could have long-term effects on both human and marine life because oil could remain in the food chain for generations. The same research suggested that as much as one-third of the oil remains in the Gulf.
Health consequences.
By 21 June, 143 spill exposure cases had been reported to the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals (DHH); 108 of those cases involved workers in the clean-up efforts, while 35 were reported by gulf residents. Chemicals from the oil and dispersant are believed to be the cause of these illnesses as the addition of dispersants created an even more toxic substance (PAHs) when mixed with crude oil. Mike Robicheux, a Louisiana physician who has been treating people sick from exposure to toxic chemicals, described it as the biggest public health crisis from a chemical poisoning in the history of this country" In addition, the increased risk of mental disorders and stress-related health problems were noted shortly after the spill.
A survey of the health effects of the spill on cleanup workers reported "eye, nose and throat irritation; respiratory problems; blood in urine, vomit and rectal bleeding; seizures; nausea and violent vomiting episodes that last for hours; skin irritation, burning and lesions; short-term memory loss and confusion; liver and kidney damage; central nervous system effects and nervous system damage; hypertension; and miscarriages". Dr. James Diaz, writing for the "American Journal of Disaster Medicine", said these ailments appearing in the Gulf reflected those reported after previous oil spills, like the Exxon Valdez. Diaz warned that "chronic adverse health effects, including cancers, liver and kidney disease, mental health disorders, birth defects and developmental disorders should be anticipated among sensitive populations and those most heavily exposed". Diaz also believes neurological disorders should be expected.
According to Dr. Riki Ott "people are already dying from this" According to Mississippi Riverkeeper of the Waterkeeper Alliance, blood samples from 8 people from Pensacola, Florida and Alabama, residents and cleanup workers "were analyzed for volatile solvents and all came back with ethylbenzene and m,p-Xylene in excess of 95th percentile values of 0.11 ppb for ethylbenzene and 0.34 ppb for m,p-xylene." The highest concentration value was four times the 95th percentile. The blood of all 8 individuals "had chemicals that are found in the BP crude oil".
Two years after the spill the study started by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health found biomarkers that are matching the oil from the spill, in the bodies of cleanup workers. Other studies have reported a variety of mental health issues, skin problems, breathing issues, coughing, and headaches. Nearly three years later, studies indicated a '"significant percentage" of Gulf residents were reporting mental health problems like anxiety, depression and PTSD.
Economy.
The spill had a strong economic impact to BP as also the Gulf Coast's economy sectors such as offshore drilling, fishing and tourism. On BP's expenditures on the spill included the cost of the spill response, containment, relief well drilling, grants to the Gulf states, claims paid, and federal costs, including fines and penalties. As of March 2012, BP estimated the company's total spill-related expenses do not exceed $37.2 billion. However, by some estimations penalties that BP may be required to pay have reached as high as $90 billion. In addition, in November 2012 the EPA announced that BP will be temporarily banned from seeking new contracts with the US government. Due to the loss of the market value, BP had dropped from the second to the fourth largest of the four major oil companies by 2013. During the crisis, BP gas stations in the United States reported sales off between 10 and 40% due to backlash against the company.
Local officials in Louisiana expressed concern that the offshore drilling moratorium imposed in response to the spill would further harm the economies of coastal communities as the oil industry employs about 58,000 Louisiana residents and has created another 260,000 oil-related jobs, accounting for about 17% of all Louisiana jobs. NOAA had closed , or approximately 36% of Federal waters in the Gulf of Mexico, for commercial fishing causing $2.5 billion cost for the fishing industry. The U.S. Travel Association estimated that the economic impact of the oil spill on tourism across the Gulf Coast over a three-year period could exceed approximately $23 billion, in a region that supports over 400,000 travel industry jobs generating $34 billion in revenue annually.
Offshore drilling policies.
On 30 April 2010 President Barack Obama ordered the federal government to hold the issuing of new offshore drilling leases and authorized investigation of 29 oil rigs in the Gulf in an effort to determine the cause of the disaster.. Three more BP employees were charged in November 2012: two site managers were charged with manslaughter for acting negligently in their supervision of key safety tests performed on the rig prior to the explosion and failure to alert onshore engineers of problems in the drilling operation, and an executive was charged with obstructing Congress. Two employees are charged with obstruction of justice and for lying to federal investigators. Attorney General Eric Holder said that the criminal investigation is not yet over and that more company officials could be charged.
In the November 2012 resolution of the federal charges against it, BP also agreed to plead guilty to 11 felony counts related to the deaths of the 11 workers.
The settlement resulting in the $1.4 billion Transocean fine also included Transocean's pleading guilty to a misdemeanor charge.
