Cyclobenzaprine, brand name Flexeril, is a muscle relaxant medication used to relieve skeletal muscle spasms and associated pain in acute musculoskeletal conditions. It is the most well-studied drug for this application, and it also has been used off-label for fibromyalgia treatment. A new bedtime formulation of cyclobenzaprine is under development for the management of fibromyalgia syndrome.
Mechanism of action.
The mechanism of action for cyclobenzaprine is unclear. Studies from the 1980s in rats indicated cyclobenzaprine activates the locus ceruleus in the brain stem, leading to an increased release of norepinephrine in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, and the subsequent inhibitory action of norepinephrine on alpha motor neurons.
Cyclobenzaprine has been considered structurally related to the first-generation tricyclic antidepressants. Such tricyclics, including amitriptyline, act to inhibit the uptake of norepinephrine, resulting in increased transynaptic norepinephrine concentration. They have been shown to exert analgesic effects in chronic nerve and muscle pain. Cyclobenzaprine may have a similar effect.
Others contend the structure is more closely related to cyproheptadine, an antagonist at histamine H1 receptors, muscarinic acetylcholine receptors, and 5-HT2A serotonin receptors. Corroborating studies show cyclobenzaprine causes inhibition of descending serotonergic systems in the spinal cord by blocking 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptors. This action is thought to have an inhibitory effect on the alpha motor neurons in the ventral horn of the spinal cord, thereby resulting in decreased firing of alpha motor neurons and a reduction in spinal mono- and polysynaptic reflexes.
Use.
After sustaining an injury, muscle spasms may occur to stabilize the affected body part and prevent further damage. They also generate pain. Cyclobenzaprine is FDA-approved to treat such muscle spasms associated with acute, painful musculoskeletal conditions.
It decreases pain in the first two weeks, peaking in the first few days, but has no proven benefit after two weeks. Since no benefit is proven beyond that, therapy should not be continued long-term. It is not useful for spasticity due to neurologic conditions such as cerebral palsy.
Cyclobenzaprine has also shown effectiveness in the treatment of fibromyalgia symptoms, with a report of 4.8 patients needing treatment for each (1) patient reporting pain reduction (but no change in fatigue or tender points). Like other tricyclic antidepressants, it is also prescribed off-label as a sleep-aid.
Formulations and dosages.
Cyclobenzaprine is marketed as Apo-Cyclobenzaprine (10 mg tablets), Flexeril (5 and 10 mg tablets), Fexmid (7.5 mg tablet), and Novo-Cycloprine (10 mg tablets). Both Flexeril and Fexmid are available in generic form. A once-a-day, extended-release formulation, Amrix, is available in 15- and 30-mg capsules.
Cyclobenzaprine is regulated in the U.S. for prescription use only. Though it does not fall within most governmental guidelines as a controlled substance, possession of it without a valid or current prescription may be illegal, depending upon various state and local laws.
Side effects.
Meta-analysis studies have found significantly increased rates of drowsiness (38% of patients), dry mouth (24%), dizziness (10%), and adverse events of any kind in patients taking cyclobenzaprine versus placebo. Drowsiness and dry mouth appear to intensify with increasing dose.
The sedative effects of cyclobenzaprine are likely due to its antagonistic effect on histamine, serotonin, and muscarinic receptors. Agitation is a common side effect observed especially in the elderly. In general, the NCQA recommends avoiding the use of cyclobenzaprine in the elderly because of the potential for more severe side effects. There is one case report of overdose causing rhabdomyolysis (muscle breakdown). Treatment protocols and support should follow the same as for any structurally related tricyclic, such as tricyclic antidepressants.
Overdose.
The most common effects of overdose are drowsiness and tachycardia. Rare but potentially critical complications are cardiac arrest, cardiac dysrhythmias, severe hypotension, seizures, and neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Life-threatening overdose is rare, however, as the median lethal dose is approximately 338 mg/kg in mice and 425 mg/kg in rats. The potential harm is increased when central nervous system depressants and antidepressants are also used; deliberate overdose often includes alcohol among other drugs.
Interactions.
Cyclobenzaprine has major contraindications with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). At least one study also found increased risk of serotonin syndrome when cyclobenzaprine was taken with the serotonergic drugs duloxetine or phenelzine.
Research.
A formulation of cyclobenzaprine is being developed for the management of fibromyalgia by Tonix Pharmaceuticals. This formulation contains a very low dose (VLD) of cyclobenzaprine as compared to currently marketed products. By targeting sleep quality, VLD cyclobenzaprine is designed to address the non-restorative sleep feature of fibromyalgia. In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled Phase II clinical study in 36 patients, VLD-cyclobenzaprine given at bedtime was shown to significantly improve core fibromyalgia symptoms and was well tolerated. Reported clinical benefits include reductions in pain, fatigue, and depression.
Chemistry.
Cyclobenzaprine, N,N-dimethyl-3-(dibenzois synthesized by reacting 5H-dibenzo[a,dcyclohepten-5-one with 3-dimethylaminopropylmagnesium chloride and subsequent dehydration of the resulting carbinol in acidic conditions into cyclobenzaprine.
