, short for , is a Japanese media franchise encompassing digital toys, anime, manga, video games and videos. The franchise's eponymous creatures are monsters of various forms living in a "Digital World", a parallel universe that originated from Earth's various communication networks.
Eponymous creatures.
Digimon hatch from types of eggs which are called . In the English iterations of the franchise there is another type of Digi-Egg that can be used to digivolve, or transform, Digimon. This second type of Digi-Egg is called a in Japanese. They age via a process called "Digivolution" which changes their appearance and increases their powers. The effect of Digivolution, however, is not permanent in the partner Digimon of the main characters in the anime, and Digimon who have digivolved will most of the time revert back to their previous form after a battle or if they are too weak to continue. Some Digimon act feral. Most, however, possess large amounts of intelligence and human speech. They are able to digivolve by the use of Digivices that their human partners have. In some cases, as in the first series, the DigiDestined (known as the 'Chosen Children' in the original Japanese) had to find some special items such as crests and tags so the Digimon could digivolve into further stages of evolution known as "Ultimate" and "Mega" in the dub.
The first Digimon anime introduces the Digimon life cycle: They age in a similar fashion to real organisms, but do not die under normal circumstances because they are made of reconfigurable data, this data and can be seen all throughout the show. Any Digimon that receives a fatal wound will dissolve into infinitesimal bits of data. The data then recomposes itself as a Digi-Egg, which will hatch when rubbed gently, and the Digimon goes through its life cycle again. Digimon who are reincarnated in this way will sometimes retain some or all their memories of their previous life. However, if a Digimon's data is completely destroyed, they will die.
Virtual pet toy.
Digimon started out as a digital pet called "Digital Monster", similar in style and concept to the Tamagotchi. It was planned by Wiz and released by Bandai on June 26, 1997. The toy began as the simple concept of a Tamagotchi mainly for boys. The V-Pet is similar to its predecessors, with the exceptions of being much harder and being able to connect to fight other Digimon v-pets. Every owner would start with a Baby Digimon, train it, evolve it, take care of it, and then have battles with other Digimon owners to see who was stronger. The Digimon pet had several evolution capabilities and abilities too, so many owners had many different Digimon. In December, the second generation of Digital Monster was released, followed by a third edition in 1998.
Anime meta-series.
On March 6, 1999, the franchise was given an anime as the first of the "Digimon" movies aired in theaters in Japan. Originally, the "Digimon Adventure" movie was supposed to be a short film, but after the storyboard was finished, a request for "Digimon" becoming a children's television show was made. On March 7, 1999, they began airing a television sequel titled "Digimon Adventure".
Five more series would follow, most of them with their own tie-in movies, and the series was dubbed for release in western markets in the fall of the same year. The show spawned card games, with "Hyper Colosseum" in Japan and later "Digi-Battle" in America, and more video games. The animated series is easily the best-known segment of the Digimon universe and responsible for the majority of its popularity.
"Digimon" are "Digital Monsters". According to the stories, they are inhabitants of the "DigiWorld", a manifestation of Earth's communication network. The stories tell of a group of mostly pre-teens, who accompany special Digimon born to defend their world (and ours) from various evil forces. To help them surmount the most difficult obstacles found within both realms, the Digimon have the ability to evolve "(Digivolve)" In this process, the Digimon change appearance and become much stronger, often changing in personality as well. The group of children who come in contact with the Digital World changes from series to series.
As of 2011, there have been six series— "Digimon Adventure", the follow-up sequel "Digimon Adventure 02", "Digimon Tamers", "Digimon Frontier", "Digimon Data Squad" and "Digimon Fusion". The first two series take place in the same fictional universe, but the third, fourth, fifth and sixth each occupy their own unique world (in the case of "Digimon Tamers", the "Adventure" universe is referred to as a television and commercial enterprise, as well as the appearance of one character hailing from the "Adventure" universe). In addition, each series has spawned assorted feature films. Digimon still shows popularity, as new card series, video games, and movies are still being produced and released: new card series include Eternal Courage, Hybrid Warriors, Generations, and Operation X; the video game, Digimon Rumble Arena 2; and the previously unreleased movies "Revenge of Diaboromon", "Runaway Locomon", "Battle of Adventurers", and "Island of Lost Digimon". In Japan, "Digital Monster X-Evolution", the eighth TV movie, was released, and on December 23, 2005 at Jump Festa 2006, the fifth series, "Digimon Savers" was announced for Japan to begin airing after a three-year hiatus of the show. A sixth television series, "Digimon Xros Wars", began airing in 2010, and was followed by a second season, which started on October 2, 2011 as a direct sequel to "Digimon Xros Wars".
"Digimon" was produced by Toei Animation and Bandai of Japan. The series were broadcast in Japan by Fuji Television, except for "Xros Wars", which instead aired on TV Asahi. The first four series were called "Digimon: Digital Monsters" in international markets, while "Savers" was released as "Digimon Data Squad" and "Xros Wars" will be released as "Digimon Fusion".
"Digimon Adventure" (Series One).
The first Digimon television series, which began airing on March 7, 1999 in Japan on Fuji TV and Kids Station and on August 14, 1999 in the United States on Fox Kids dubbed by Saban Entertainment for the North American English version. Its premise is a group of seven kids who, while at summer camp, travel to the Digital World, inhabited by creatures known as Digimon, learning they are chosen to be "DigiDestined" ("Chosen Children" in the Japanese version) to save both the Digital and Real World from evil. Each Kid was given a Digivice which selected them to be transported to the DigiWorld and was destined to be paired up with a Digimon Partner, such as Tai being paired up with Agumon and Matt with Gabumon. The children are helped by a mysterious man/digimon named Gennai, who helps them via hologram. The Digivices help their Digimon allies to Digivolve into stronger creatures in times of peril. The Digimon usually reached higher forms when their human partners are placed in dangerous situations, such as fighting the evil forces of Devimon, Etemon and Myotismon in their Champion forms. Later, each character discovered a crest that each belonged to a person; Tai the Crest of Courage, Matt the Crest of Friendship, Sora the Crest of Love, Izzy the Crest of Knowledge, Mimi the Crest of Sincerity, Joe the Crest of Reliability, T.K. the Crest of Hope, and later Kari the Crest of Light which allowed their digimon the digivolve into their Ultimate form. The group consisted of seven original characters: Taichi "Tai" Kamiya, Yamato "Matt" Ishida, Sora Takenouchi, Koushiro "Izzy" Izumi, Mimi Tachikawa, Joe Kido, and Takeru "T.K." Takaishi. Later on in the series, an eighth character was introduced: Hikari "Kari" Kamiya (who is Taichi's younger sister).
"Digimon Adventure 02" (Series Two).
The second Digimon series is direct continuation of the first one, and began airing on April 2, 2000. Three years later, with most of the original DigiDestined now in high school at age fourteen, the Digital World was supposedly secure and peaceful. However, a new evil has appeared in the form of the Digimon Emperor (Digimon Kaiser) who as opposed to previous enemies is a human just like the DigiDestined. The Digimon Emperor has been enslaving Digimon with Dark Rings and Control Spires and has somehow made regular Digivolution impossible. However, five set Digi-Eggs with engraved emblems had been appointed to three new DigiDestined along with T.K. and Kari, two of the DigiDestined from the previous series. This new evolutionary process, dubbed Armor Digivolution, helps the new DigiDestined to defeat evil lurking in the Digital World. Eventually, the DigiDestined defeat the Digimon Emperor, more commonly known as Ken Ichijouji on Earth, (who is more or less a rival to Davis) only with the great sacrifice of Ken's own Digimon, Wormmon. Just when things were thought to be settled, new Digimon enemies made from the deactivated Control Spires start to appear and cause trouble in the Digital World. To atone for his past mistakes, Ken joins the DigiDestined, being a DigiDestined himself, with his Partner Wormmon revived to fight against them. They soon save countries including France and Australia from control spires and defeat MaloMyotismon (BelialVamdemon), the digivolved form of Myotismon (Vamdemon) from the previous series. They stop the evil from destroying the two worlds, and at the end every one has their own Digimon partner.
"Digimon Tamers" (Series Three).
The third Digimon series, which began airing on April 1, 2001, is set largely in a "real world" where the "Adventure" and "Adventure 02" series are television shows, and where Digimon game merchandise (based on actual items) become key to provide power boosts to real Digimon which appeared in that world. The plot revolves around three Tamers, Takato Matsuki, Rika Nonaka, and Henry Wong. It began with Takato making his very own Digimon by sliding a mysterious blue card on his card reader, which then became a D-Power. Guilmon taken form from Takato’s sketchings of a new Digimon. ("Tamers"’ only human connection to the "Adventure" series is Ryo Akiyama, a character featured in some of the Digimon video games and who made an appearance in some occasions of the "Adventure" story-line.) Some of the changes in this series include the way the Digimon digivolve with the introduction of Bio-Digivolution, and the way their "Digivices" work. In this series, the Tamers can slide game cards through their "Digivices" and give their digimon certain advantages, such as in the card game. This act is called "Digi-modify" (Card Slash in the Japanese version). The same process was often used to Digivolve the Digimon, but as usual, emotions play a big part in the digivolving process. Unlike most Digimon series where the tone is set mostly in a way to appeal to young children, Tamers took a darker tone in nature than the previous two seasons by having very serious character development and more realistic repercussions of having digimon in the real world.
"Digimon Frontier" (Series Four).
The fourth Digimon series, which began airing on April 7, 2002, radically departs from the previous three by focusing on a new and very different kind of evolution, Spirit Evolution, in which the human characters use their D-Tectors (this series' Digivice) to transform themselves into special Digimon called Legendary Warriors, detracting from the customary formula of having digital partners. After receiving unusual phone messages from Ophanimon (one of the three ruling Digimon alongside Seraphimon and Cherubimon) Takuya Kanbara, Kouji Minamoto, Junpei Shibayama, Izumi Orimoto, Tomoki Himi, and Koichi Kimura go to a subway station and take a train to the Digital World. Summoned by Ophanimon, the Digidestined realize that they must find the ten legendary spirits and stop the forces of Cherubimon from physically destroying the Digital World. After finding the ten spirits of the Legendary Warriors and defeating Mercurymon, Grumblemon, Ranamon, and Arbormon, they finally end up fighting Cherubimon hoping to foil his effort to dominate the Digital World. After the defeat of Cherubimon, the Digidestined find they must face an even greater challenge as they try to stop the Royal Knights—Dynasmon and Crusadermon—from destroying the Digital World and using the collected data to revive the original ruler of the Digital World: the tyrannical Lucemon. Ultimately the Digidestined fail in preventing Lucemon from reawakening but they do manage to prevent him from escaping into the Real World. In the final battle, all of the legendary spirits the digidestined have collected thus far merge and create Susanoomon. With this new form, the digidestined are able to effectively defeat Lucemon and save the Digital World. In general, "Frontier" has a much lighter tone than that of "Tamers", yet remains darker than "Adventure" and "Adventure 02".
"Digimon Savers/Data Squad" (Series Five).
After a three year hiatus, a fifth Digimon series began airing on April 2, 2006. Like "Frontier", "Savers" has no connection with the previous installments, and also marks a new start for the Digimon franchise, with a drastic change in character designs and story-line, in order to reach a broader audience. The story focuses on the challenges faced by the members of D.A.T.S. ("Digital Accident Tactics Squad"), an organization created to conceal the existence of the Digital World and Digimon from the rest of mankind, and secretly solve any Digimon-related incidents occurring on Earth. Later the D.A.T.S. is dragged into a massive conflict between Earth and the Digital World, triggered by an ambitious human scientist named Akihiro Kurata, determined to make use of the Digimon for his own personal gains. The English version was dubbed by Studiopolis and it premiered on the Jetix block on Toon Disney on October 1, 2007. Digivolution in "Data Squad" requires the human partner's DNA ("Digital Natural Ability" in the English version and "Digisoul" in the Japanese version) to activate, a strong empathy with their Digimon and a will to succeed. 'Digimon Savers' also introduces a new form of digivolving called Burst Mode which is essentially the level above Mega (previously the strongest form a digimon could take). Like previously in Tamers, this plot takes on a dark tone throughout the story and the anime was aimed, originally in Japan, at an older audience consisting of late teens and people in their early twenties from ages 16 to 21. Because of that, along with the designs, the anime being heavily edited and localized for western US audiences like past series, and the English dub being aimed mostly toward younger audiences of children aged 6 to 10 and having a lower TV-Y7-FV rating just like past dubs, Studiopolis dubbed the anime on Jetix with far more edits, changes, censorship, and cut footage. This included giving the Japanese characters full Americanized names and American surnames as well as applying far more Americanization (Marcus Damon as opposed to the Japanese Daimon Masaru), cultural streamlining and more edits to their version similar to the changes 4Kids often made (such as removal of Japanese text for the purpose of cultural streamlining). Despite all that, the setting of the country was still in Japan and the characters were Japanese in the dub. This series was the first to show any Japanese cultural concepts that were unfamiliar with American audiences (such as the manju), which were left unedited and used in the English dub. Well Go USA released it on DVD instead of Disney. The North American English dub was televised on Jetix in the U.S. and on the Family Channel in Canada.
"Digimon Xros Wars/Fusion" (Series Six).
Three and a quarter years after the end of the fifth series, a new sixth series was confirmed by Bandai for the Digimon anime, its official name of the series revealed in the June issue of Shueisha's V Jump magazine being "Digimon Xros Wars". It began airing in Japan on TV Asahi from July 6, 2010 onwards. Reverting back to the design style of the first four series as well as the plot taking on the younger, lighter tone present in series one, two and four throughout the story. The story follows a boy named Taiki Kudō who, along with his friends, ends up in the Digital World where they meet Shoutmon and his Digimon friends. Wielding a digivice known as a Xros Loader, Taiki is able to combine multiple Digimon onto one to enhance his power, Shoutmon being the usual core of the combination, using a technique known as 'DigiXros'. Forming Team Xros Heart, Taiki, Shoutmon and their friends travel through the Digital World to liberate it from the evil Bagra Army, led by Bagramon, and Twilight, a shady group led by DarkKnightmon with Nene as a figurehead before joining Xros Heart. Xros Heart also finds themselves at odds with Blue Flare, led by Kiriha. The second arc of "Xros Wars" was subtitled "The Evil Death Generals and the Seven Kingdoms". It saw the main cast reshuffled with a new wardrobe while Akari and Zenjiro stay behind in the Human World; thus making Taiki, Kiriha and Nene the lead protagonists as they set off to face the Seven Death Generals of the Bagra Army and DarkKnightmon's new pawn: Nene's brother Yū. A new evolution known as Super Digivolution was introduced at the end of the first arc.
On August 17, 2011, Shueisha's "V-Jump" magazine announced a sequel set one year later, a third arc of "Xros Wars" subtitled "The Young Hunters Who Leapt Through Time", which aired from October 2, 2011 to March 25, 2012, following on from the previous arc. It focuses on a new protagonist, Tagiru Akashi and his partner Gumdramon who embark on a new journey with an older Taiki, Shoutmon, an older Yū and the revived Damemon, along with other new comrades as they deal with a hidden dimension that lies between the Human World and the Digital World called DigiQuartz. The series finale reintroduces the heroes of the previous five seasons as they all come together and help the current heroes in the final battle due to the fact that the DigiQuartz is essentially a tear in Space and Time, allowing all of the Digimon universes to converge. 
"Digimon Xros Wars: The Young Hunters Who Leapt Through Time" is currently a nominee for the 2012 International Emmy Kids Awards for "Best Animation".
Movies.
There have been nine Digimon movies released in Japan. The first seven were directly connected to their respective anime series; "Digital Monster X-Evolution" originated from the Digimon Chronicle merchandise line. All movies except "X-Evolution" and "Ultimate Power! Activate Burst Mode" have been released and distributed internationally. "", released in the U.S. and Canada territory by Fox Kids through 20th Century Fox on October 6, 2000, consists of the union of the first three Japanese movies.
Versions outside Japan.
United States
Canada
United Kingdom
Other Areas
Manga.
Digimon first appeared in narrative form in the one-shot manga “C'mon Digimon”, released in the summer of 1997. C'mon Digimon spawned the popular "Digimon Adventure V-Tamer 01" manga, written by Hiroshi Izawa, which began serialization on November 21, 1998.
Yuen Wong Yu manhua.
A Chinese manhua was written and drawn by Yuen Wong Yu (余 遠鍠 "Yu Yuen-wong"), who based its storyline on the television series. This adaptation covers "Digimon Adventure" in five volumes, "Digimon Adventure 02" in two, "Digimon Tamers" in four, and "Digimon Frontier" in three. The original stories are heavily abridged, though on rare occasions events play out differently than the anime.
The Cantonese language version was published by Rightman Publishing Ltd. in Hong Kong.
Two English versions were also released. The first one was published by Chuang Yi in Singapore. The second one, which was adapted by Lianne Sentar, was released by TOKYOPOP in North America.</ref>
Panini.
The European publishing company, Panini, approached Digimon in different ways in different countries. While Germany created their own adaptations of episodes, the United Kingdom (UK) reprinted the Dark Horse titles, then translated some of the German adaptations of "Adventure 02" episodes. Eventually the UK comics were given their own original stories, which appeared in both the UK's official "Digimon Magazine" and the official UK Fox Kids companion magazine, "Wickid". These original stories only roughly followed the continuity of "Adventure 02". When the comic switched to the "Tamers" series the storylines adhered to continuity more strictly; sometimes it would expand on subject matter not covered by the original Japanese anime (such as Mitsuo Yamaki's past) or the English adaptations of the television shows and movies (such as Ryo's story or the movies that remained undubbed until 2005). In a money saving venture, the original stories were later removed from "Digimon Magazine", which returned to printing translated German adaptations of "Tamers" episodes. Eventually, both magazines were cancelled.
Video games.
The Digimon series has a large number of video games which usually have their own independent storylines with a few sometimes tying into the stories of the anime series or manga series. The games consists of a number of genres including life simulation, adventure, video card game, strategy and racing games, though they are mainly action role-playing games. The games released in North America are: "Digimon World", "Digimon World 2", "Digimon World 3", "Digimon World 4", "Digimon Digital Card Battle", "Digimon Rumble Arena", "Digimon Rumble Arena 2", "Digimon Battle Spirit", "Digimon Battle Spirit 2", "Digimon Racing", "Digimon World DS", "Digimon World Data Squad", "Digimon World Dawn and Dusk", "Digimon World Championship", and Digimon Masters.
In late 2009, Bandai created a webpage in Japanese showing a new game to be released in 2010 called "", which uses the same engine as their predecessors "Digimon World DS" and "Digimon World Dawn and Dusk" and was released on July 1, 2010. In February 2010, a website for the online multiplayer game, "Digimon Battle Online", was launched, showing it to be based primarily in the world of the Tamers saga and its characters.
In 2011, Bandai posted a countdown on a teaser site. Once the countdown was finished, it revealed a reboot of the Digimon World series titled "".
On September 22, 2011, online game publisher Joymax announced the release of an MMORPG game called "Digimon Masters", which was developed by the Korean publisher DIGITALIC. The game is currently under OBT (Open Beta Test) with the final release scheduled for October.
Card game.
The Digimon Collectible Card Game is a card game based on Digimon, first introduced in Japan in 1997 and published by Bandai. The third season (Digimon Tamers) utilized this aspect of the franchise by making the card game an integral part of the season. The card game is also put into games, Digital Card Battle being one of them, and it is also featured in Digimon World 3.
