"Suit & Tie" is a song recorded by American singer Justin Timberlake for his upcoming third studio album, "The 20/20 Experience" (2013). It was written by Timberlake, Timothy "Timbaland" Mosley, Shawn "Jay Z" Carter, Jerome Harmon, James Fauntleroy, Terrence Stubbs, Johnny Wilson and Charles Still and produced by Timbaland, Timberlake and Harmon. The song serves as Timberlake's highly-anticipated musical comeback following a six-year hiatus, during which time he pursued an acting career and developed his skills as a record producer and songwriter for other artists.
Background.
In September 2006, Timberlake released his second studio album "FutureSex/LoveSounds". Well-received both critically and commercially, the album spawned six singles, including the worldwide hits "SexyBack", "My Love" and "What Goes Around... Comes Around". After wrapping up a worldwide concert tour in support of the album in 2007, Timberlake took a break from his music career to focus on acting. In addition, Timberlake worked behind-the-scenes with his record label Tennman Records (founded in 2007) and his production team The Y's (founded in 2008). He also provided guest vocals on several singles by other artists, such as "4 Minutes" by Madonna and "Carry Out" by Timbaland. In June 2011, Timberlake and Specific Media Group jointly purchased Myspace for approximately $35 million. Timberlake promised to put in the work to make Myspace, a once-dominant social network pioneer that "fell on hard times", relevant again.
In August 2012, producer Jim Beanz reported that Timberlake had started working on his new music project. However, shortly after the announcement, Timberlake's publicist revealed that there were no current plans for a new Timberlake album, affirming instead that Timberlake was working with Timbaland on songs for his upcoming project "Shock Value III".
Release.
In early January 2013, via his official Twitter account, Timberlake posted a tweet, "I think I'M READY", before posting a link to a YouTube video which shows him walking into a studio and explains his absence from releasing new songs. In the minute-long video, a camera follows Timberlake as he walks through a recording studio, while the singer's voice over discusses why it's been so long between albums. In the video, he reveals that he is not interested in releasing something he doesn't love. The video closes with Timberlake entering a recording booth, putting on headphones and saying, "I'm ready." Subsequently, on singer's official site, a countdown leading up to Monday, Jan 14 at 12 a.m. ET appeared, and so was speculation of a new single and album to break Timberlake's hiatus. That timing coincided with a tweet that Power 105.1 radio personality Charlamagne posted saying, "Justin, Jay Z Timbaland. New record Monday".
Following months of private beta testing, Myspace was relaunched on January 15. The front page of the site featured an image of Timberlake wearing a suit and tie. In addition, a chance to stream or download "Suit & Tie" for joining or signing in to Myspace was given. "Wired" magazine wrote that by doing this, the site, which was completely revamped to focus on "assisting artists in sharing their music with passionate fans", is sending a "clear message" about what the network is good for: "posting music for free, and trying to upsell it to downloads".
Writing and inspiration.
"Suit & Tie" was written by Timberlake, Timbaland, Shawn "Jay-Z" Carter, Jerome "J-Roc" Harmon and James Fauntleroy. According to Timberlake: "The inspiration for this really came out of the blue and to be honest, I didn't expect anything out of it. I just went into the studio and started playing around with some sounds and songs. It was probably the best time I've had in my career... Just creating with no rules and/or end goal in mind and really enjoying the process."
Composition.
"Suit & Tie" is a mid-tempo R&B song, with a length of five minutes and twenty-seven seconds (5:27). It begins with a "slow-drawl" intro consisting of slowed down synths and "slightly out of time" drum claps. A distorted Timberlake growls "awoo", before he and Timbaland sing: "I be on my suit and tie shit". After a brief pause the song then settles into a "rolling, laidback" groove that contains finger clicks and old-school horn blasts (sampled from the track "Sho' Nuff" by 1970s soul trio Sly, Slick and Wicked) , add a layer of sophistication to the track. Timbaland's "shiny collection" of percussion congeals on the track. Jay-Z's appearance, a single verse which appears roughly two thirds of the way into the track contains a lyrical interpolation of the line "I'm a show you how I do this son", from his 2002 track "Show You How".
"Suit & Tie" is a sleek dance number with several start-stop components arranged in a way similar to his debut single "Like I Love You" (2002). Jim Farber of the "New York Daily News" wrote that the song is in the "classic" style of Curtis Mayfield, yet "isn't in any way conventionally retro". The song "floats along" like a song from The Whispers, but according to Melinda Newman of HitFix, Timbaland's production manages to pay homage without sounding dated. The song then goes into a hypnotic, engaging outro before a great, cold ending. Lyrically, the song is an ode to the joys of "being handsome and well-dressed".
Critical response.
Michael Cragg of "The Guardian" wrote that "Suit & Tie" feels like the work of someone "luxuriating in the fact they're making music again" and not someone "desperate to redefine pop in the face of its recent club-related slump". He stated that the song is not a "sound-redefining, statement-making, globe-conquering comeback single" like "SexyBack" (2006) was, but "more of a midway point" between his previous singles "Señorita" and "Summer Love". A reviewer from "The Independent" wrote that Timberlake appears to have "gone up an octave" since he last released new music. The reviewer also compared the song to "Rock Your Body" and "SexyBack". Stephen Deusner of Pitchfork awarded the track their Best New Track tag praising Timberlake's vocal performance and Timbaland's production by saying, "Timbaland creates a smooth beat out of a marimba roll and harp glissando that Marvin Gaye must have left on the cutting-room floor, and Timberlake rides it with that fluid, effortless falsetto." Deusner, however, noted that the feature verse from Jay-Z is "another in a string of uninspired cameos," but it couldn't "sink the song’s slinky vibe." Popjustice, in the same vein, claimed it is "officially, and very disappointingly, mediocre" and "it could make a decent third single from an album, if they were struggling".
Melinda Newman of HitFix said that "leave it to Timberlake" to represent R&B in a way that "few contemporary artists are today", noting Bruno Mars and Miguel being a few exceptions. She also wrote that it is "more of a statement that Timberlake is back than a catchy, hit song. And that's fine. Artists don't lead with their strongest stuff. As re-introductions go, it's a good place to start and he can build to what we hope are some catchier songs on the album". Kia Makarechi of "The Huffington Post" wrote that: "Our expectations are our greatest enemy. [...] If we ditch the notion that Justin needs to reinvent dance music every time he drops an album (a tall order for any artist), 'Suit & Tie' may actually give us a lot to look forward to".
Music video.
The music video was for "Suit & Tie" was shot on January 25, 2013. It was directed by David Fincher, who Timberlake had previously worked with on "The Social Network" (2010). The music video was released on Timberlake's Vevo page on Valentine's Day 2013.
Chart performance.
A few hours after its release, "Suit & Tie" reached the top position on the US iTunes Store. According to Gary Trust of "Billboard", industry sources suggested that the track could sell upwards 350,000 downloads in his opening-week, and noted that it could debut into the top five of the Hot 100 chart. The song debuted at number 84 on the "Billboard" Hot 100 based on two days of airplay alone in the week ending January 26, 2013.
"Suit & Tie" also debuted at number 14 on "Billboard"s Pop Songs chart with 6,045 plays, the highest detections total by a new entry in the chart's history. Only Mariah Carey debuted higher at number 12 with "Dreamlover" (1993). In the United Kingdom, the song debuted at number 3.
The following week, "Suit & Tie" jumped to number four on the "Billboard" Hot 100 with 315,000 first-week downloads sold. It's the heftiest start for a song by a male artist since Justin Bieber's "Boyfriend" began with 521,000 the week of April 14, 2012. It's Timberlake's best sales week ever for a download, surpassing the 250,000 debut of "SexyBack" in 2006. It then fell to number 13 for two weeks, but returned to the top ten on the week of February 10, 2013 after Timberlake performed it at the 2013 Grammy Awards.
