Pretty Little Liars is a series of young-adult novels by American author Sara Shepard, beginning with 2006's inaugural entry of the same name. The series follows the lives of four girls – Spencer Hastings, Hanna Marin, Aria Montgomery, and Emily Fields – whose clique falls apart after the disappearance of their leader, Alison DiLaurentis, in the 7th grade. Later, when the girls are juniors in high school, Alison's body is found, and they begin receiving various messages from someone using the alias "A" who threatens to expose their secrets and get revenge on them for what Alison did to "A". 
The novels explore several serious issues such as bullying, murder, drug addiction, underage drinking, eating disorders, homosexuality, peer-pressure, infidelity, and mental illness. Moral ambiguity and the consequences of lying are featured prominently in the series; the girls constantly create their own problems through their unwillingness to tell the truth about certain events and misdeeds they have done.
The novels have frequently appeared on the "The New York Times" Best Seller list. In 2010, a television series loosely based on the novels began airing. The twelfth book in the series, "Burned", was released on December 4, 2012. A prequel, "Ali's Pretty Little Lies", was released on January 2, 2013. Additionally, a thirteenth book, "Crushed", is set to be released June 4th, 2013. The fourteenth and last book, "Deadly", will be released in December 2013.
Overview.
The series is loosely divided into three arcs of four to five books each, chronicling the introduction and reveal of each "A". The series follows the lives of four teenage girls — Aria Montgomery, Emily Fields, Hanna Marin, and Spencer Hastings (nicknamed "the Pretty Little Liars" or simply "the Liars") — whose clique falls apart after the disappearance of their leader, Alison DiLaurentis. Four years after her disappearance, they begin receiving text messages from an anonymous source, "A," who threatens to expose their secrets — including long-hidden ones they thought only their close friend Alison knew. But shortly after, Alison's body is discovered.
Characters.
Spencer Hastings
Hanna Marin
Aria Montgomery 
Emily Fields
Alison DiLaurentis
Courtney DiLaurentis
"A"
