Amit Sadh (Born in Delhi, India) is an Indian television & film actor, best known for his role as Adi in Kyun Hota Hai Pyarr. More recently, he plays the lead in Abhishek Kapoor’s Kai Po Che, which is a screen adaptation of Chetan Bhagat’s novel ‘The 3 Mistakes of my Life.’ 
Early Life & Background.
Amit was born in Delhi, but went on to complete his schooling from the La Martiniere Boarding School in Lucknow. He took a keen interest in sports, particularly football, and even played for the school team. Being quite the adventure enthusiast, Amit kick started his career by teaching adventure sports like rock climbing, kayaking, etc. An ever growing passion in acting led him to enroll in the Lee Strasberg Theatre Institute, New York, where he took up an acting course for 2 years. 
Television.
Amit’s career in acting took off from the small screen. His first role was that of Adi in Neena Gupta’s Kyun Hota Hai Pyarr, and in no time, his character became a household name on Indian television. Following this, he essayed a variety of roles- from that of a don in Guns and Roses to a lawyer in Durgesh Nandini. Another breakthrough role, where Amit’s skills were put to the test was the TV serial Awaaz, where he was given a new look & underwent rigorous training. In the reality TV arena, Amit was part of Big Boss & Nach Baliye. He further explored his acting career by starring in commercials like Tata Sky & Platinum.
Film career.
Amit’s career in Bollywood kicked off with Ram Gopal Varma’s Phoonk 2. Post the acting course in New York; he got the chance to essay the role of a journalist in Kabeer Kaushik’s Maximum. He is now a part of UTV’s Kai Po Che, directed by Abhishek Kapoor. He plays the role of Omkar Shastri, which is one of the three lead roles in the film.
Personal life.
He fell in love with Neeru Bajwa during the shooting of a Indian (Hindi) television show "Guns and Roses" where he essayed the role of a don. According to him, it was the best role of his career. He was later engaged to fellow actress Neeru Bajwa but broke out of this relationship in 2010.
