María José de Pablo Fernández, better known as Cote de Pablo (born November 12, 1979), is a Chilean-born American stage and TV actress and recording artist. She is best known for her role as Ziva David in the CBS television series "NCIS", for which she has won an ALMA Award. She has also embarked on a career as a songwriter and vocalist.
Early life.
De Pablo was born in Santiago, Chile, to an upper-class Catholic family. She has a younger sister, Andrea, and a brother who works as a DJ. When de Pablo was 10 years old, her mother, María Olga Fernández, received a job in Miami, Florida, at a Spanish-speaking television network. There, de Pablo attended Arvida Middle School and New World School of the Arts where she studied musical theater. In the 5th grade, she found many people could not properly pronounce her first name of "Maria José," so she asked them to call her "Coté," a common Chilean nickname for "María José." De Pablo then attended Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where she studied music and theater and appeared in several plays, including "And the World Goes 'Round," "The House of Bernarda Alba," "Indiscretions," "The Fantasticks," and "A Little Night Music." She graduated in 2000.
After graduation, she moved to New York City to find work as an actress, working as a waitress in an Indian restaurant in Manhattan and an Italian eatery in Brooklyn to support herself. She picked up parts in the New York City Public Theater, in the TV show "All My Children," and in commercials. In 2005, de Pablo was about to make her Broadway debut in "The Mambo Kings" in 2005 as Dolores Fuentes, but the show closed after a short trial run in San Francisco. Two days after "The Mambo Kings" closed, de Pablo was asked to audition for "NCIS." She was put alongside series star Michael Weatherly to test for chemistry during her second audition; he went offscript by brushing her hair back and commenting, "You remind me of Salma Hayek." De Pablo's response to Weatherly was to stay in character, and she "dismissed him completely." Afterwards, producer Donald Bellisario met with her when she was waiting for a cab to take her back to the airport and told her she had gotten the part.
Television.
De Pablo hosted some episodes of the show "Control" from 1994 to 1995 on Univision, alongside former "Entertainment Tonight" host Carlos Ponce.
De Pablo played the role of Marguerite Cisneros in "The Jury" (broadcast on the Fox Network). The show was short-lived, screening only ten one-hour episodes.
De Pablo is best known for her role on the CBS nighttime drama "NCIS" as Ziva David, a former Israeli Mossad Liaison Officer, now a Special Agent for NCIS. De Pablo describes the character as "someone completely different from anyone else on the show because she's been around men all her life; she's used to men in authority. She's not afraid of men."
Personal life.
De Pablo is in a long-term relationship with actor Diego Serrano.
As a consequence of kickboxing during scenes de Pablo has been injured several times on the show including injuring her neck.
Music.
Cote de Pablo performed a portion of Tom Waits's song "Temptation" on the "NCIS" episode, "", which first aired in the U.S. on September 23, 2008. Her full performance of the song, including some lyrics in French, appears for the first time on "NCIS: The Official TV Soundtrack", which was released on February 10, 2009.
She is also the singer in Roberto Pitre's "Vivo En Vida" where she sings "Samba In Prelude" and "Cry Me a River" and "Temptation".
