Gina Torres (born April 25, 1969) is an American television and movie actress. She has appeared in many television series, including ' (as Nebula), ' (as Cleopatra), the short-lived "Cleopatra 2525", as well as "Alias" (as Anna Espinosa), "Firefly" (as series regular Zoe Washburne), "Angel" (as Jasmine), "The Matrix" sequels in a supporting role, and "The Shield". She also starred in the independent film "South of Pico" as the fragile waitress Carla. Currently she plays a supporting role on the USA Network show "Suits" as Jessica Pearson.
Early life.
Torres was born at the Flower Fifth Avenue Hospital in Manhattan, New York City, the youngest of three children. Her family lived briefly in Washington Heights before moving to The Bronx. Her parents were both of multiracial Cuban descent, and her father worked as a typesetter for "La Prensa" and the New York "Daily News". 
Torres, a mezzo soprano, began singing at an early age and attended Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts in New York City. She also trained in opera and jazz, and performed in a gospel choir. Torres applied and was accepted to several colleges but could not afford to attend. She chose instead to pursue her dream of being a performer.
Career.
In 2001, she won the ALMA Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Syndicated Drama Series for her role in "Cleopatra 2525". In 2004, she was nominated for the International Press Academy's Golden Satellite Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series, Drama, for her role as Jasmine in "Angel". Her film appearances include "The Matrix Reloaded" and "The Matrix Revolutions".
In 2004, Torres appeared in seven episodes of the third season on "24" as Julia Milliken, a woman who has an affair with the White House Chief of Staff and becomes involved in a Presidential scandal. In 2005 she was tapped for the pilot episode of "Soccer Moms". Also in 2005, she voiced the character of Vixen in numerous episodes of the animated series "Justice League Unlimited" and replaced the voice-over of Jada Pinkett Smith's character Niobe in "The Matrix Online". Gina is best known for her role in Fox's short-lived "Firefly" series, which lasted only one season but still carries a heavy science fiction fanbase. She reprised her "Firefly" role as Zoe in the film "Serenity" (2005).
In 2006, Torres began her role as Cheryl Carrera in the short-lived drama series "Standoff" on the FOX network. Her character is the Supervisory Special Agent in Charge for Crisis Negotiation Unit, FBI Los Angeles. Torres appeared in the film "I Think I Love My Wife", playing the spouse of Chris Rock's character.
She was cast in "Washington Field", a 2009 CBS television pilot from executive Producer Edward Allen Bernero. It is about the National Capital Response Squad, a unit of the FBI made up of elite experts in different areas who travel around the world, responding to events that affect American interests. The cast includes Cole Hauser, Eddie Cibrian, Gina Torres, Teri Polo and Matthew Yang King.
She is also the voice of Wonder Woman in "DC Universe Online" MMORPG, as well as Airachnid in the "Transformers Prime" cartoon.
In 2013, Torres was reunited with fellow "Firefly" costar, Nathan Fillion, in an episode of Fillion's television show, "Castle".
Personal life.
She met Laurence Fishburne while filming "The Matrix Reloaded". Torres and Fishburne were engaged in February 2001 and married on September 22, 2002, at The Cloisters museum in New York City.
On January 8, 2007, Fishburne's spokesman Alan Nierob announced the couple were expecting their first child together. She gave birth to daughter Delilah in June 2007.
