Charles Matthew "Charlie" Hunnam (born 10 April 1980) is an English actor and screenwriter. He is best known for his roles as Pete Dunham in the film "Green Street Hooligans", Nathan Maloney in the Channel 4 drama "Queer as Folk", and Jackson "Jax" Teller in the FX series "Sons of Anarchy".
Early life.
Hunnam was born in Newcastle upon Tyne, England, the younger of two sons born to what he describes as a "tough-guy" father and a "bohemian" mother, who split up when he was two years old. He moved to the Lake District when he was 12, as his mother remarried. Hunnam stated that he was "a city kid in a country environment" and that "people started trying to prove their worth by fighting me on the playground to prove that they could have the Newcastle kid. So I ended up having a horrible childhood, a horrible time in school, having to really defend myself a lot." 
He also said that "had that not happened to me, I think I would still have been as ambitious but I may not have been as disciplined and driven as I am now." 
Hunnam attended Cumbria College of Art and Design, where he graduated with a degree in Performing arts.
Career.
Discovered while clowning around in a shoe shop by a production manager for the British children's show "Byker Grove", Hunnam was cast in his first role as Jason in three episodes of the show. Aged eighteen, his first major role came when he was cast by Russell T. Davies as fifteen-year-old schoolboy Nathan Maloney in Davies' Channel 4 drama "Queer as Folk". He followed this up with his role as Daz in "Whatever Happened to Harold Smith?" and then relocated to Los Angeles.
His career expanded to include a recurring role as Gregor Ryder in the WB Television Network series "Young Americans". He then appeared in the short-lived Fox series "Undeclared" as an English drama student called Lloyd Haythe. Despite critical acclaim, the series was cancelled after one season. Hunnam then appeared in "Abandon", "Nicholas Nickleby", and "Cold Mountain". Hunnam has stated that he does not wish to simply take any role that he is offered: "I have 60 years to make the money, but the choices I make in the next five years are really going to define my career." This decision resulted in his return to the UK to take the lead role of Pete Dunham in "Green Street", however his attempts at delivering a Cockney accent resulted in his inclusion in many critics' 'worst accents in movie history' lists. 
Hunnam played the role of Patric, a member of "The Fishes", in "Children of Men" (2006). Hunnam states that this role was the final part in his "trilogy of mad men". "I played the psycho in "Cold Mountain", my character in "Green Street" is fairly psychotic and now I've got this role." Hunnam currently stars as Jackson "Jax" Teller in "Sons of Anarchy", a show about a prominent motorcycle club in a small fictional California town. Hunnam was cast after Kurt Sutter, the creator of the show, saw him in "Green Street". 
In 2009, he sold his screenplay "Vlad" to Summit Entertainment with Brad Pitt's Plan B Studios co-producing. The film is being directed by music video director and photographer Anthony Mandler, and will focus on Dracula as a young prince.
Personal life.
Hunnam met actress Katharine Towne in 1999 when they both auditioned for roles on "Dawson's Creek". After dating for four weeks, they married in Las Vegas. The couple divorced in 2002.
Hunnam was voted ninth in "Elle Girl"s top 100 sexiest men in 2005. He is currently dating Morgana McNelis, who is a jewelery designer - founder of "Maison de Morgana".
