The Secret Life of the American Teenager (often shortened to Secret Life) is an American teen drama television series created by Brenda Hampton. It first aired on ABC Family on July 1, 2008. The show was renewed for a second season consisting of 24 episodes on February 9, 2009, which began airing on June 22, 2009. On January 12, 2010, ABC Family announced that "Secret Life" would return for its third season, which premiered on June 7, 2010. On January 9, 2011, ABC Family announced the show would return for its fourth season on March 26, 2011. On February 2, 2012, ABC Family renewed the series for a 5th season. 
The series received generally negative reviews from mainstream critics when it began broadcasting, but was well received among female and teenage viewers. The pilot episode broke the record for the highest rated debut on ABC Family, which has been broken by the second season premiere, beating "Kyle XY", with 2.82 million viewers. The season one finale brought in 4.50 million viewers, beating that night's episode of "Gossip Girl", which had less than half its usual number of viewers. Premiering to mostly positive reviews from critics and being well received among viewers, the second season of "Secret Life" opened with the largest audience the series has seen so far, posting a series high in total viewers with 4.68 million viewers; in adults 18–34 it is the number one scripted original premiere of Summer 2009. Furthermore, the mid-season premiere became ABC Family's most watched telecast of all time with viewers ages 12–34 with more than three million viewers watching. 
The show has earned the Teen Choice Award for Choice Summer TV Show during its premiere season, and spawned a book entitled "The Secret Diary of Ashley Juergens". It currently airs on Monday at 8/7c on ABC Family in the United States, on MTV in the UK, on MTV in Poland, on ABC Spark in Canada, on TF6 in France and on Disney Channel in The Netherlands and Belgium.
On October 9, 2012, it was announced that "The Secret Life of the American Teenager" was cancelled, and that the upcoming fifth season will be the show's last.
Series overview.
Season One.
Season One primarily focuses on Amy Juergens becoming pregnant after having sex with Ricky Underwood at band camp. She confides in her best friends Lauren and Madison who try to convince her to go out with Ben Boykewich, a classmate who has fallen in love with her, and then claim the baby is his as his family is rich. Amy refuses to go along with lie and tells Ben the truth, but he is surprisingly supportive and offers to marry her anyway, despite the protests of his friends Henry and Alice. When Ricky finds out he is the father, he is willing to be a part of his future child's life, causing Adrian Lee, Ricky's friends with benefits to become jealous, especially since Ricky already has his sights on the sweet and virginal Grace Bowman, who was going out with Jack Pappas until he cheated on her with Adrian. Still, much to Adrian's surprise, Grace is not angry with her and the two girls slowly become friends despite being romantic rivals. Ricky and Ben also compete with each other for Amy's attention and at the end of the season, Amy has her child, a boy whom she names John and decides to keep, after struggling with the decision over the course of the season.
Season Two.
In Season Two, Amy's parents Anne and George have separated and Anne even begins dating again, but when she becomes pregnant again, it is revealed that the baby is George's. At the same time, Ashley begins her freshman year at Grant High and resents the legacy Amy has accidentally created as a teenage mother so she befriends a fellow gay classmate named Griffin and they both pledge to remain abstinent throughout high school. Meanwhile, Amy struggles to raise John and frequently argues with Ricky over custodial arrangements, especially since Ben is becoming jealous of Ricky's constant presence. Eventually, Ben and Amy break up while Ricky and Adrian have agreed to date officially but Ricky has issues being faithful. Grace loses her virginity to Jack on the same night her father dies in a plane crash and is irrationally wracked with guilt, and breaks up with him for good. She and her brother Tom have trouble adjusting when their mother decides to remarry again. Adrian begins to reach out to Amy in order to make peace so Amy, John, and Ricky can be a family with less drama. The season's events culminate with Adrian cheating on Ricky with Ben on the night of the Mother/Daughter dance, in an attempt to get back at Ricky for kissing Amy. Ricky is angry at the both of them and breaks up with Adrian and refuses to forgive Ben, thus crushing their already fragile friendship.
Season Three.
In Season Three, everyone finds out Adrian is pregnant with Ben's baby. Ricky and Amy continue to date and start considering taking their relationship to the next level. George and Anne Juergens have officially divorced and Anne lives closer to her mother while George stays at the house with Amy and Ashley. Ashley drops out of school and begins homeschooling herself. Kathleen Bowman's husband goes to Zimbabwe for a medical mission to bring aid to third world people and returns in the season finale with a proposal that he and Kathleen return to live and explore the world. Kathleen is hesitant to accept, not wanting to leave Grace and Tom behind by themselves. Adrian and Ben decide to get married and the ceremony occurs near the end of the season. In the two-part season finale, Ben and Adrian are living together in their condo and Adrian begins to sense that something might be wrong with their baby. They decide to call the doctor, who has them meet her at the hospital as soon as possible. The baby is revealed to be stillborn. Amy is upset by this and decides to have sex with Ricky instead of going away for the weekend.
Season Four.
In Season Four, Amy and Ricky begin to get closer and Amy and John move in with Ricky in his apartment above the butcher shop. Meanwhile, Ashley leaves to go on a road trip with her boyfriend Toby. Grace goes to Zimbabwe and meets a new guy named Daniel who later becomes her boyfriend. Jack and Madison break up forcing Jack to do all the senior stuff with Grace who he is still in love with. Adrian is depressed as she lost her baby and Ben wants to leave but doesn't have the heart to do so. Adrian figures out that he wants to leave and tries to seduce him so she can get pregnant again. Later Adrian sets her goal towards Ricky. Ricky proposes to Amy and she accepts. Afterwards, Jesse has a graduation party and everyone is invited. Adrian goes with Omar, her new boyfriend. Daniel's ex-girlfriend shows up at the party and says she wants him back. Ricky kisses Adrian one last time as per her wish and she claims she is "free" from him, after which her new boyfriend Omar breaks up with her claiming that the kiss was "totally disrespectful". The next morning outside, Grace asks Jack about Adrian's theory that a kiss might help a couple get over each other which prompts Jack to kiss her. It ends with Ricky and Amy making out in front of his car with Lauren dolefully sitting in the back seat.
Broadcasting.
"Secret Life" first aired on ABC Family on July 1, 2008. Season 1 began with 11 episodes broadcast from July 1, 2008 to September 9, 2008. After a hiatus, 12 first-season episodes aired January 5, 2009 through March 23, 2009, despite being marketed as season 2, for a total of 23 episodes. The first season was aired on Canadian broadcaster CityTV starting on September 3, 2008. In early 2009, CityTV removed "Secret Life" from its schedule. Therefore, MuchMusic started to air the first season in Canada on November 30, 2009, followed by the second season on December 7, 2009. 
Following the success of its first season, ABC Family announced on January 31, 2009, plans to renew "Secret Life". The official press release was released on February 9 and was added to ABC Family's line up on April 7, 2009. The show was renewed for a 24-episode second season, which began airing on June 22, 2009. Season 2 began with 12 episodes broadcast starting June 22, 2009 through September 7, 2009. After a four-month hiatus, the second half of the season returned on January 4, 2010, and concluded on March 22, 2010. 
Following their record-breaking, mid-season returns, "Make It or Break It", and "Secret Life" were both picked up for an additional season. The third season premiere of "Secret Life" was aired on June 7, 2010, at 8 pm. On January 10, 2011, it was reported that "Secret Life" was picked up for a fourth season to be shown in Summer 2011 and season three would resume on March 28, 2011 after an extended season break. The second half of the fourth season is set to air on March 26, 2012.
On February 2, 2012 it was announced ABC Family renewed The Secret Life of the American Teenager for a fifth season.
Reception.
"Secret Life" received mixed reviews at the time of its debut. It currently has a score of 47 out of 100 from review aggregator Metacritic. The "New York Post" praised the series for having a set of characters that are "... real and come from families of all stripes – from intact to single-parent households to one boy in foster care..." However, most mainstream critics haven't embraced the show, indicating it as a TV-series version of an after school special, "filled with didactic messages and a lotta wooden acting," in the words of Ken Tucker of "Entertainment Weekly". "The New York Times" claimed that "Secret Life" must surely be the collective effort of an anti-pregnancy cabal. [...] ABC Family means well but could not have done worse. "Secret Life" doesn’t take the fun out of teenage pregnancy, it takes the fun out of television" and calls the show a "Prime-Time Cautionary Tale". "Variety" Magazine reports that "ABC Family's latest original drama wants to be a slow-motion version of "Juno" but settles for being an obvious, stereotype-laden teen soap [...] based on first impressions, "The Secret Life of the American Teenager" should probably stay a secret." ReporterMag's Andrew Rees says, "The show...might be the worst scripted drama on television. Suffering from gag-worthy dialog, horrific plot twists, terrible acting, and characters who not even the best of 3-D glasses could give depth to, it’s a wonder how this show stays on the air."
Brenda Hampton does not mind the poor reviews, saying, "I'd rather get good ratings and bad reviews than bad ratings and good reviews.". Despite its lackluster critical reviews, "Secret Life" received the highest premiere viewership ratings ever for an ABC Family original program. The pilot episode brought in 2.82 million viewers and a 0.9/3 share in the 18- to 49-year-old demographic. "Secret Life" also scored high in the female demographic, registering a 6.5/24 among female teenagers and a 3.1/11 among 12- to 34-year-old females.
"Secret Life"'s mid-season finale episode of season one defeated the first hour of the much-publicized series premiere of "90210" on The CW in viewers 12–34 and females 12–34, beating "90210" in total viewers and all their key demographics, and bringing in some of the best ratings of the season for "Secret Life". The season one finale brought in 4.50 million viewers and was the highest rated telecast on March 23, 2009 in viewers aged 12–34 and the number one scripted telecast that night. The episode also beat "90210", which had 2.20 million viewers, more than half the usual number.
On Monday, June 22, 2009, "Secret Life" opened its second season with the largest audience so far, posting a series high in total viewers with 4.68 million viewers, and second-best numbers ever in adults 18–34 with 1.4 million viewers, behind season one's mid-season finale, adults 18–49 with 2.1 million viewers and viewers 12–34 with 2.9 million viewers. In June 2009, "Secret Life" ranked as cable’s number one scripted telecast in females 12–34, and the number one scripted series telecast in viewers 12–34 and female teens. Additionally, "Secret Life" stood as ad-supported cable’s number one telecast this month in female teens. The season debut became cable’s number one scripted series premiere of the 2008/2009 season to date in women 18–34, women 18–49, and viewers 12–34, and the number one scripted original premiere of summer 2009 in adults 18–34.
"Secret Life’s" second season debut stands as cable’s number one scripted original series season premiere of summer 2009 in adults ages 18–34 and across core female 18–34, 18–49 and 12–34 demos, ahead of such high profile series as USA’s "Royal Pains" and "Burn Notice", and TNT’s "The Closer". Some critics praised the new developments of the show's second season, saying they could be "interesting material to build on." Jean Bently of EW Popwatch says that now that the whole "teen going through a pregnancy" plot has played out and the "frustrated young mother" thing is going on, we have room to explore some other topics. She remained hopeful that the writers will not just turn these new problems into issues of the week, instead allowing time for the characters to grieve Marshall's death, deal with Ann's accidental pregnancy, and explore the more emotionally complex aspects of teenage sex.
With more than 4.55 million people watching the season two mid-season premiere, the episode became ABC Family’s most-watched telecast ever in the key 12–34 and teen demos. The episode stands as the series’ second-most-watched episode in viewers and is TV’s number one telecast of the season in female teens, cable’s number one telecast in females 12–34, and cable’s number one scripted telecast in viewers 12–34. The season two mid-season premiere remains cable’s number one scripted premiere of the 2009/10 season. It improved nearly one million total viewers over its season two mid-season finale, and was number one in all target demos for the hour.
On Monday, June 7, 2010, "Secret Life" opened its third season as the number one summer premiere for the 2010 summer season. It drew 1.3 million women 18–49 viewers, 2.3 million viewers 12–34, 1.8 million female 12–34 viewers, and 1.0 million teen viewers, topping high profiles premieres of "Burn Notice", "Royal Pains", and "Pawn Stars". Additionally, Monday’s "Secret Life" ranks as summer’s number one scripted premiere on cable with 1.2 million viewers adults 18–34. It improved over its season 2 finale, growing by 20% in adults 18–34, by 21% in adults 18–49, and by 10% in viewers 12–34.
Regarding "The Secret Life"'s advertising, Laura Caraccioli-Davis, executive vice president of the media buyer Starcom, says, "Nielsen numbers will do the talking in the advertising community, which has a deep respect for success."
U.S. Nielsen ratings.
The following is a table with the average estimated amount of viewers per episode, each season of "The Secret Life of the American Teenager" on ABC Family.
Accolades.
Throughout its four seasons, "Secret Life" has been nominated for several Teen Choice Awards, and won a Gracie Allen Award. It won a Teen Choice Award for Choice Summer TV Show during its premiere season. In 2009, it was nominated for three Teen Choice Awards, including Choice TV Show Drama, Choice TV Breakout Show, and Choice Summer TV. Kenny Baumann was nominated for Choice TV Actor Drama and Choice Summer TV Star: Male, Shailene Woodley was nominated for Choice TV Actress Drama and Choice Summer TV Star: Female, Daren Kagasoff was nominated for Choice TV Breakout Star Male and won Choice Summer TV Star Male, and Molly Ringwald and Mark Derwin were nominated for Choice TV Parental Unit. A Gracie Allen Award was awarded to the show for Outstanding Drama in 2009. In 2010, the show was nominated as a Favorite TV Obsession at the 2010 People's Choice Awards; Shailene Woodley won a 2010 Gracie Award for Outstanding Female Rising Star in a Drama Series; the show was nominated as the Choice Summer TV show at the 2010 Teen Choice Awards; Ken Baumann and Daren Kagasoff were nominated as the Choice Male Summer TV Star; and Shailene Woodley was also nominated as the Choice Female Summer TV Star.
Home releases.
Each "Secret Life" season is released on DVD in separate volumes. Season one, confusingly, is sold as season one and season two. Season two is sold as volume three and volume four, and similarly for the later seasons. The DVD releases include commentary by cast and crew members on selected episodes, deleted scenes, interviews with the cast, and behind-the-scenes featurettes. The season two, volume two DVD includes a preview of "Ashley Juergen's Secret Diary", a novella released on June 15, 2010.
Other media.
On June 15, 2010, "The Secret Diary of Ashley Juergens" was published. Written by Kelly and Courtney Turk, whose previous credits include episodes of "7th Heaven" and "NCIS", it documents the thoughts of the character Ashley Juergens in the events chronicling the first and part of the second season. It also includes new characters that were not shown on "Secret Life". "We watched the episodes together and then talked briefly about ideas we each had and what we thought Ashley would have to say about whatever the storyline was. Then we separated and exchanged our chapters," Courtney stated while talking about the difference between writing a book and writing for television.
