Joseph Hill "Joss" Whedon (; born June 23, 1964) is an American screenwriter, film and television producer, director, comic book author, composer, and actor. He is also the founder of Mutant Enemy Productions and co-founder of Bellwether Pictures. He is best known as the creator and showrunner of the television series "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" (1997–2003), "Angel" (1999–2004), "Firefly" (2002), and "Dollhouse" (2009–2010), as well as "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog" (2008). Whedon also co-wrote "Toy Story" (1995), wrote and directed "Firefly"s follow up film "Serenity" (2005), co-wrote and produced the horror film "The Cabin in the Woods" (2012), and wrote and directed the film adaptation of "Marvel's" "The Avengers" (2012), the third highest-grossing film of all time.
He is also notable for his work in the comic books "Astonishing X-Men", "Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight", "", and "Runaways" and his collaboration in online media. Many of Whedon's projects have cult status.
Early life.
Joss Whedon was born in New York City. He has been described as the world's first third-generation TV writer, as he is the son of Tom Whedon, a screenwriter for "The Electric Company" in the 1970s and "The Golden Girls" in the 1980s, and the grandson of John Whedon, a writer for "The Donna Reed Show" in the 1950s. His mother, Lee Stearns, taught history at Riverdale Country School as Lee Whedon, and was an unpublished novelist. Whedon is the younger brother of Samuel and Matthew Whedon and older brother of writers Jed and Zack Whedon.
Whedon graduated from Wesleyan University in 1987. Before going to Wesleyan he spent two years at Winchester College in England. He attended Riverdale Country School in New York City where his mother taught history. At a young age he was a prolific writer, loved Monty Python and showed great interest in acting.
Whedon's influences include the likes of Ray Bradbury, James Cameron, Rod Serling, William Shakespeare, Stephen Sondheim and Steven Spielberg.
Career.
Television work.
Following a move to Los Angeles, Whedon secured his first writing job on the television series "Roseanne". After working several years as a script doctor for films, he returned to television, where he created four TV shows.
Years after having his script for the movie "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" produced, Whedon revived the concept as a television series of the same name. "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" went on to become a critical and cult hit receiving an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Writing in a Drama Series in 2000. "Buffy" ran for five seasons on The WB Television Network before being relocated to the UPN Network for its final two seasons. "Angel" was a spin-off of "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", featuring Buffy's vampire-with-a-soul ex-boyfriend as the title character. "Angel" debuted on The WB in September 1999 and ran for five seasons; during its first two seasons, "Angel" episodes were broadcast immediately following "Buffy" episodes.
In 2002, Whedon created the Space Western television series "Firefly", which was broadcast on the Fox network. The series was canceled after only 11 of the 14 completed episodes were aired, many out of intended order. After the cancellation, Whedon wrote the script for a "Firefly" movie, titled "Serenity". In early 2004 Whedon announced that it had been greenlit by Universal Studios, and the film was widely released in the United States on September 30, 2005. In the DVD release, Whedon discusses how "Serenity" would not have been made if not for the dedication of the Browncoats, fans of the series.
In late 2007, Eliza Dushku, with whom Whedon worked on "Buffy" and "Angel," met over lunch to discuss possible ideas for a series for her to star in and came up with an idea which excited both of them. The show, "Dollhouse", was announced by Fox in November 2008 to begin airing on February 13, 2009. "Dollhouse" was canceled after two seasons due to low ratings.
Whedon is also noted for his directing work in television, which includes two 2007 episodes of "The Office" ("Business School" and "Branch Wars") as well as a 2010 episode of the musical series "Glee" ("Dream On") in which he reunited with his "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog" star Neil Patrick Harris.
Although not yet an actor, he made cameo appearances in his own shows as well as others. He voiced a radio newsreader in the "Buffy" season one episode, "I, Robot... You, Jane". In the season two "Angel" episode "Through the Looking Glass", he made a cameo appearance under heavy makeup as Numfar, a character whose entire role was to perform comical dances. In "Firefly", Whedon appeared as a guest at a funeral in the final produced episode, "The Message". He made a brief appearance as an overbearing rental-car clerk in an episode of "Veronica Mars", "Rat Saw God", in 2005; Whedon is a vocal fan of "Veronica Mars". He voiced himself in two episodes of Seth Green's television series "Robot Chicken" titled "Rabbits on a Roller Coaster" in 2007 and "Help Me" in 2008.
In 2012, Whedon stated that although television involves more compromise than film: 
Whedon is involved in an upcoming Marvel TV show for ABC. Titled "S.H.I.E.L.D.", it will focus on the secret military law-enforcement agency featured throughout the Marvel Cinematic Universe. The pilot is penned by Whedon, his brother Jed Whedon, and Maurissa Tancharoen, directed by Whedon, and executive produced by himself, Jed Whedon, Tancharoen, Jeffrey Bell, and Jeph Loeb. Whedon stated that the storyline of the series would be largely independent from the "Avengers" sequel, and will mostly revolve around the title espionage organization.
Feature films and video.
Whedon wrote or co-wrote several films, including "Buffy the Vampire Slayer", "Toy Story", "Alien Resurrection", "Titan A.E." and '. The song "My Lullaby" from ' was written by him and Seattle native Scott Warrender. He was nominated (along with six other writers) for an Academy Award for "Toy Story"'s screenplay.
He also wrote uncredited drafts or rewrites of "Speed", "Waterworld", "Twister" and "X-Men". According to Graham Yost, the credited writer of "Speed", Whedon wrote most of the film's dialogue; in contrast, Whedon claimed that the released "X-Men" film contained only two dialogue exchanges that he had contributed to the screenplay, and that the final version of "Atlantis: The Lost Empire" contained "not a shred" of his work. Whedon expressed strong dissatisfaction with the released versions of the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" film, "Titan A.E." and "Alien Resurrection".
He wrote and directed 2005's "Serenity", based on his television series "Firefly". Serenity won the 2006 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form. Beginning in January 2006, fans (with Universal's blessing) began organizing worldwide charity screenings called "Can't Stop the Serenity" (CSTS), a play on a line in the film: "You can't stop the signal", to benefit Equality Now, a human rights organization supported by Joss Whedon. Over $500,000 has been raised for Equality Now since 2006. As of May 1, 2011, 45 cities were registered for CSTS 2011 in 6 countries and 24 U.S. states.
In November 2008, Whedon guest starred in the premiere episode of "The Write Environment", a direct to DVD series featuring in-depth, candid one-on-one interviews with some of TV's most prolific and well known series creator/writers.
Whedon wrote a horror film titled "The Cabin in the Woods" with Drew Goddard, which finished production in 2009. The film was produced by MGM, but once the studio went bankrupt, the film was held back. It was given a theatrical release on April 13, 2012 and was distributed by Lionsgate. Goddard directed the Whedon-produced film, which starred Bradley Whitford, Chris Hemsworth, Fran Kranz, and Richard Jenkins.
In April 2010, it was confirmed that Whedon would direct "The Avengers", a live-action adaptation of the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name. The film premiered on April 11, 2012. It was highly successful at the box office, grossing $1 billion worldwide within 19 days of its release, earning the biggest opening weekend of all-time, and becoming the third highest-grossing film ever at the North American box office. The film also received considerable praise from critics, with the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reporting a 92% positive rating based on 279 reviews.
On October 24, 2011, Bellwether Pictures confirmed they had completed principal photography on an adaptation of William Shakespeare's play "Much Ado About Nothing", which is directed and produced by Joss Whedon. It was filmed in 12 days in Santa Monica. The film premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival and has a theatrical release date of June 7, 2013. Whedon also composed Much Ado About Nothing's score. Whedon is also the writer and executive producer of the upcoming paranormal romance film "In Your Eyes", the second feature film under production by Bellwether Pictures.
On August 7, 2012, it was confirmed that Whedon would return to write and direct a sequel to "The Avengers", following a deal with Marvel Studios that will expire after three years, in June 2015. The film will be released on May 1, 2015.
Comic books.
Whedon, a lifelong comic book fan, is the author of the Dark Horse Comics miniseries "Fray" which takes place in the far future of the Buffyverse. Whedon returned to the world of "Fray" during the "Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Eight" arc, "Time of Your Life".
Like many other authors from the "Buffy" TV show, he also contributed to the show's comic book version: he wrote three stories in the anthology "Tales of the Slayers" (including one featuring Melaka Fray from "Fray") and also the main storyline of the five-issue miniseries "Tales of the Vampires".
The three-issue miniseries "", based on the "Firefly" series and leading up to the film "Serenity", was released June through August 2005. Co-written with Brett Matthews and pencilled by Will Conrad, the first issue featured covers drawn by John Cassaday, J. G. Jones, and Bryan Hitch, as well as other artists for the second and third issues. The first two issues went to a second printing. The trade paperback featured a new cover by acclaimed painter Adam Hughes.
A second three-issue Serenity miniseries "", was released in March, April, and May 2008. "Better Days" reunites Whedon, Matthews, Conrad, and Adam Hughes, who will provide all three covers. The three covers form a larger panorama of the ship's crew. "Better Days" is set before "Those Left Behind", and features the full crew of Serenity. A trade paperback featuring a cover by Jo Chen was released in October 2008.
Whedon and others have mentioned that more "Serenity" comics are planned for the near future, and will be based in the "Firefly" continuation of the series, including one about Shepherd Book. Likewise, Whedon and other former Buffy writers have released a new ongoing "Buffy" which takes place after the series finale "Chosen", which he officially recognizes as the canonical "Season 8". The first issue was released on March 14, 2007 by Dark Horse Comics. Following the success of issue one of "Buffy" season eight, IDW Publishing approached Whedon about similarly producing a canonical "Angel" Season 6. "" has 14 issues published as of November 19, 2008 with 3 more to come following the adventures of Angel and his team after the TV series ended, where the title of the series will then change to "Angel: Aftermath". Although Whedon has not had the time to write the series, he has served as executive producer with Brian Lynch, writing the season 6 story.
Whedon wrote "Astonishing X-Men" in Marvel Comics' popular line of comics about the X-Men but finished his 24 issue run in 2008 and handed over the writing reins to Warren Ellis. The title, recreated specifically for Whedon, has been one of Marvel's best-selling comics as of 2006 and was nominated for several Eisner Awards including Best Serialized Story, Best Continuing Series, Best New Series and Best Writer, winning the Best Continuing Series award in 2006. One storyline from this comic, the notion of a cure for mutation being found, was also an element in the third X-Men film, "X-Men: The Last Stand". Whedon also introduced several new characters into the Marvel Universe such as the villainous Ord, X-Men Ruth "Blindfold" Aldine and Hisako "Armor" Ichiki, Runaway Klara Prast and Special Agent Abigail Brand, along with S.W.O.R.D., the organization she commands.
Whedon is the second writer of the critically acclaimed and fan-favorite Marvel comic "Runaways", taking over after series creator Brian K. Vaughan completed his run. Whedon had been a fan of the series for some time, and had a letter published in the first volume, which was included in the Volume 1 hardcover.
Whedon's other comic-related work includes writing the introduction to "Identity Crisis" trade paperback and a contribution to the "jam issue" "Superman/Batman #26" (to date his only published work for DC Comics), writing short pieces for Marvel's "Stan Lee Meets Spider-Man" and "Giant-Size X-Men" #3 and also being the subject of an issue of "Marvel Spotlight" (alongside artist Michael Lark). He contributed as part of a panel of writers to Marvel Comics' "Civil War" crossover event, lending advice in how to tell the story and how to end it.
In February 2009, "Astonishing X-Men" #6, which depicted the return of Colossus to the title, and concluded Whedon's first story arc on that title, was named by Marvel Comics readers the #65 in Marvel's Top 70 Comics of all time.
Online media.
In 2005 he released a series of online shorts titled the R. Tam sessions, starring himself and Summer Glau, which served as a form of viral marketing for "Serenity". In 2007, he launched a free webcomic, titled "Sugarshock!" hosted on Dark Horse comic's Myspace page.
In March 2008, Whedon teamed up with his brothers Zack Whedon and Jed Whedon, along with Jed's then-fiancée Maurissa Tancharoen to write, compose and produce the musical superhero spoof, "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog". The musical stars Neil Patrick Harris, Nathan Fillion and Felicia Day. Whedon conceived of Dr. Horrible over the year before and production took place over seven days during the Writers Guild strike. The project was freely available online from July 15 until July 20. In August, Whedon released a new "Serenity/Firefly" comic free online "Serenity: The Other Half". In September, "Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog" Soundtrack, made the top 40 Album list despite being a digital exclusive only available on iTunes. The Soundtrack was successful enough to pay its crew and all its bills.
In February 2009, he stated that after his series "Dollhouse" was over, whether by cancellation or reaching its end, he planned on putting his efforts purely into on-line content like "Dr. Horrible". In the "Dr. Horrible" bonus feature "Commentary! The Musical!", Joss sings the song "Heart (Broken)" about the crippling scrutiny and commercialisation of producing fiction for a modern consumer audience.
Whedon appears in all three episodes of "Husbands" season two as Wes, and said that it was his "biggest acting role yet". Whedon appeared in the Cracked.com video called "Potty Training a 25-Year-Old", as a bathroom coach. Whedon also played the character Gerald in the first episode of "Written by a Kid".
Unrealized projects.
Whedon had a number of planned television projects that have become stuck in development or terminally stalled. Among these was a "Buffy" animated series, a set of made-for-television movies for The WB based on "Angel" and "Buffy" characters, and "Ripper", a proposed BBC pilot about Rupert Giles. "Ripper" was announced to be in development at the San Diego Comic-Con 2007. The development process was set to begin in 2008 and "Ripper" to be shown that summer but the pilot has not materialized yet due to characters rights.
Early in his career Whedon sold two spec scripts that have not yet been produced, "Suspension" and "Afterlife". He sold "Suspension" for $750,000 with an additional $250,000 if production commences. It has been described as ""Die Hard" on a bridge". A year later in 1994 he sold "Afterlife" for $1.5 million with an additional $500,000 if production commences. As of 2000 Andy Tennant was in talks to direct and rewrite. In "Afterlife" are precursors to many of the themes Whedon would later explore in "Dollhouse". The script is about Daniel Hoffstetter, a government scientist, who awakes after dying to discover his mind has been imprinted on a mind-wiped body.
Whedon had been signed to write and direct Warner Bros.' adaptation of "Wonder Woman" but on February 3, 2007, Whedon announced that he would no longer be involved with the project. "We just saw different movies, and at the price range this kind of movie hangs in, that's never gonna work. Non-sympatico. It happens all the time."
Late in 2009, Whedon made a humorous bid of $10,000 for control of future "Terminator" material. He was rebuffed at that time and it is not known if he has plans to attempt this again.
"Goners".
"Goners" was announced in 2005. According to "Variety" magazine, it is a fantasy thriller under development by Universal Studios, and is to be produced by Mary Parent and Scott Stuber.
Directorial style, themes and influences.
Whedon spoke about his approach to screenwriting.
He also spoke about his penchant to kill off characters.
Whedon prefers to use practical effects as much as possible when using computer-generated imagery for special effects in his films.
Whedon has kept ambivalent on whether to shoot on film or digital video, saying that he has "no allegiance to film as film. If the story is in front of me, I’m fine".
Many of Whedon's altered new phrases, and heavily popularized words have entered a common usage called "", which PBS included an entire section of in their article series "Do You Speak American?". In an issue of "Buffy Season Eight", where Buffy travels to the future, Whedon writes Buffy's reaction to the future dialect of Manhattan; this allows Whedon to comment on the series' distinctive style of dialogue. "Buffy blames herself for what's happened to the English language, and there's a lot of hubris in that joke. I like to think that adding Y's to words that don't usually have Y's is going to destroy the whole fabric of our society".
In terms of characters, Whedon's works usually revolve around an ensemble of protagonists, primarily focused on a loner hero who ends up working with others to accomplish a goal. He says of the recurring aspects of community, "Everything I write tends to turn into a superhero team, even if I didn't mean for it to. I always start off wanting to be solitary, because a) it's simpler, and b) that isolation is something that I relate to as a storyteller. And then no matter what, I always end up with a team". Examining a typical motif, he explained, "I tend to write about people who are helpless or out of control who then regain or retake control".
Thematically, Whedon's films and TV series feature several allusions to components like contemporary philosophy; existentialism, anti-authoritarianism, power, powerlessness, betrayal, revenge, deception, sexuality, sacrifice, misogyny, and feminism. Whedon gives his mother credit for inspiring the elements of feminism in his work. When asked how he could write so well for women, he answered "If you met my mom, you wouldn't ask". The character Kitty Pryde from the "X-Men" comics was an early model for Whedon's strong teenage girl characters, "If there's a bigger influence on Buffy than Kitty, I don't know what it was. She was an adolescent girl finding out she has great power and dealing with it". Kitty Pryde later played a central role in Whedon's run on "Astonishing X-Men". In response to why he writes such strong women characters, he famously replied, "Because you're still asking me that question".
Personal life.
Whedon is married to producer and co-founder of the “micro-studio” for indie films, Bellwether Pictures, Kai Cole. Together they have 2 children: son Arden Cole (b. 2002) and daughter Squire Cole.
Religious and philosophical views.
Whedon has identified himself as an atheist on multiple occasions. When interviewed by "The A.V. Club" on October 9, 2002, Whedon answered the question "Is there a God?" with one word: "No." The interviewer followed up with: "That's it, end of story, no?" Whedon answered: "Absolutely not. That's a very important and necessary thing to learn." In one of the "Buffy" DVD commentaries, Whedon comments that "I don't believe in the 'sky bully'", referring to God under a name coined by his colleague Tim Minear. In addition, during a question and answer session found on the "Serenity" DVD with fans of the "Firefly" series at Fox Studios in Sydney, he identifies himself as an atheist and absurdist.
Whedon has also spoken about existentialism. On the "Firefly" DVD set, Whedon explains in detail how existentialism, and more specifically the book "Nausea", by Jean-Paul Sartre, was used as a basis for the episode "Objects in Space". On this commentary he claimed interest in existential ideas and described the impact of "Nausea" on his early life. Whedon also identifies himself as a humanist. In April 2009, the Humanist Chaplaincy at Harvard University presented Whedon with the 2009 Outstanding Lifetime Achievement Award in Cultural Humanism.
Political views.
In July 2012, at the San Diego Comic-Con International, in response to one woman who noted the anti-corporate themes in many of his movies, and asked him to give his economic philosophy in 30 seconds or less, Whedon spoke out against both the socialism he was brought up listening to and capitalism as well, stating that "ultimately all these systems don't work". He went on to say that America is "turning into Tsarist Russia." 
Endorsing Barack Obama in the 2012 United States presidential election, Whedon satirically equated Mitt Romney's future as president with a zombie apocalypse, "Romney is ready to make the deep rollbacks in health care, education, social services, reproductive rights, that will guarantee poverty, unemployment, overpopulation, disease, rioting; all crucial elements in creating a nightmare zombie wasteland".
