Futebol Clube do Porto MH IH MH OM () (), commonly known as FC Porto, Porto, or FCP, is a Portuguese multi-sports club from the city of Porto, in the northern region of the country. Although they successfully compete in a number of different sports, FC Porto is mostly known for its association football team. Founded in Porto in September 28, 1893, it is one of the "Três Grandes" (Big Three, in English), football clubs in Portugal, with SL Benfica and Sporting CP being the other two clubs, FC Porto's biggest rivals. FC Porto's supporters are often called "Portistas" or "Dragões" (Dragons).
FC Porto is the most successful Portuguese football club in terms of total titles, with 72 titles, ahead of Benfica, which has 69 titles and ahead of Sporting CP, which has 45 titles. It is the second most successful Portuguese football club in domestic competitions, with 65 titles, behind Benfica, which has 67 titles, and ahead of Sporting, which has 44 titles, and the most successful Portuguese football club in international competitions, with 7 titles, ahead of Benfica, which has 2 titles, and ahead of Sporting and Braga which have 1 title.
Domestically, it holds the record of five Primeira Liga titles in a row, having won the Primeira Liga 26 times. Other national titles won by the club include the Championship of Portugal/Portuguese Cup 20 times and the Portuguese SuperCup 19 times. FC Porto has the distinction of being the second of only two teams in the history of the Primeira Liga to have completed an entire 30 game season unbeaten (in the 2010–11 season, with the other team being Benfica in the 1972–73 and 1977–78 seasons). In the 2010–11 season, FC Porto achieved the largest difference ever between champion and runners-up (21 points) in a 3 points per win system.
FC Porto is an internationally lauded team, with a national record of seven international titles: the 1986–87 European Cup, the 1987 Intercontinental Cup, the 1987 UEFA Super Cup (Portugal's only UEFA Super Cup trophy), thus becoming one of a few teams in the world to hold in possession three major international titles simultaneously and the only one in Portugal, the 2002–03 UEFA Cup (Portugal's only UEFA Cup trophy), the 2003–04 UEFA Champions League (Portugal's only UEFA Champions League trophy), the 2004 Intercontinental Cup (Portugal's only Intercontinental Cup trophies) and the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League (Portugal's only UEFA Europa League trophy).
In addition, FC Porto was runners-up in the 1983–84 European Cup Winners' Cup, in the 2003 UEFA Super Cup, in the 2004 UEFA Super Cup and in the 2011 UEFA Super Cup.
FC Porto was one of the founding members of the Primeira Liga in 1933, and, together with Benfica and Sporting, it has never been relegated from the First Division (Primeira Divisão, in Portuguese) of Portuguese football. FC Porto was also one of the founding members of the disbanded G-14, and is a member of the European Clubs Association (one of the founding members as well).
History.
The club was founded in 1893 by a wine merchant, António Nicolau de Almeida. The original stadium still exists (the field of constitution), currently serving the formation of the club, under the name Dragon Force.
FC Porto's nickname, "Dragões" (Dragons), as well as the name of their stadium, Estádio do Dragão (Dragon's Stadium), is related to the club's coat of arms. Until 1922 the club's emblem was a blue football with the letters FCP in white. That year, one of the club's players thought of combining that emblem with the city of Porto's coat of arms at the time. These arms, given by Queen Maria II in 1837 (subsequently altered in 1940), had a quartered shield, showing in the first and fourth quarter the arms of Portugal, and in the second and third quarter the Virgin Mary holding the Child Jesus. The crest of the Royal House of Portugal was a dragon holding the motto "Invicta" (undefeated), surrounded by the collar of the Order of the Tower and Sword, Portugal's highest honour, bestowed on the city by the queen after the undefeated siege of July 1832 – August 1833. Still today the official titles of the city of Porto are: "Antiga, Mui Nobre, Sempre Leal e Invicta" (ancient, very noble, always loyal and undefeated), and to this date, the city is often referred to in Portugal as "a (cidade) Invicta" (the undefeated ). The colours of the club may likewise be inspired by the historical colours of Portugal: until the overthrow of the Monarchy in 1910, the Portuguese flag was blue and white (instead of the modern green and red) with the coat of arms of Portugal in the centre, crowned by a royal crown.
The Dragon
The traditional symbol and crest of the House of Braganza is a green dragon,representing Saint George,[6 patron saint of Portugal. Because of the use of the dragon in heraldry by the Braganza and Pedro IV's link with Porto, a dragon was added to the old coat of arms of the municipality of Porto and is still a part of F.C. Porto's coat of arms, who are nicknamed "the dragons".
1984 Cup Winners' Cup.
When Pinto da Costa joined as president, FC Porto was the only club from the "Três Grandes" without European honours, but that quickly changed. Its first final in an international competition was played against Juventus for the 1983–84 European Cup Winners' Cup, however FC Porto lost, in a match that became known for the bad refereeing of Adolf Prokop . The coach was José Maria Pedroto.
First time champions of Europe in 1987.
Three years later, the team led by Artur Jorge, the name hand-picked by José Maria Pedroto, won its first European honour in a thrilling 2–1 victory over Bayern Munich in the European Cup 1986–87.
European Super Cup and Intercontinental Cup winners.
The following season, Porto won the European Super Cup against AFC Ajax, and the Intercontinental Cup against Peñarol, making it the first Portuguese winners of either cup. The coach was Tomislav Ivić.
1988–2002.
The following 16 years saw FC Porto as an average team – often in the final 16, but not progressing much further. The exception was in 1994, when Porto reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Champions League. The semi-final, decided on a single game, resulted in a heavy loss (3–0) at the hands of Johann Cruyff's FC Barcelona at the Nou Camp.
2003 UEFA Cup winners and first Treble.
In 2003, under the guidance of José Mourinho, FC Porto made a UEFA Cup run, concluding with a victory in the final against Celtic in Seville, Spain. It was FC Porto's first Treble (consisting in the Portuguese Liga, in the Portuguese Cup and in the UEFA Cup titles).
In this year, FC Porto lost the UEFA Super Cup against A.C. Milan.
2004 – Champions of Europe for the second time.
The following season set a greater challenge, but despite a slow start which included a 1–3 loss against Real Madrid, FC Porto never lost again in the Champions League, relegating Olympique de Marseille to the UEFA Cup (where they reached the final), drawing with Manchester United at Old Trafford in the dying minutes of play to go through on aggregate, and beating Olympique Lyonnais and Deportivo La Coruña. FC Porto beat AS Monaco 3–0 in the Final, played in Arena AufSchalke in Germany. FC Porto's UEFA Champions League winning line-up for their spectacular cup-run was: Vítor Baía, Nuno Valente, Ricardo Carvalho, Jorge Costa(c), Paulo Ferreira, Costinha, Maniche, Pedro Mendes, Deco (Pedro Emanuel), Derlei (Benni McCarthy), and Carlos Alberto (Dmitri Alenichev).
In this year, FC Porto lost the UEFA Super Cup against Valencia.
Second Intercontinental Cup triumph.
Even after the departure of José Mourinho to Chelsea, the club kept winning at the international level. On 12 December 2004, FC Porto won the last-held Intercontinental Cup, by beating Once Caldas from Colombia 8–7 in a penalty shoot-out. The coach was Víctor Fernández.
2011 UEFA Europa League winners and second Treble.
2011 saw the club winning a second Treble (consisting of the Portuguese Liga, Portuguese Cup (their third consecutive triumph) and UEFA Europa League titles). Under the guidance of André Villas-Boas (who became at 33 years old the youngest coach ever to win a European competition), FC Porto won the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League ensuring its second UEFA Cup/UEFA Europa League title. It was the first European final ever between two Portuguese clubs (FC Porto and Braga). Radamel Falcao also set a new goalscoring record of 17 goals in 14 matches during the campaign (Play-off round excluded), surpassing Jürgen Klinsmann's previous record. FC Porto however lost the UEFA Super Cup against F.C. Barcelona.
The following year, FC Porto won the Portuguese SuperCup for the third successive year and retained the Primeira Liga, for their 26th title.
Recent seasons.
<div id="notes gs1"/>1Includes all goals scored in Portuguese Liga.
<div id="notes gs2"/>2</ref>
Stadium.
Porto's home games are played at Estádio do Dragão () in Porto. Built in 2003 as a replacement for FC Porto's old ground, Estádio das Antas, and as a venue for UEFA Euro 2004, Estádio do Dragão has an all-seated capacity of 50,399. The stadium's name is derived from the presence of a dragon on the crest of the city of Porto during the Monarchy, which is also the nickname of Porto fans.
Designed by Manuel Salgado and built by the Grupo Amorim, it cost €97,755,318, of which €18,430,956 was supported by the Portuguese taxpayers. To support costs, each stand carries one or two sponsor names: EDP for the south end, TMN and SAPO ADSL in the east stands, PT and meo for the west stands, and finally Coca-Cola in the north stands. Away fans are placed in the left corner of the North stand, while Porto supporter groups (""SuperDragões"" and ""Colectivo Ultras 95"") are at each end, although initially both groups were in the South stand.
A new multi-sport arena near the stadium was recently completed to harbour F.C. Porto's other sports such as the handball and basketball teams, which are regular contenders for the national titles and the roller hockey section, amongst the best in the sport worldwide. Supporters and players of the club are nicknamed "Portistas" or "Dragões".
Museum.
FC Porto has more than 20 cups and trophies in exposition by its museum situated in the Dragão Stadium. The Museum is not yet open for public viewing, however it will open in a couple of months.
Commercially, the club has several stores called "Loja Azul" (Blue Store) scattered around the city, including two used with official supplier Nike. Since 1994, a merchandising goods fair called "Portomania" is organized during the pre-season. F.C. Porto publishes one of the older club-related publications in Europe: a monthly 60-page full-colour magazine called "Dragões" (Dragons) that has existed since the early 1980s.
Players.
Notable players.
For a list of notable former and present players see List of F.C. Porto players
Top goalscorers.
Top goalscorers in Portuguese League matches.
The Public Company.
After going public in 1998, FC Porto created several satellite companies around the club to improve its efficiency.
The FCPorto SAD is listed in the Euronext Lisbon stock exchange.
Management.
Below is listed a part of the club's governing bodies, along with its presidents.
Superleague Formula.
F.C. Porto has a team in the Superleague Formula race car series where football teams lend their name to cars. Alan Docking Racing and Hitech Racing have operated the car. Ex-Champ Car World Series driver Tristan Gommendy drove the Porto car for most races, winning two of them. Álvaro Parente drove the F.C. Porto car for one round at the Estoril Circuit, winning the race.
