Brittany Anne Snow (born March 9, 1986) is an American television and film actress and singer. She began her career as Susan "Daisy" Lemay on the CBS series "Guiding Light" (1998–2002), for which she won a Young Artist Award for Best Young Actress and was nominated for two other Young Artist Awards and a Soap Opera Digest Award. She then played the protagonist Meg Pryor on the NBC series "American Dreams" (2002–2005), for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award and three Teen Choice Awards. Her subsequent television roles have included Ariel Alderman on "Nip/Tuck" (2005) and Jenna Backstrom on "Harry's Law" (2011).
Her film roles include Kate Spencer in "John Tucker Must Die" (2006), Amber Von Tussle in "Hairspray" (2007), Donna Keppel in "Prom Night" (2008), Emma Gainsborough in "The Vicious Kind" (2009) and Chloe Beale in "Pitch Perfect" (2012).
Personal life.
Snow is of English descent, and was born and grew up in Tampa, Florida, where she attended Gaither High School. Her mother, Cindy Joanna (née Archer), works for Prentice Hall, and her father, John Thomas Snow, Sr., ran an insurance agency until retiring to organize Brittany's schedule. She has one half-brother, John Jr, and a half-sister, Holly. Snow has spoken openly about her battles with eating disorders.
Career.
Snow began modeling at the age of three in a print ad for Burdines. She was on CBS' "Guiding Light" for three years as troubled teen Susan "Daisy" Lemay. She played Meg Pryor on NBC's "American Dreams" and neo-Nazi high school student Ariel Alderman on the third season of "Nip/Tuck". In 2005, she appeared in "The Pacifier" with action star Vin Diesel.
In 2006, she was in the film "John Tucker Must Die" and voiced Naminé in the video game "Kingdom Hearts II" as well as Shizuku Tsukishima in the Studio Ghibli film "Whisper of the Heart", along with Ashley Tisdale. She also portrayed a young woman afflicted with bipolar disorder in the season seven finale of "".
She appeared in "Hairspray", a film adaptation of the Broadway musical, playing Amber Von Tussle, the daughter of Michelle Pfeiffer's character. She had already worked with the director of "Hairspray" (Adam Shankman) on the Disney film "The Pacifier". With her role in "Hairspray", her musical side is shown in several numbers, including a solo entitled "The New Girl In Town", a song previously cut from the Broadway musical version. She played the lead role in "Prom Night", which was released in April 2008. Snow appeared on the music video for "The Phrase That Pays" by The Academy Is... which was released in July 2007.
Snow is set to play the lead, Alyssa, in the film adaptation of "Clock Tower", to be released in 2012. She stars alongside Evan Ross in the cautionary thriller "96 Minutes".
In 2011, Snow appeared in the short-lived CBS romantic comedy "Mad Love".
Snow currently stars in the musical comedy film "Pitch Perfect" as acapella singer Chloe alongside Anna Kendrick, Anna Camp, Rebel Wilson and Skylar Astin. Snow recently appeared as a series regular in the first season of the legal drama "Harry's Law" as Jenna, which premiered on January 17, 2011, created by David E. Kelley. Snow returned as a recurring character in the series for season two.
