The is a portable game console produced by Nintendo. It is an autostereoscopic device capable of projecting stereoscopic 3D effects without the use of 3D glasses or additional accessories. Nintendo announced the device in March 2010 and officially unveiled it at E3 2010 on June 15, 2010. The console succeeds the Nintendo DS, featuring backward compatibility with older Nintendo DS and Nintendo DSi video games, and competes with the Sony PlayStation Vita handheld console.
The Nintendo 3DS was first released on February 26, 2011. Less than six months later on July 28, 2011, Nintendo announced a significant price reduction from US$249 to US$169 amid disappointing sales. The company offered ten free Nintendo Entertainment System games and ten free Game Boy Advance games from the Nintendo eShop to consumers who bought the system at the original launch price.
A partially redesigned version of the console, the Nintendo 3DS XL, was released on July 28, 2012. It features screens that are 90% larger than the original Nintendo 3DS.
History.
Nintendo began experimenting with 3D technology in the 1980s. The Famicom 3D System, an accessory consisting of liquid crystal shutter glasses, was Nintendo's first product that enabled stereoscopic 3D effects. Although very few titles were released, Nintendo helped design one – called "" – which was co-developed by Nintendo and HAL Laboratory and released in 1988. The Famicom 3D System failed to garner market interest and was never released outside of Japan.
Despite the limited success, Nintendo would press ahead with 3D development into the 1990s. Gunpei Yokoi, creator of the Game Boy handheld device and popular "Metroid" video game, developed a new 3D device for Nintendo called the Virtual Boy. It was a portable table-top system consisting of goggles and a controller that used a spinning disc to achieve full stereoscopic monochrome 3D. Released in 1995, Nintendo sold less than a million units of the Virtual Boy spawning only 22 compatible game titles, and was widely considered to be a commercial failure. Shigeru Miyamoto, known for his work on popular game franchises such as Mario and "The Legend of Zelda", commented in a 2011 interview that he felt conflicted about Yokoi's decision to use wire-frame models for 3D and suggested that the product may not have been marketed correctly. The failure of the Virtual Boy left many at Nintendo doubting the viability of 3D gaming. Despite this, Nintendo continued to investigate the incorporation of 3D technology into other products.
The Nintendo GameCube, released in 2001, was another 3D-capable system. With an LCD attachment, it could display true stereoscopic 3D, though only the launch title "Luigi's Mansion" was ever designed to utilize it. Due to the expensive nature surrounding the technology at the time, the GameCube's 3D functionality was never marketed to the public. Nintendo later experimented with a 3D LCD during development of the Game Boy Advance SP, but the idea was shelved after it failed to achieve satisfactory results. Another attempt was made in preparation for a virtual navigation guide to be used on the Nintendo DS at Shigureden, an interactive museum in Japan. Nintendo president Hiroshi Yamauchi encouraged additional 3D research in an effort to use the technology in the exhibition. Although the project fell short, Nintendo was able to collect valuable research on liquid crystal which would later aid in the development of the Nintendo 3DS.
Development.
Speculation on the development of a successor to the Nintendo DS began to ramp up in late 2009. At the time, Nintendo controlled as much as 68.3 percent of the handheld gaming market. In October 2009, tech tabloid Bright Side of News reported that Nvidia, a graphics processing unit (GPU) developer that recently made headway with its Tegra System-on-Chip processors, had been selected by Nintendo to develop hardware for their next generation portable game console. Later that month, speaking about the future for Nintendo's portable consoles, company president Satoru Iwata mentioned that while mobile broadband connectivity via subscription "doesn't fit Nintendo customers", he was interested in exploring options like Amazon's Whispernet found on the Amazon Kindle which provides free wireless connectivity to its customers for the sole purpose of browsing and purchasing content from the Kindle Store.
Nintendo has expressed interest in motion-sensing capabilities since the development of the original Nintendo DS, and an alleged comment by Satoru Iwata from a 2010 interview with Asahi Shimbun implied that the successor to the Nintendo DS would incorporate a motion sensor. The claim led to a minor dispute between the publication and Nintendo over its accuracy. In February 2010, video gaming website Computer and Video Games reported that a select "handful" of Japanese developers were in possession of software development kits for the Nintendo DS successor, with The Pokémon Company given special priority. According to their insider at an unspecified third-party development studio, the hardware features a "tilt" function that is similar to that of the iPhone, "but does a lot more".
On March 23, 2010, Nintendo officially announced the Nintendo 3DS handheld console, successor to the Nintendo DSi. According to industry analysts, the timing of Nintendo's original announcement, which had drawn attention away from the launch of the company's still-new Nintendo DSi XL handheld, was likely intended to preempt impending news leaks about the product by the Japanese press. In April 2010, a picture of a possible development build of the internal components of the 3DS was released as part of a U.S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) filing by Mitsumi. An analysis of the image showed that it was likely genuine as it featured components known to be used in the Nintendo DS line along with features of the 3DS that had not been announced like a 5:3 top screen, and a control nub similar to those used in Sony PSP systems.
E3 2010 Unveiling.
In June 2010, video gaming website IGN reported that according to "several developers who have experienced 3DS in its current form", the system possesses processing power that "far exceed the Nintendo Wii" and with 3D shaders, they could make games that "look close to current generation visuals on the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3". They also cited "several developer sources" as saying that the system does not use the Nvidia Tegra mobile chipset.
The system was officially revealed at Nintendo's conference at E3 2010 on June 15, 2010. The first game revealed was ', with several other titles from third parties also announced, including Square Enix with "Kingdom Hearts" and "Final Fantasy", Konami with ', Warner Bros. Interactive with a Batman title, Ubisoft with ', Capcom with "Resident Evil Revelations" and ', and Activision with DJ Hero. Other Nintendo titles were later revealed after the conference, such as "Mario Kart 7", "Animal Crossing", and remakes of "Star Fox 64" and "". The 3DS design shown at E3 was almost final, but subject to minor changes.
Pre-launch events.
On September 29, 2010, Nintendo of Japan announced the release date of the Nintendo 3DS in Japan to be on February 26, 2011. Furthermore, several additional features were announced: the inclusion of a "Mii Maker" (similar to the "Mii Channel" on the Wii), Virtual Console (including Game Boy, Game Boy Color, and "classic games" in 3D), a cradle for recharging the system's battery, multitasking, several included augmented reality games, an included 2G SD card, and stored game data, as well as the final names for the 3DS tag modes, StreetPass and SpotPass collectively. The colors available at launch were revealed to be Aqua Blue and Cosmo Black, and the launch price in Japan was revealed to be ¥25,000. The final physical design was also revealed at this event.
On January 19, 2011, Nintendo held two simultaneous press conferences in Amsterdam and New York City, where they revealed all of the features of the Nintendo 3DS. In North America, the release date was confirmed as March 27, 2011 with a retail price of $249.99. In Europe, the release date was announced as March 25, 2011, though Nintendo said that pricing would be up to retailers. Most retailers have priced the handheld between £219.99 and £229.99, though some retailers, such as Amazon, have lowered the price following Sony's announcement of the PSP's successor on January 26, 2011, with some retailers pricing the handheld at around £200 .
In February 2011, Nintendo held four hands-on events in the UK named "Believe Your Eyes". February 5 and 6 saw simultaneous events in London and Manchester, while the 12th and 13th saw events in Glasgow and Bristol. Invitations to the events were offered first to Club Nintendo members, then later to members of the public via an online registration form. Guests watched two brief performances and trailers, then were given time to play a selection of games on 3DS devices. Attendees were then allowed into a second room, containing further games to play (mainly augmented reality-based) and in-device videos.
In March, Nintendo held a few events in Australia at selected Westfield stores for people to try out the console, with a number of demos available.
Release.
Nintendo sold its entire allotment of 400,000 Nintendo 3DS units during its February 2011 release in Japan amid reports of queue outside retailers and pre-order sellouts. The 3DS sold 374,764 units during the launch weekend of 26 February. In that week 119,591 copies of "Professor Layton and the Miracle Mask" were sold, making it the best-selling 3DS launch title. It was also the third best-selling title from any system in that week.
Nintendo announced that first day sales for the Nintendo 3DS in the US were the largest of any Nintendo handheld device in history. According to the NPD Group, Nintendo sold just under 500,000 Nintendo 3DS units during the month of March 2011 in the US.
440,000 Nintendo 3DS units were sold in its first week of release.
In Europe, Nintendo sold 303,000 3DS units during its first two days of its release. In the UK 113,000 3DS units were sold during its opening weekend, making it Nintendo's most successful hardware launch in the country to this day.
As of March 31, 2011 the 3DS has sold 3.61 million units, short of the 4 million Nintendo was expecting.
Reports show that raw material costs for the Nintendo 3DS amount to US$101.
On July 14, 2011 a "Flare Red" Nintendo 3DS was released in Japan. In North America, the "Flare Red" version was released on September 9, 2011 under the name "Flame Red" to coincide with the release of Star Fox 64 3D. "Misty Pink" and "Ice White" 3DS models have also both been announced. In Australia "Flame Red" was released on September 22, 2011, "Lavender Pink" was released on November 17, 2011 and a limited edition Zelda 25th anniversary 3DS released on December 1, 2011. In Europe "Ice White" was bundled with Super Mario 3D Land and "Misty Pink" was bundled with Nintendogs + Cats, both released on November 18, 2011.
On July 28, 2011, Nintendo announced the Nintendo 3DS would be getting a price cut from $249.99 to $169.99 in North America, €249.99 to €169.99 in Europe, £229.99 to £130-150 in the United Kingdom, 25,000¥ to 15,000¥ in Japan, and $349.95 to $249.95 in Australia.
On January 30, 2012, Nintendo announced that the Pearl Pink Nintendo 3DS would release as a stand-alone item in the United States on February 10 for $169.99.
On March 1, 2012, Nintendo of Japan announced that a Cobalt Blue 3DS would be releasing in Japan on March 22. Cobalt Blue is also available in Japan as the bundle with which will also be released in North America.
In the summer of 2012, Club Nintendo ran a promotion in Japan, Europe, and North America where people who bought two games at once could order a special 3DS designed after Mario, Princess Peach, or Toad, respectively modified versions of the Flare Red, Pearl Pink, and Ice White 3DS systems.
On April 30, 2012, Nintendo announced that a new Midnight Purple Nintendo 3DS will be made available in the United States on May 20.
On May 12, 2012, the Aqua Blue 3DS was discontinued in Japan, while all the other colors remain. On August 19, 2012, Nintendo of America released the 3DS XL (3DS LL in Japan) the same day New Super Mario Bros. 2 released. It includes a 4GB SD card and is available in red, blue, silver, white, & the upcoming pink version. The Blue & Black version may even have Mario Kart 7 Pre-Installed.
Nintendo 3DS XL.
On November 1, 2012, North American retailer Gilt announced a pink and white 3DS XL bundle which could be purchased with either "Professor Layton and the Miracle Mask" or "Style Savvy: Trendsetters". Within a few weeks, the pink and white standalone version was available at major U.S. retailers such as Best Buy and Target.
In order to reduce costs, Nintendo did not include an AC Adapter with the Japanese and European versions. However, an AC Adapter was included with the North American, Australian, and Korean releases. A Nintendo DSi, DSi XL or 3DS AC Adapter (Model Code: WAP-002) is compatible with the 3DS XL, and will also be available for purchase separately or in a bundle with a 3DS XL Charging Cradle. The 3DS XL is intended to complement the original Nintendo 3DS console – not replace it – as both models remain in production.
As with the Nintendo DSi XL, the 3DS XL features larger screens and longer battery life than the original 3DS. The screens are 90% larger; the top screen is , while the bottom screen is . The battery life increased by 86%, while the weight of the console increased by 46% (336 grams). A 4 GB SD card comes packaged with the 3DS XL instead of the 2 GB card included with the 3DS. The 3DS XL does not work with the original Circle Pad Pro, but a compatible version of the accessory was released in Japan on November 15, 2012.
Features.
Cameras.
The Nintendo 3DS features three cameras: a single camera on the front/inside of the system that can capture standard 2D images and two rear facing cameras on the back/outside of the system which can be used together to capture 3D images. These photos can be edited with various effects such as props, 3D depth and colors. The outer camera and inner camera have an ability to zoom. The cameras can shoot pictures up to 0.3 mp. On December 6, 2011, a system update was released which allows players to take up to ten minutes of 3D video footage. In addition to the normal mode, which is the only footage type that allows sound, there are three types of footage that a player can take: stop motion, interval (a time lapse effect), and montage. The stop motion, interval, and montage modes still only allow a single video to be 10 minutes long.
Activity Log.
The Activity Log tracks game-play and keeps a record of which games have been played, and for how long, as well as physical activity, such as counting every step taken while carrying a 3DS or 3DS XL. The feature encourages walking more every day to earn Play Coins, at a maximum of 10 each day to a total of 300, which can be used with compatible games and applications to acquire special content and a variety of other benefits. Play Coins cannot be used in the Nintendo eShop. The same applies to the 3DS XL.
Augmented reality.
Several augmented reality games, collectively titled "AR Games" are included on the 3DS and 3DS XL with 6 paper cards that interact with the games. By scanning the QR codes shown on certain cards, real time graphics are augmented onto live footage. Aside from "AR Games", other titles, such as "" and "Nintendogs + Cats", include AR Cards which use these features. In addition, a new eShop application called Pokémon Dream Radar utilizes AR technology which allows players to use the system’s gyroscope and Augmented Reality capabilities along with its internal camera to find and catch monsters in the real world. Pokémon you catch this way can then be transferred over to Pokémon Black 2 or Pokémon White 2, the Nintendo DS games that are compatible with the 3DS.
Backward compatibility.
In addition to its own software, the Nintendo 3DS is backward compatible with Nintendo DS software, including DSi software. However, like the Nintendo DSi, the Nintendo 3DS is incompatible with DS software that requires the use of the Game Boy Advance port. Nintendo DS and DSi software cannot be played with 3D visuals on the 3DS. The original DS resolutions are displayed in a scaled and stretched fashion because the resolutions of the 3DS screens are larger than those of the DS. However, if the user holds down the START or SELECT buttons upon launching the DS software, the displays will be at the DS's native resolution, albeit smaller with black borders. If you do this method on the 3DS XL, the DS game can be played like the original 3DS.
Virtual Console.
It was announced at the Nintendo of Japan press event on September 29, 2010 that the 3DS will have a Virtual Console service with Game Boy, Game Boy Color games, as well as "classic" games in 3D. At the 2011 GDC Nintendo announced that TurboGrafx 16, and Game Gear games would be available for Virtual Console. Purchases are made through the Nintendo eShop using a cash-based system instead of a points-based system as used for the Wii and DSi. It was released on June 6 in North America and June 7, 2011 in Europe as part of a system update.
StreetPass and SpotPass modes.
The system supports multiplayer gameplay via a local wireless connection or over the Internet. Expanding upon the connectivity of the Nintendo DS, the Nintendo 3DS features an "always on" background connectivity system that trademarks suggested was named "CrossPass", which can automatically seek and connect to wireless network nodes such as Wi-Fi hotspots, sending and downloading information in the background while in sleep mode or while playing a game. In Nintendo's September 29 conference, the confirmed Western names of the SpotPass Tag Mode service would be StreetPass and SpotPass, with SpotPass being the ability for the 3DS to seek Wi-Fi signals and automatically download content while in sleep mode and StreetPass being the passive communication between 3DS systems held by users, an example being the sharing of Mii avatars.
During the 2011 Game Developers Conference, Nintendo of America president Reggie Fils-Aime announced that Nintendo has partnered with AT&T to provide free access to AT&T hotspots via the Nintendo 3DS. Users are able to connect to these hotspots.
The background connectivity allows users to exchange software content regardless of what software is currently in the console. Sharing content is stored in a "data slot" in the console. Using this data slot, Nintendo 3DS users can readily share and exchange content for multiple games at the same time, whenever they are connected, even when playing unrelated games. Using the console's background connectivity, a Nintendo 3DS in StreetPass Mode can automatically discover other 3DS units within range, establish a connection, and exchange content for mutually played games, all transparently and without requiring any user input, even when the console is dormant. For example, in "", if the user passes someone with the same software, they will initiate a battle to collect trophies from each other.
It can be customized to fit the user's preferences, including opting out of it altogether for selected software. One application being considered is functionality to "automatically acquire magazine and newspaper articles", similar to networked e-book reader applications. Other improvements to online functionality include how Friend Codes are implemented, with only one code necessary for each console, as opposed to the DS and Wii where individual Friend Codes are required for each piece of software.
SpotPass also makes uses of certified hotspots to access an application called "Nintendo Zone". In the Nintendo Zone app, users can see game trailers, game screenshots, and information about games. After the player leaves the hotspot, although the app remains on their Nintendo 3DS unit, it becomes unable to access it.
A successor to Nintendo DS's PictoChat application for the Nintendo 3DS has been announced by Nintendo via a streaming conference on October 21, 2011. The successor is called "Swapnote" (in North America) or "Nintendo Letter Box" (in Europe), and it became available as a free download in December 2011. This application allows users to send 3D pictures, sound, and scribbled messages to registered friends via either StreetPass or SpotPass. An updated version of Swapnote, which allows users to change the color of their writing, is now available.
Video content.
The system supports 3D movie and video playback capability. During E3 2010, Nintendo demonstrated 3D trailers for DreamWorks' "How to Train Your Dragon", Warner Bros' ', and Disney's film "Tangled" on the 3DS. On September 29, 2010, Nintendo of Japan announced plans to form a partnership with Fuji TV to distribute free 3D video content to Nintendo 3DS owners in Japan. On January 19, 2011, Nintendo of Europe announced during a press conference plans to partner with Eurosport and BSkyB to distribute 3D sports content to the Nintendo 3DS. A deal with Aardman Animations was also made in early 2012 to bring fifteen exclusive 3D episodes of Shaun the Sheep to the Nintendo 3DS European market starting March 7, 2012. A firmware update for Nintendo 3DS systems in North America on March 24, 2011, included a 3D version of the music video "White Knuckles" from OK Go. The first full-length 3D film to be released for the 3DS is ', which is included with "".
Nintendo Video launched in Australia, Europe, and Japan on July 13, 2011, featuring episodes of "Oscar's Oasis" and "Magic Tricks for your Nintendo 3DS" in 3D. The service launched in North America on July 21, 2011, featuring a 3D trailer for , an introduction to Nintendo Video, and two short films - Sunday Jog and Dinosaur Office. The service updates periodically through SpotPass, automatically adding and deleting content from the console.
Netflix streaming video service was released on the Nintendo 3DS in North America on July 14, 2011.
A system update on December 7, 2011, added Interval Shot, Frame Pick, and the ability to record up to 10 minutes of 3D video. Interval Shot allows sequences of images to be recorded in short-timed intervals to create time-lapse photography. Frame Pick puts still images together to create stop motion animation.
Nintendo announced on October 21, 2011, that Hulu Plus would be released on the Nintendo 3DS by the end of the year. On February 16, 2012, following the debut of Hulu on the Wii, Nintendo reiterated the announcement this time claiming it would be available on the 3DS sometime in 2012.
Internet browser.
The Nintendo 3DS Internet Browser was made available in system update 2.0.0 on June 6 (NA) and 7 (AUS,P, and EP), 2011.
Netflix.
The Netflix application was added to the North American Nintendo 3DS eShop on July 14, 2011. Netflix users are able to pause streaming video on the 3DS and resume on other Netflix-enabled devices. Only 2D content is available through the service.
Mii.
Miis are available on the system Nintendo 3DS & Nintendo 3DS XL. Mii Maker will help users create a new Mii or import an existing Mii from the Wii or the Wii U, 3DS-created Miis & 3DS XL-created Miis can be exported back to the Wii even with additional character parts. 3DS-created Miis & 3DS XL-created Miis are also able to be exported to the Wii U.
Mii Maker also allows users to create a Mii from a photo taken by one of the cameras. Miis can also be loaded by capturing special QR codes with one of the cameras. There is also a StreetPass Mii Plaza to house all the Miis the player has gathered in StreetPass or SpotPass Mode.
Miiverse.
Miiverse is Nintendo's new social network system. It will allow players to share achievements and provide status updates. Users will be represented by their Mii on Miiverse. Miiverse will originally launch with Wii U, but Nintendo has confirmed that it will be available for the Nintendo 3DS & 3DS XL as well as web enabled personal computers and mobile devices at a later date.
Nintendo Network.
The Nintendo 3DS is the first system to support Nintendo's new network infrastructure known as Nintendo Network. Nintendo Network succeeds the previous Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection service. Nintendo outlined that the Nintendo Wi-Fi Connection was created as a way for developers to experiment with their own network infrastructures and concepts, whereas the Nintendo Network is fully unified network service. On the Nintendo 3DS, Nintendo Network allowed developers to create games with universal multiplayer without the need to enter Friend Codes for each person in a multiplayer game. This makes it much easier and more flexible for players to play with each other over the internet. Despite this, access to Nintendo Network accounts remain absent from the 3DS system.
Hardware.
The Nintendo 3DS is based on a custom PICA200 graphics processor from a Japanese start-up Digital Media Professionals (DMP). It has two screens; the top screen is a 5:3 3D screen with a resolution of 800×240 pixels (400×240 pixels per eye, WQVGA) that is able to produce an autostereoscopic three-dimensional effect (one without 3D glasses) using a parallax barrier display, while the bottom screen is a 4:3 non-3D resistive touch panel with a resolution of 320×240 pixels (QVGA). The 3DS weighs approximately and, when closed, is wide, broad, and thick.
The system features several additions to the design of the original DS, including a slider on the side of the device that adjusts the intensity of the 3D effect, a round nub analog input called the "Circle Pad", an accelerometer, and a gyroscope. The 3DS has two cameras on the outside of the device, capable of taking 3D photos and capturing 3D video, as well as a camera positioned above the top screen on the inside of the device which faces the player, capable of taking 2D photos and capturing 2D video; all cameras have a resolution of 640×480 pixels (0.3 megapixels). The system supports 2.4 GHz 802.11b/g Wi-Fi connectivity with enhanced security WPA2.
At launch, the Nintendo 3DS cards hold up to 2GB of game data and look almost exactly the same as those of the current DS. However, there is a small tab jutting out on the one side, which prevents 3DS cards from being inserted into a Nintendo DS.
On the issue of copyright infringement, game developer THQ claims that the Nintendo 3DS features sophisticated copy protection technology which Nintendo believes is able to significantly curb video game copyright infringement, which is claimed to have had increasingly depressed the handheld market with the proliferation of cheap flash memory and the rise in file sharing.
The system comes in color variations "Aqua Blue" and "Cosmo Black", as well as "Flame Red" (named "Metallic Red" in Europe), on July 14, 2011 in Japan, September 9, 2011 in North America and September 22, 2011 in Australia. Another color is the "Pearl Pink" color ("Coral Pink" in Europe), released on October 20, 2011 in Japan. and November 27, 2011 in North America On October 6, 2011 a fifth color was announced - the "Ice White" edition was released in Japan on November 3, 2011 and released in Europe on December 2 bundled along with 'Super Mario 3D Land'. On November 8, 2011 Nintendo of Europe announced that a limited edition 3DS for would release on November 25, 2011. The limited Edition Zelda 3DS released in North America on November 25, 2011. On April 30, 2012 Nintendo of America announced a Midnight Purple 3DS to release on May 20 along with the game Mario Tennis Open On May 11, 2012, Nintendo announced that it would be discontinuing Aqua Blue in Japan and was replaced with the Cobalt Blue model on May 17, 2012. On July 5, 2012 Nintendo of Taiwan and Nintendo of Hong Kong announced Cerulean Blue and Shimmer Pink 3DS systems to release on September 28, 2012. On August 19, 2012, the 3DS XL was made available in the United States with a 4GB SD card and looks almost the same as the original 3DS. The 3DS XL has a smaller overall form factor than the DSi XL, but does in fact have Nintendo's largest handheld LCD screen to date.
Circle Pad Pro.
Pictures of the device first appeared in Famitsu, which explained that the add-on would add a second analog joystick and extra set of shoulder buttons and would be bundled with "Monster Hunter Tri G". It will also include a black wrist strap similar to the Wii. The first game to support it was "Monster Hunter Tri G" in Japan and ' in Europe and North America. Other titles announced to be compatible with the slide pad are ' (Japan version only), ', ', "" and Dynasty Warriors VS.
The Circle Pad Pro's release schedule was the following: in Japan on December 10, 2011; on January 27, 2012 in Europe; on February 2, 2012 in Australia; and in North America on February 7, 2012. The device is not region-locked.
An updated version of the Circle Pad Pro compatible with the 3DS XL was released in Japan on November 15, 2012. Nintendo has yet to announce a release date for Europe, North America, and other locations worldwide.
Nintendo 3DS Ambassador Program.
In response to lower-than-anticipated sales figures, Nintendo cut the price of the 3DS worldwide by almost a third in August 2011. In an effort to compensate those who had paid the original price, the company introduced the "Nintendo 3DS Ambassadors Program", through which existing 3DS owners were eligible to download ten NES games and ten Game Boy Advance games at no extra cost. Nintendo further stated that the NES Ambassador titles may see a future release to the general public on the Nintendo eShop, while there were no plans to make the Game Boy Advance Ambassador titles similarly available.
The 10 NES games were released on August 31, 2011.
The 10 Game Boy Advance games were released in North America on December 16, 2011.
Possible health concerns.
Nintendo has publicly stated that the 3D mode of the 3DS is not intended for use by children ages six and younger, citing possible harm to their vision. Nintendo suggests that younger players use the device's 2D mode instead, although the American Optometric Association has assured parents that 3D gaming in moderation would not be harmful for children. Additionally, the 3DS may help in screening children before the age of 6 who have depth related vision problems according to Dr. Michael Duenas, associate director for health sciences and policy for the American Optometric Association, and Dr. Joe Ellis, the president of the optometrists' association. However, Dr. David Hunter, a pediatric ophthalmologist affiliated with the American Academy of Ophthalmology believes that it is largely speculative whether a child who has problems perceiving depth in real life would react to a 3DS in any way that parents would recognize as indicating any problems with depth perception. Nintendo's vague warning, that specialists believe "there is a possibility that 3-D images which send different images to the left and right eye could affect the development of vision in small children," was not specifically backed up by any scientific evidence, leading Duenas to believe it is motivated by preventing possible liability rather than safeguarding against realistic harm.
Nintendo has stated that a parental control involving a PIN will allow parents to disable autostereoscopic effects. Playing games in 3D has been suspected of causing headaches among some gamers. The dizziness experienced by some users may be explained by the headaches that watchers of 3D movies have similarly experienced, which is believed to be due to confusion caused by a lack of visual cues that humans use to perceive depth in their everyday environment.
Reception.
The Nintendo 3DS hardware received positive reviews at launch. IGN called its hardware design a "natural evolution of the Nintendo DSi system." CNET praised the device's 3D effect, while IGN called it "impressively sharp and clean", and impressively superior to its predecessors, although it was noted that the 3D effect only worked if the system was held at the right distance and angle. A common complaint was the 3DS's battery life; Engadget reported to get 3 hours of battery life from the system, while IGN reported 2 to 4.5 hours of play.
The 3DS XL's battery lasts 3.5 to 6.5 hours.
The Nintendo 3DS XL also received positive reviews at launch. Kotaku mentioned it as "possibly the best portable gaming device ever... a well-designed machine..." while The Verge called it "the best portable gaming buy around right now."
Sales.
Prior to its launch, Amazon UK announced that the system was their most pre-ordered video game system ever. Nintendo of America announced that the number of Nintendo 3DS pre-orders were double the number of pre-orders for the Wii.
The 3DS is also the fastest selling console in Australia, with 200,000 units sold through 37 weeks of availability. The 3DS overtook sales of all other consoles, handheld and home, to claim this record. As of August 2012, the 3DS has sold over 7 million units in Japan.
