Jenna Lee Dewan-Tatum ("née" Dewan; born December 3, 1980) is an American actress and dancer. She appeared in the movies "Step Up" and "The Playboy Club" and has been a background dancer for artists including Missy Elliott, Janet Jackson, and Christina Aguilera. Dewan is the co-founder of 33andOut Productions and Iron Horse Entertainment.
Early life.
Dewan was born in Hartford, Connecticut, the daughter of Nancy Lee (née Bursch) and Darryll Dewan, who was a running back on the 1972 Notre Dame football team. Her father is of Lebanese and Polish descent and her mother is of German and English ancestry. Her parents divorced when Dewan was young and her mother remarried Claude Brooks Smith. During high school at Grapevine High School in Grapevine, Texas, Dewan was a varsity cheerleader. She graduated in 1999 and was voted prom queen her senior year. She went to USC and was a member of the California Gamma Chapter of Pi Beta Phi.
Career.
Dancing.
Prior to her acting career, Dewan was a background dancer, working with singers such as Clinton Troupe, 'N Sync, Sean Combs, Toni Braxton, Celine Dion, Pink, Missy Elliott, Ricky Martin and Billy Crawford. In 2001 she appeared in Janet Jackson's music video "All for You" and toured with Jackson on her All for You Tour. Dewan appeared in a bit role as a backup dancer in the film "The Hot Chick". Dewan was also featured in Christina Aguilera's music video for the single "Not Myself Tonight" in 2010.
Acting.
In 2004 Dewan made her acting debut on the Fox sitcom television series "Quintuplets". Dewan has guest-appeared on "The Young and the Restless", "Joey" and "Melrose Place".
In 2005 Dewan portrayed the protagonist in the independent low-budget supernatural horror film "Tamara". The film was an initial financial and critical failure. In 2006 Dewan made appearances in "The Grudge 2" and "Take the Lead". That same year Dewan starred as the female lead in the dance drama "Step Up" as Nora Clark, a dance student partnered with a troubled student who is sent to spend his community service as a janitor. The film made $119 million worldwide. 
In August 2008 Dewan starred in the Lifetime made-for-television film "" which follows five rule-breaking teens. Dewan portrayed the role of disciplinarian Coach Emma Carr. In November 2009 Dewan appeared in the straight-to-DVD comedy "American Virgin" alongside Rob Schneider.
In August 2010 Dewan was cast in the ensemble crime heist film "Setup". Production began in November 2010 in Grand Rapids, Michigan. The film was to be released theatrically in July 2011 but was released straight to DVD in September.
In March 2011 Dewan was cast in the NBC pilot of "The Playboy Club". In May 2011 NBC picked up the series for a full season. Dewan portrayed the role of Bunny Janie, a provocative Playboy bunny who works at a Playboy Club in Chicago in 1961. The series premiered on September 19 to 5.2 million viewers and mixed reviews from critics. Due to low ratings, NBC cancelled the series after just three episodes in October 2011.
Dewan appeared in the romantic-comedy film "10 Years", produced by her husband Channing Tatum. The film was released on September 14, 2012.
Dewan will star in upcoming Lifetime series "Witches of East End".
33andOut Productions.
Along with friends Reid Carolin, Adam Martingano, Brett Rodriguez and husband Channing Tatum, Dewan started a production company called 33andOut Productions. Their first production is a documentary called "Earth Made of Glass" that follows Rwandan President Paul Kagame and genocide survivor Jean-Pierre Sagahutu. It premiered at the 2010 Tribeca Film Festival.
Personal life.
In 2006, Dewan met actor Channing Tatum on the set of their movie "Step Up". They began dating shortly after filming had finished. The couple got engaged in early September 2008 in Maui. On July 11, 2009, they were married on the grounds of Church Estates Vineyards in Malibu, California. In December 2012, the couple announced that they were expecting their first child.
Dewan is an animal rights activist. She is a member of PETA and a vegan.
