In quantum mechanics, the uncertainty principle is any of a variety of mathematical inequalities asserting a fundamental limit to the precision with which certain pairs of physical properties of a particle, such as position "x" and momentum "p", can be known simultaneously. The more precisely the position of some particle is determined, the less precisely its momentum can be known, and vice versa. The original heuristic argument that such a limit should exist was given by Werner Heisenberg in 1927, after whom it is sometimes named the Heisenberg principle. A more formal inequality relating the standard deviation of position σx and the standard deviation of momentum σp was derived by Earle Hesse Kennard later that year (and independently by Hermann Weyl in 1928),
where "ħ" is the reduced Planck constant.
Historically, the uncertainty principle has been confused with a somewhat similar effect in physics, called the observer effect, which notes that measurements of certain systems cannot be made without affecting the systems. Heisenberg offered such an observer effect at the quantum level (see below) as a physical "explanation" of quantum uncertainty. It has since become clear, however, that the uncertainty principle is inherent in the properties of all wave-like systems, and that it arises in quantum mechanics simply due to the matter wave nature of all quantum objects. Thus, "the uncertainty principle actually states a fundamental property of quantum systems, and is not a statement about the observational success of current technology". It must be emphasized that "measurement" does not mean only a process in which a physicist-observer takes part, but rather any interaction between classical and quantum objects regardless of any observer.
Since the uncertainty principle is such a basic result in quantum mechanics, typical experiments in quantum mechanics routinely observe aspects of it. Certain experiments, however, may deliberately test a particular form of the uncertainty principle as part of their main research program. These include, for example, tests of number-phase uncertainty relations in superconducting or quantum optics systems. Applications are for developing extremely low noise technology such as that required in gravitational-wave interferometers.
Introduction.
The uncertainty principle can be interpreted in either the wave mechanics or matrix mechanics formalisms of quantum mechanics. Although the principle is more visually intuitive in the wave mechanics formalism, it was first derived and is more easily generalized in the matrix mechanics formalism. We will attempt to motivate the principle in the two frameworks.
Mathematically, the uncertainty relation between position and momentum arises because the expressions of the wavefunction in the two corresponding bases are Fourier transforms of one another (i.e., position and momentum are conjugate variables). A similar tradeoff between the variances of Fourier conjugates arises wherever Fourier analysis is needed, for example in sound waves. A pure tone is a sharp spike at a single frequency. Its Fourier transform gives the shape of the sound wave in the time domain, which is a completely delocalized sine wave. In quantum mechanics, the two key points are that the position of the particle takes the form of a matter wave, and momentum is its Fourier conjugate, assured by the de Broglie relation formula_1, where formula_2 is the wavenumber.
In the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, any pair of non-commuting self-adjoint operators representing observables are subject to similar uncertainty limits. An eigenstate of an observable represents the state of the wavefunction for a certain measurement value (the eigenvalue). For example, if a measurement of an observable formula_3 is taken then the system is in a particular eigenstate formula_4 of that observable. The particular eigenstate of the observable formula_3 may not be an eigenstate of another observable formula_6. If this is so, then it does not have a single associated measurement as the system is not in an eigenstate of the observable.
Wave mechanics interpretation.
According to the de Broglie hypothesis, every object in the universe is a wave, a situation which gives rise to this phenomenon. The position of the particle is described by a wave function formula_7. The time-independent wave function of a single-moded plane wave of wavenumber "k"0 or momentum "p"0 is
The Born rule states that this should be interpreted as a probability density function in the sense that the probability of finding the particle between "a" and "b" is
In the case of the single-moded plane wave, formula_10 is a uniform distribution. In other words, the particle position is extremely uncertain in the sense that it could be essentially anywhere along the wave packet. Consider a wave function that is a sum of many waves, however, we may write this as
where "A""n" represents the relative contribution of the mode "p""n" to the overall total. The figures to the right show how with the addition of many plane waves, the wave packet can become more localized. We may take this a step further to the continuum limit, where the wave function is an integral over all possible modes
with formula_13 representing the amplitude of these modes and is called the wave function in momentum space. In mathematical terms, we say that formula_13 is the "Fourier transform" of formula_15 and that "x" and "p" are conjugate variables. Adding together all of these plane waves comes at a cost, namely the momentum has become less precise, having become a mixture of waves of many different momenta.
One way to quantify the precision of the position and momentum is the standard deviation σ. Since formula_10 is a probability density function for position, we calculate its standard deviation.
We improved the precision of the position, i.e. reduced σx, by using many plane waves, thereby weakening the precision of the momentum, i.e. increased σp. Another way of stating this is that σx and σp have an inverse relationship or are at least bounded from below. This is the uncertainty principle, the exact limit of which, is the Kennard bound. Click the "show" button below to see a semi-formal derivation of the Kennard inequality using wave mechanics.
Matrix mechanics interpretation.
In matrix mechanics, observables such as position and momentum are represented by self-adjoint operators. When considering pairs of observables, one of the most important quantities is the "commutator". For a pair of operators formula_17 and formula_18, we may define their commutator as
In the case of position and momentum, the commutator is the canonical commutation relation
The physical meaning of the non-commutativity can be understood by considering the effect of the commutator on position and momentum eigenstates. Let formula_21 be a right eigenstate of position with a constant eigenvalue "x"0. By definition, this means that formula_22 Applying the commutator to formula_21 yields
where formula_25 is simply the identity operator. Suppose for the sake of proof by contradiction that formula_21 is also a right eigenstate of momentum, with constant eigenvalue "p"0. If this were true, then we could write
On the other hand, the canonical commutation relation requires that
This implies that no quantum state can be simultaneously both a position and a momentum eigenstate. When a state is measured, it is projected onto an eigenstate in the basis of the observable. For example, if a particle's position is measured, then the state exists at least momentarily in a position eigenstate. This means that the state is "not" in a momentum eigenstate, however, but rather exists as a sum of multiple momentum basis eigenstates. In other words the momentum must be less precise. The precision may be quantified by the standard deviations, defined by
As with the wave mechanics interpretation above, we see a tradeoff between the precisions of the two, given by the uncertainty principle.
Robertson–Schrödinger uncertainty relations.
The most common general form of the uncertainty principle is the "Robertson uncertainty relation". For an arbitrary Hermitian operator formula_31, we can associate a standard deviation
where the brackets formula_33 indicate an expectation value. For a pair of operators formula_17 and formula_18, we may define their "commutator" as
In this notation, the Robertson uncertainty relation is given by
The Robertson uncertainty relation immediately follows from a slightly stronger inequality, the "Schrödinger uncertainty relation",
where we have introduced the "anticommutator",
we let formula_39 and formula_40 and substitute these into the equation above to get
The inner product formula_41 is written out explicitly as
and using the fact that formula_17 and formula_18 are Hermitian operators, we find
Similarly it can be shown that
formula_50
Thus we have
and
We now substitute the above two equations above back into Eq. () and get
Substituting the above into Eq. () we get the Schrödinger uncertainty relation
This proof has a small issue related to the Hermiticity of "A" when the state is an eigenstate of "B". This issue can be overcome by using a variational method for the proof.
Since the Robertson and Schrödinger relations are for general operators, the relations can be applied to any two observables to obtain specific uncertainty relations. A few of the most common relations found in the literature are given below.
but it was not always obvious what formula_74 precisely meant. The problem is that the time at which the particle has a given state is not an operator belonging to the particle, it is a parameter describing the evolution of the system. As Lev Landau once joked "To violate the time-energy uncertainty relation all I have to do is measure the energy very precisely and then look at my watch!"
Nevertheless, Einstein and Bohr understood the heuristic meaning of the principle. A state that only exists for a short time cannot have a definite energy. To have a definite energy, the frequency of the state must accurately be defined, and this requires the state to hang around for many cycles, the reciprocal of the required accuracy.
For example, in spectroscopy, excited states have a finite lifetime. By the time-energy uncertainty principle, they do not have a definite energy, and each time they decay the energy they release is slightly different. The average energy of the outgoing photon has a peak at the theoretical energy of the state, but the distribution has a finite width called the "natural linewidth". Fast-decaying states have a broad linewidth, while slow decaying states have a narrow linewidth.
The broad linewidth of fast decaying states makes it difficult to accurately measure the energy of the state, and researchers have even used detuned microwave cavities to slow down the decay-rate, to get sharper peaks. The same linewidth effect also makes it difficult to measure the rest mass of fast decaying particles in particle physics. The faster the particle decays, the less certain is its mass.
One "false" formulation of the energy-time uncertainty principle says that measuring the energy of a quantum system to an accuracy formula_75 requires a time interval formula_76. This formulation is similar to the one alluded to in Landau's joke, and was explicitly invalidated by Y. Aharonov and D. Bohm in 1961. The time formula_77 in the uncertainty relation is the time during which the system exists unperturbed, not the time during which the experimental equipment is turned on, whereas the position in the other version of the principle refers to where the particle has some probability to be and not where the observer might look.
Another common misconception is that the energy-time uncertainty principle says that the conservation of energy can be temporarily violated – energy can be "borrowed" from the universe as long as it is "returned" within a short amount of time. Although this agrees with the "spirit" of relativistic quantum mechanics, it is based on the false axiom that the energy of the universe is an exactly known parameter at all times. More accurately, when events transpire at shorter time intervals, there is a greater uncertainty in the energy of these events. Therefore it is not that the conservation of energy is "violated" when quantum field theory uses temporary electron-positron pairs in its calculations, but that the energy of quantum systems is not known with enough precision to limit their behavior to a single, simple history. Thus the influence of "all histories" must be incorporated into quantum calculations, including those with much greater or much less energy than the mean of the measured/calculated energy distribution.
where formula_65 is the standard deviation of the energy operator in the state formula_61, formula_67 stands for the standard deviation of formula_6. Although, the second factor in the left-hand side has dimension of time, it is different from the time parameter that enters Schrödinger equation. It is a lifetime of the state formula_61 with respect to the observable formula_6. In other words, this is the time after which the expectation value formula_71 changes appreciably.-->
Examples.
Quantum harmonic oscillator stationary states.
Using the rules for creation and annihilation operators on the eigenstates of the QHO,
we may show that the variances are
The product of these standard deviations is therefore
In particular, the Kennard bound is saturated for the ground state formula_96, where the probability density is the normal distribution.
Quantum harmonic oscillator with Gaussian initial condition.
In a quantum harmonic oscillator of characteristic angular frequency ω, place a state that is offset from the bottom of the potential by some displacement "x"0 as
where Ω describes the width of the initial state but need not be the same as ω. Through integration over the propagator, we can solve for the -dependent solution. After many cancelations, the probability densities reduce to
where we have used the notation formula_100 to denote a normal distribution of mean μ and variance σ2. Copying the variances above and applying trigonometric identities, we can write the product of the standard deviations as
From the relations
we can conclude
Coherent states.
A coherent state is a right eigenstate of the annihilation operator,
which may be represented in terms of Fock states as
One expects that the factor formula_106 may be replaced by formula_107
which is only known if either formula_108 or formula_109 is convex.
Hardy's uncertainty principle.
The mathematician G. H. Hardy formulated the following uncertainty principle: it is not possible for "f" and formula_110 to both be "very rapidly decreasing." Specifically, if "f" is in "L"2(R),
is such that
and
then, if formula_114 while if formula_115 then there is a polynomial formula_116 of degree formula_117 such that
This was later improved as follows: if formula_119 is such that
then
where formula_116 is a polynomial of degree formula_123 and formula_3 is a real formula_125 positive definite matrix.
This result was stated in Beurling's complete works without proof and proved in Hörmander (the case formula_126) and Bonami, Demange, and Jaming for the general case. Note that Hörmander–Beurling's version implies the case formula_127 in Hardy's Theorem while the version by Bonami–Demange–Jaming covers the full strength of Hardy's Theorem.
Theorem. If a tempered distribution formula_129 is such that
and
then
for some convenient polynomial formula_116 and real positive definite matrix formula_3 of type formula_125.
History.
Werner Heisenberg formulated the Uncertainty Principle at Niels Bohr's institute in Copenhagen, while working on the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics.
In 1925, following pioneering work with Hendrik Kramers, Heisenberg developed matrix mechanics, which replaced the ad-hoc old quantum theory with modern quantum mechanics. The central assumption was that the classical concept of motion does not fit at the quantum level, and that electrons in an atom do not travel on sharply defined orbits. Rather, the motion is smeared out in a strange way: the Fourier transform of time only involve those frequencies that could be seen in quantum jumps.
Heisenberg's paper did not admit any unobservable quantities like the exact position of the electron in an orbit at any time; he only allowed the theorist to talk about the Fourier components of the motion. Since the Fourier components were not defined at the classical frequencies, they could not be used to construct an exact trajectory, so that the formalism could not answer certain overly precise questions about where the electron was or how fast it was going.
In March 1926, working in Bohr's institute, Heisenberg realized that the non-commutativity implies the uncertainty principle. This implication provided a clear physical interpretation for the non-commutativity, and it laid the foundation for what became known as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Heisenberg showed that the commutation relation implies an uncertainty, or in Bohr's language a complementarity. Any two variables that do not commute cannot be measured simultaneously—the more precisely one is known, the less precisely the other can be known. Heisenberg wrote:Heisenberg, W., "Die Physik der Atomkerne", Taylor & Francis, 1952, p. 30.</ref>
where "ħ" = "h"/2π, and "σ""x", "σ""p" are the standard deviations of position and momentum. Heisenberg only proved relation (2) for the special case of Gaussian states.
Terminology and translation.
Throughout the main body of his original 1927 paper, written in German, Heisenberg used the word, "Unbestimmtheit" ("indeterminacy"), to describe the basic theoretical principle. Only in the endnote did he switch to the word, "Unsicherheit" ("uncertainty"). When the English-language version of Heisenberg's textbook, "The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory", was published in 1930, however, the translation "uncertainty" was used, and it became the more commonly used term in the English language thereafter.
Heisenberg's microscope.
The principle is quite counter-intuitive, so the early students of quantum theory had to be reassured that naive measurements to violate it, were bound always to be unworkable. One way in which Heisenberg originally illustrated the intrinsic impossibility of violating the uncertainty principle is by using an imaginary microscope as a measuring device. 
He imagines an experimenter trying to measure the position and momentum of an electron by shooting a photon at it.
The combination of these trade-offs imply that no matter what photon wavelength and aperture size are used, the product of the uncertainty in measured position and measured momentum is greater than or equal to a lower limit, which is (up to a small numerical factor) equal to Planck's constant. Heisenberg did not care to formulate the uncertainty principle as an exact limit (which is elaborated below), and preferred to use it instead, as a heuristic quantitative statement, correct up to small numerical factors, which makes the radically new noncommutativity of quantum mechanics inevitable.
Critical reactions.
The Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics and Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle were, in fact, seen as twin targets by detractors who believed in an underlying determinism and realism. According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, there is no fundamental reality that the quantum state describes, just a prescription for calculating experimental results. There is no way to say what the state of a system fundamentally is, only what the result of observations might be.
Albert Einstein believed that randomness is a reflection of our ignorance of some fundamental property of reality, while Niels Bohr believed that the probability distributions are fundamental and irreducible, and depend on which measurements we choose to perform. Einstein and Bohr debated the uncertainty principle for many years. Some experiments within the first decade of the twenty-first century have cast doubt on how extensively the uncertainty principle applies.
Einstein's slit.
Bohr's response was that the wall is quantum mechanical as well, and that to measure the recoil to accuracy formula_138 the momentum of the wall must be known to this accuracy before the particle passes through. This introduces an uncertainty in the position of the wall and therefore the position of the slit equal to formula_139, and if the wall's momentum is known precisely enough to measure the recoil, the slit's position is uncertain enough to disallow a position measurement.
A similar analysis with particles diffracting through multiple slits is given by Richard Feynman.
Einstein's box.
Bohr was present when Einstein proposed the thought experiment which has become known as Einstein's box. Einstein argued that "Heisenberg's uncertainty equation implied that the uncertainty in time was related to the uncertainty in energy, the product of the two being related to Planck's constant." Consider, he said, an ideal box, lined with mirrors so that it can contain light indefinitely. The box could be weighed before a clockwork mechanism opened an ideal shutter at a chosen instant to allow one single photon to escape. "We now know, explained Einstein, precisely the time at which the photon left the box." "Now, weigh the box again. The change of mass tells the energy of the emitted light. In this manner, said Einstein, one could measure the energy emitted and the time it was released with any desired precision, in contradiction to the uncertainty principle." 
Bohr spent a sleepless night considering this argument, and eventually realized that it was flawed. He pointed out that if the box were to be weighed, say by a spring and a pointer on a scale, "since the box must move vertically with a change in its weight, there will be uncertainty in its vertical velocity and therefore an uncertainty in its height above the table. ... Furthermore, the uncertainty about the elevation above the earth's surface will result in an uncertainty in the rate of the clock," because of Einstein's own theory of gravity's effect on time.
"Through this chain of uncertainties, Bohr showed that Einstein's light box experiment could not simultaneously measure exactly both the energy of the photon and the time of its escape."
EPR paradox for entangled particles.
Bohr was compelled to modify his understanding of the uncertainty principle after another thought experiment by Einstein. In 1935, Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen (see EPR paradox) published an analysis of widely separated entangled particles. Measuring one particle, Einstein realized, would alter the probability distribution of the other, yet here the other particle could not possibly be disturbed. This example led Bohr to revise his understanding of the principle, concluding that the uncertainty was not caused by a direct interaction.
But Einstein came to much more far-reaching conclusions from the same thought experiment. He believed the "natural basic assumption" that a complete description of reality, would have to predict the results of experiments from "locally changing deterministic quantities", and therefore, would have to include more information than the maximum possible allowed by the uncertainty principle.
In 1964, John Bell showed that this assumption can be falsified, since it would imply a certain inequality between the probabilities of different experiments. Experimental results confirm the predictions of quantum mechanics, ruling out Einstein's basic assumption that led him to the suggestion of his "hidden variables". Ironically this fact is one of the best pieces of evidence supporting Karl Popper's philosophy of invalidation of a theory by falsification-experiments. That is to say, here Einstein's "basic assumption" became falsified by experiments based on Bell's inequalities. For the objections of Karl Popper against the Heisenberg inequality itself, see below.
While it is possible to assume that quantum mechanical predictions are due to nonlocal, hidden variables, and in fact David Bohm invented such a formulation, this resolution is not satisfactory to the vast majority of physicists. The question of whether a random outcome is predetermined by a nonlocal theory can be philosophical, and it can be potentially intractable. If the hidden variables are not constrained, they could just be a list of random digits that are used to produce the measurement outcomes. To make it sensible, the assumption of nonlocal hidden variables is sometimes augmented by a second assumption—that the size of the observable universe puts a limit on the computations that these variables can do. A nonlocal theory of this sort predicts that a quantum computer would encounter fundamental obstacles when attempting to factor numbers of approximately 10,000 digits or more; a potentially achievable task in quantum mechanics.
Popper's criticism.
Karl Popper approached the problem of indeterminacy as a logician and metaphysical realist. He disagreed with the application of the uncertainty relations to individual particles rather than to ensembles of identically prepared particles, referring to them as "statistical scatter relations". In this statistical interpretation, a "particular" measurement may be made to arbitrary precision without invalidating the quantum theory. This directly contrasts with the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, which is non-deterministic but lacks local hidden variables.
Popper, K. "Quantum theory and the schism in Physics", Unwin Hyman Ltd, 1982, pp. 53–54.</ref>
Popper proposed an experiment to falsify the uncertainty relations, although he later withdrew his initial version after discussions with Weizsäcker, Heisenberg, and Einstein; this experiment may have influenced the formulation of the EPR experiment.
Many-worlds uncertainty.
The many-worlds interpretation originally outlined by Hugh Everett III in 1957 is partly meant to reconcile the differences between the Einstein and Bohr's views by replacing Bohr's wave function collapse with an ensemble of deterministic and independent universes whose "distribution" is governed by wave functions and the Schrödinger equation. Thus, uncertainty in the many-worlds interpretation follows from each observer within any universe having no knowledge of what goes on in the other universes.
Free will.
Some scientists including Arthur Compton and Martin Heisenberg have suggested that the uncertainty principle, or at least the general probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, could be evidence for the two-stage model of free will. The standard view, however, is that apart from the basic role of quantum mechanics as a foundation for chemistry, nontrivial biological mechanisms requiring quantum mechanics are unlikely, due to the rapid decoherence time of quantum systems at room temperature.
