Darren Everett Criss (born February 5, 1987) is an American actor, singer-songwriter, multi-instrumentalist, and composer. He is also a founding member and co-owner of StarKid Productions, a musical theater company based in Chicago, Illinois. He is best known for his portrayal of Blaine Anderson, an openly gay high school student, on the Fox television series "Glee".
Criss first garnered attention playing the lead role of Harry Potter in StarKid's musical production of "A Very Potter Musical". The theater troupe made "Billboard" history when their album "Me and My Dick", featuring original songs and music co-written by Criss, became the first charting student-produced musical recording, landing at #11 on the “Top Cast Albums" chart in 2010; the following year they debuted at #1 on the same chart with "Starship", another original album solely written and composed by Criss. As lead singer of "Glees Dalton Academy Warblers, Criss once again topped the charts with the album ' in 2011. It debuted at No. 1 on "Billboard" "Top Soundtracks" chart and No. 2 on the US "Billboard" 200.
In January 2012, Criss made his Broadway debut, starring as J. Pierrepont Finch in the revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying".
Early life and education.
Criss was born in San Francisco, California, the youngest son of Cerina (née Bru) and Charles William Criss, a banker and a former director of the San Francisco Opera, the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra, the Stern Grove Festival, and San Francisco Performances. Criss is Eurasian – his mother, a native of Cebu, Philippines, is of Chinese, Spanish, and Filipino descent, while his father, a native of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, is of Irish descent. He has an older brother named Charles "Chuck" Criss (born April 15, 1985), a musician and member of the indie rock band Freelance Whales. Criss and his brother were raised in San Francisco, except from 1988 to 1992, when the family resided in Honolulu, Hawaii, where their father started the EastWest Bank, serving as Chairman and Chief Executive Officer.
Criss' interest in music and the performing arts started in his early childhood — at the age of five, he began taking violin lessons, and, at ten, he was accepted into the Young Conservatory program of the American Conservatory Theater; concurrently, he made his professional stage debut, performing at the musical theater company 42nd Street Moon. Criss continued to hone his musical skills and eventually became a multi-instrumentalist, mastering the violin, guitar, piano, mandolin, harmonica, and drums. At fifteen, he began composing songs.
Criss completed his elementary education at Stuart Hall for Boys, and then later graduated from Saint Ignatius College Preparatory in 2005. At Saint Ignatius he was a member of the performing arts program and acted in theater classics such as "The Music Man", "The Diary of Anne Frank", and "Fiddler on the Roof". Criss also immersed himself in the school music scene – he held the position of concertmaster in the school orchestra, he fronted his own band, and was voted "most likely to win a Grammy" by his peers. Academically, he received the National Latin Exam Award in 2002 (Maxima Cum Laude) and 2003 (Magna Cum Laude). 
Criss attended the University of Michigan, majoring in theater performance and minoring in musicology and Italian. He performed in stage productions such as "Pride and Prejudice", "A Few Good Men", and "The Cripple of Inishmaan", and spent a semester abroad studying theater at the Accademia dell'Arte in Arezzo, Italy. The university's student-run theater organization, Basement Arts, where Criss was active as both an actor and director, established the foundation for his theater company, StarKid Productions. In 2009, Criss obtained a Bachelor of Fine Arts.
Acting career.
Theater.
Criss made his professional stage debut at the age of ten as Cesario in 42nd Street Moon's production of "Fanny" (1997), then played Mauro in the Richard Rodgers and Stephen Sondheim musical "Do I Hear a Waltz?" (1998), and Beauregard Calhoun in "Babes in Arms" (1999).
Having decided at a young age to pursue an acting career, Criss spent his formative years at the American Conservatory Theater, studying theater performance and appearing in a number of plays, notably "A Christmas Carol", "A Midsummer Night’s Dream", and "The Voysey Inheritance". 
In 2009, after receiving his Bachelor of Fine Arts, Criss, along with his friends and classmates from the University of Michigan, founded StarKid Productions, a musical theater company. His most prominent acting role with StarKid has been that of Harry Potter in the musical comedies "A Very Potter Musical", "A Very Potter Sequel", and "A Very Potter Senior Year" (based on the "Harry Potter" series of novels by J.K. Rowling). StarKid's plays have been viewed more than 140 million times on the company's YouTube channel since its launch on June 19, 2009.
In January 2012, Criss made his Broadway debut, replacing Daniel Radcliffe in the role of J. Pierrepont Finch in the revival of "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying" for a three-week engagement at the Al Hirschfeld Theatre. His stint there proved to be a success: apart from Daniel Radcliffe's final week, the musical had the three most lucrative weeks of its 11-month run with Criss in the lead role, grossing more than four million dollars.
Television.
Criss started his television career with supporting roles on the series "Eastwick" and "Cold Case".
Currently, Criss portrays Blaine Anderson, an openly gay high school student, on the FOX television show "Glee". He made his first appearance in season two in the episode "Never Been Kissed", which aired on November 9, 2010. Blaine attended Dalton Academy and was lead singer of its glee club, The Dalton Academy Warblers. Blaine initially served as a friend and mentor for Kurt Hummel, the bullied gay member of the Warblers' rival glee club, New Directions. Chemistry between the two characters, combined with fan support for the potential couple, led series co-creator Ryan Murphy to pair them romantically onscreen. At the beginning of the third season, Blaine transfers to McKinley High and joins New Directions; concurrently, Criss was promoted from recurring guest star to the show's main cast.
Discussing public response to his character, Criss stated that he particularly enjoyed comments from "people from parts of the world who are maybe not as exposed to certain ideologies", but had reconsidered their stance on relationships and human rights as a result of the Blaine and Kurt storyline. He called this response "phenomenal" and said, "I was a straight kid growing up in a very gay community and it's something that I've had to watch so many friends have to struggle with and have no place to go to identify in kind of a grander media culture. To be a small piece of that machine is incredibly wonderful."
Films.
In August 2011, Criss played Blaine Anderson in "".
On September 7, 2012, Criss made his feature film debut in the comedy "Girl Most Likely". It premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) and will get a nationwide theatrical release on July 19, 2013. Previously titled "Imogene", the film co-stars Kristen Wiig, Annette Bening, and Matt Dillon.
Music career.
Solo artist.
Criss began his solo music career while attending the University of Michigan. Playing in small venues, he developed his own musical repertoire which today consists of standards from the American Songbook, contemporary songs, Disney classics, and his own compositions. Occasionally, he would collaborate and perform with other fellow musicians, in particular University of Michigan alumnus, singer-songwriter Charlene Kaye. He duetted with Kaye on her songs "Skin and Bones" and "Dress and Tie", and is featured in her music videos for "Skin and Bones", "Magnolia Wine", and "Dress and Tie".
On July 20, 2010, Criss released an independently-produced EP called "Human" on iTunes. Describing his album as "soul-folk" to "Entertainment Weekly", it peaked at No. 17 on the "Billboard" Top Heatseekers Albums chart. On December 10, 2010, Criss became the 400,000th member of the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP).
After finding success with StarKid Productions and his breakthrough role on "Glee", Criss began headlining prominent venues such as The Roxy, The Troubadour, and Lincoln Center. Criss has since performed for notables such as Barbra Streisand, Rod Stewart, Alan Menken, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, U.S. First Lady Michelle Obama, and U.S. President Barack Obama.
In April 2011, Criss signed with Sony Music Entertainment. He will be recording a full-length studio album, though no release date has been set.
StarKid Productions.
Criss is credited as one of the primary songwriters and composers for StarKid Productions. He has contributed songs to "A Very Potter Musical", "Me and My Dick", "Little White Lie", and "A Very Potter Senior Year". Subsequently, Criss solely composed all the songs and music for "A Very Potter Sequel", its companion album "A Very StarKid Album", and "Starship".
In November 2011, Criss participated in StarKid's first national concert tour, The SPACE Tour, for the New York and Boston shows, and, in the summer of 2012, he joined them again for their second national tour, Apocalyptour, for the Los Angeles and New York shows.
"Glee".
Criss has contributed to the "Glee" soundtrack as lead singer of the The Dalton Academy Warblers and as a member of William McKinley High's New Directions. The Warblers are an all-male a cappella choir group whose backing vocals and arrangements are done by Tufts University's Beelzebubs.
Criss' first song on "Glee", "Teenage Dream", hit No. 1 on the "Billboard" Digital Songs chart, selling 214,000 singles in its first week, outselling the original version in its first week of digital sales. It was the first time a "Glee" cast track had reached the top spot, and is the show's fastest selling track to date. On July 13, 2011, the song was certified gold for selling over 500,000 copies.
Due to the chart success of singles by Criss and the Warblers in season 2, the album "" was released on April 19, 2011. It debuted at No. 2 on the US "Billboard" 200 and No. 1 on "Billboard" Soundtracks chart, selling 86,000 copies in its first week.
From May 21 to July 3, 2011, Criss and the cast of "Glee" performed in Glee Live! In Concert!, touring the U.S.A., Canada, England, and Ireland. According to "Billboard Magazine", it was the 16th most successful concert tour of 2011, grossing more than $40 million, with total attendance topping 485,000. All 40 dates sold out, including shows at Staples Center, Nassau Coliseum, and The O2 Arenas in London and Dublin.
Advocacy and charity work.
Criss is an advocate for LGBT rights, and is an active supporter of The Trevor Project, the leading national organization focused on suicide prevention efforts among lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning (LGBTQ) youth. Criss is the recipient of "Variety"'s Power of Youth Philanthropy award for his contributions to The Trevor Project.
Criss is a spokesperson for the Rock the Vote organization and its campaign. On March 23, 2011, he helped launch , a "national high school civics program...that uses pop culture, video, a classroom discussion and a mock election to teach young people the skills to navigate the elections process and engage as active citizens".
Criss recorded the Bob Dylan song "New Morning", featuring his brother Chuck Criss, for Amnesty International. It was part of the compilation album "", released on January 24, 2012.
On March 8, 2012, Criss was chosen by UNICEF Philippines to represent their organization and accept a $25,000 donation from the Hollywood Foreign Press Association for the disaster relief of Tropical Storm Washi
In 2012, Criss became the spokesperson for the Festival of New American Musicals. The organization's mission is "to foster the creators, to train and showcase the performers and in the process also to help build the next generation of musical theater audience and support." Its honorary co-chairs are Stephen Sondheim, Stephen Schwartz, Jerry Herman, Angela Lansbury, and Jason Alexander.
Criss has performed at various charity benefits including American Conservatory Theater, AIDS Project Los Angeles, New Conservatory Theatre Center, Toys for Tots, City of Hope National Medical Center, Motion Picture & Television Fund, Public School Arts, MusiCares Foundation, The Old Vic, UCLA's Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, Big Brothers Big Sisters of America, Young Storytellers Foundation, and the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation.
Discography.
StarKid Productions albums
Independent songs
Music videos
