Mindy Kaling is the stage name of Vera Chokalingam (born June 24, 1979), an American actress, comedian, writer, and producer who played Kelly Kapoor on the NBC sitcom "The Office" and currently stars in "The Mindy Project", a show which she developed. Kaling is also a co-executive producer, director and writer of several of the show's episodes; she also wrote, executive produced and directed various episodes of "The Office".
Early life.
Kaling was born Vera Chokalingam in Cambridge, Massachusetts, to a Tamil father from India and a Bengali mother. Her father Avu is an architect and her mother Swati was a gynecologist.
She has been referred to as Mindy ever since her mother was pregnant with her when her parents were living in Nigeria. They were already planning to move to the United States and wanted a "cute American name" for their daughter, and liked the name Mindy from the TV show "Mork & Mindy". The name Vera is the name of the "incarnation of a Hindu goddess".
She graduated from Buckingham Browne & Nichols, a private school in Cambridge, Massachusetts in 1997. The following year, she entered Dartmouth College, where she was a member of the improvisational comedy troupe "The Dog Day Players" and the a cappella group "The Rockapellas", and the creator of the comic strip "Badly Drawn Girl" in "The Dartmouth" (the college's daily newspaper), as well as writing for the "Dartmouth Jack-O-Lantern" (the college's humor magazine). She graduated in 2001.
Career.
In 2003 she portrayed Ben Affleck in a play called "Matt & Ben", which she also co-wrote with her best friend from college Brenda Withers. The play was named one of "Time" magazine's "Top Ten Theatrical Events of The Year".
Kaling's TV appearances include a 2005 episode of "Curb Your Enthusiasm", playing Richard Lewis's assistant. Kaling is also featured on the CD "Comedy Death-Ray" and wrote for one episode of "Saturday Night Live" in April 2006.
Kaling's first film role was in "The 40-Year-Old Virgin", which starred Steve Carell. She also made an appearance in the film "Unaccompanied Minors" as a waitress. In 2007 she held a small part in "License to Wed" starring fellow "The Office" actors John Krasinski, Angela Kinsey, and Brian Baumgartner. Recently, Kaling was in "" as a Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum tour guide and voiced Taffyta Muttonfudge in Disney's animated comedy film, "Wreck-It Ralph". In 2011 she played the role of Shira, a doctor who is a roommate and colleague of the main character Emma (played by Natalie Portman) in "No Strings Attached". Kaling also made an appearance as Vanetha in the 2012 romantic comedy film "The Five-Year Engagement".
Prior to acting, one of her "worst job" experiences was as a production assistant on the "Crossing Over With John Edward" psychic show.
Kaling used to maintain a blog called “Things I’ve Bought That I Love", which reemerged on her website on September 29, 2011. She is the author of the comic memoir "Is Everyone Hanging Out Without Me? (And Other Concerns)". The book is a collection of essays about her early life and career, intertwined with short observational essays about her friends, family, and relationships.
In 2012, Kaling pitched a comedy to Fox called "The Mindy Project"; which was written by her. The initial pilot featured Kaling as the lead actress, while she also contributed as a producer. Fox began airing the series Tuesdays at 9:30 Eastern Time starting 2012.
The Office.
Kaling first joined "The Office" as a writer at age 24 as the only woman on a staff of eight, and then took on the role of character Kelly Kapoor. She has written at least 22 episodes, including "Niagara", for which she was co-nominated for an Emmy with Greg Daniels. Kaling also wrote and directed the webisodes "Subtle Sexuality" in 2009. In a 2007 interview with "The A.V. Club", Kaling stated that the Kelly character is "an exaggerated version of what I think the upper-level writers believe my personality is". After the "Diwali" episode, Kaling appeared with Daniels on NPR's "Fresh Air".
Most recently, Kaling directed "The Office" webisodes "The 3rd Floor". She also directed the season 6 episode titled "Body Language", which marked her television directorial debut.
Kaling's contract was set to expire at the end of Season 7. On September 15, 2011, she signed a new contract to stay with the show for Season 8 and was promoted to full Executive Producer status. Her NBC contract includes a development deal for a new show (eventually titled "The Mindy Project"), in which she appears as an actor and contributes as a writer.
