Ek Tha Tiger (English:"There was a tiger")is a 2012 India action film, directed by Kabir Khan and produced by Aditya Chopra of Yash Raj Films. It stars Salman Khan and Katrina Kaif in the lead roles and Ranvir Shorey, Girish Karnad, Roshan Seth and Gavie Chahal in supporting roles. The film marks the third collaboration of Kabir Khan with Yash Raj Films after "Kabul Express" (2006) and "New York" (2009).
Pre-production of the film started in the second half of 2010, after the script had been completed. Principal photography commenced on September 2011 and ended in June 2012. The film has been shot in as many as five countries across three continents. Initially scheduled for a release on June 2012, the film faced delays and opened on August 15, 2012, coinciding with the Independence Day of India.
"Ek Tha Tiger" garnered positive to mixed reactions from critics whilst opening to extremely strong box office collections. The film was declared a "Blockbuster" by "Box Office India" and is the most successful film of Yash Raj Films. The film went on to become the second Bollywood film to gross over worldwide behind only "3 Idiots" with a worldwide gross of and became second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time.
Plot.
The film begins with an agent code-named "Tiger" (Salman Khan) conducting a mission in northern Iraq. India's top spy and an officer of India's Research and Analysis Wing (RAW), Tiger is forced to kill one of his own men who has defected to Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI), the spy agency of rival Pakistan. He subsequently kills many ISI agents in his escape.
Tiger returns and reports to his boss, Shenoy (Girish Karnad) in New Delhi. He is immediately sent on a mission to Dublin, Ireland, to observe a scientist of Indian origin, Professor Anwar Jamaal Kidwai (Roshan Seth), who teaches at the Trinity College and is suspected of sharing his findings with the Pakistan defense establishment. Fellow RAW agent Gopi (Ranvir Shorey) accompanies Tiger on this mission. Tiger meets the scientist but fails to spend enough time for his observance, and instead begins to spend time with scientist's caretaker Zoya (Katrina Kaif), who is studying at a local dance academy. He tries to befriend Zoya in desire of information, and he begins to discover his human side as he grows closer to her. Meanwhile he is attacked and robbed at his residence by a person suspected to be an ISI agent. Despite repeated warnings from Gopi not to fall in love, Tiger later falls in love with Zoya, Before expressing his feelings to her during his visit to dance academy he founds that in reality she is an ISI Agent and refuses to commit treason on Pakistan when he asks. He lets her go instead of killing her.
Some time later, they meet again at a UN Foreign Minister's Meet in Istanbul, Republic of Turkey when Zoya signals him to come using a cryptic message. There they decide to leave everything for their love and fool their respective agencies by taken their flight to Brazil while they had earlier informed the agencies to be in Kazakhstan. Some years later, they are traced by their agencies in Cuba and Zoya is caught by the ISI agents. Tiger meets Gopi who is searching him for RAW and convinces him to save Zoya from ISI agents, lying to him that both Tiger and Zoya intend to return to India and cooperate with RAW. Instead, Tiger and Zoya escape aboard a plane after she has been rescued using the RAW agents.
After that, Tiger calls Shenoy. Shenoy tell them that they will find both but Tiger give him the message that they will themselves return the day when Pakistan and India will not have the need for ISI and RAW. In the epilogue, several images of Tiger and Zoya in cities like Cape Town, Zurich and London are shown, where they had been reported to be seen.
Cast.
Filming.
Initial reports claimed that principal photography would start by June 2011. The first schedule began on September 2011 in Dublin, Ireland. It had previously been postponed for a short time, when Khan set off to USA for a surgery regarding his condition of Trigeminal neuralgia. Filming took place at the Trinity college, and the Ha'penny Bridge. A set of action sequences were also shot in the city. During filming in Dublin, the Irish crew of the film held a demonstration and halted the shooting temporarily, reportedly due to filming conditions and payment. The filming of the second schedule took place in Istanbul for two months. In February 2012, the film’s cast and crew went to Havana, Cuba, to shoot for one month. There, Khan shot a cameo scene for a local tourism company. The sets used in the film were featured in the ad. Following the period, script issues resulted in the postponement of the film’s planned shoot in Hong Kong. Afterwards, a three day schedule was completed in Delhi. The filming ended in June 2012 after the last schedule was shot in Bangkok. Khan had to undergo a fitness programme titled 'Dirty Running' for his action sequences over 30 days. Kaif played her role without makeup.
Soundtrack.
Initially, Pritam was signed as the composer of "Ek Tha Tiger" and the first digital poster of the movie credited him as such. However, he opted out of the film later due to date clashes with yet an other Yash Raj projects, "Dhoom 3". Chopra, who had worked with Sohail Sen's in their film "Mere Brother Ki Dulhan", roped him in to compose for the film. The lyrics were penned by Neelesh Misra. A song titled "Jaaniyan" which had vocals by Asif Nawaz, a Pakistani artist was reported to have been leaked from the film's soundtrack. However, YRF officials denied the news, saying that the album was not in any danger of being leaked. A single track named "Mashallah" crooned by Wajid Ali and Shreya Ghoshal was released on 12th July 2012.
Critical reception.
The album of "Ek Tha Tiger" received unanimously positive reviews. Satyajit of Glamsham gave the album 4/5, saying that "EK THA TIGER roars with multi-cultured international musical feel, a musician delight that primarily targets classy listeners. Unlike massy tracks of DABANGG, WANTED, READY or BODYGUARD, it has more classy appeal attached to it and all credits goes to composer's skillfulness in catching every aura, genre and format." Indo-Asian News Service of CNN-IBN gave the album 4/5 and commented that "The soundtrack of Ek Tha Tiger offers the listener the romantic and action flavour of the movie. This one's definitely an entertaining affair with an array of sounds for music lovers." Purva Desai of The Times of India also gave the album 4/5, concluding that "A good effort by Sohail Sen and Sajid-Wajid because the album is fresh and sounds new, where the music composers have made an attempt to incorporate world sounds. The music is so different from Kabir Khan's earlier films like Kabul Express and New York which makes the music of Ek Tha Tiger a welcome surprise!" Devesh Sharma of Filmfare gave the soundtrack 4/5, stating that "We are used to pulsating music in Salman Khan starrers, so this album is a tad disappointing in that sense." and also that "The songs have a situational feel and let’s hope they look better on screen than they sound." Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama gave the album 3.5/5 and concluded that "The music of Ek Tha Tiger is good though one expected it to have gone all the way further up." and that "In case of Ek Tha Tiger, there isn't any composition that puts you off. In fact what is noticeable is the fact that the overall sound of the album remains more or less consistent."
Marketing.
The first-look poster was released in August 2011, whilst the film's first teaser was released on May 10, 2012 along with the film "Ishaqzaade". The theatrical trailer received more than 1 million views upon release within 2 days, making it the largest for a Bollywood film. Promotional tours were carried out in the cities of New Delhi, Ahmedabad, and Lucknow. The makers tied up with soft drink company Thumbs up and engaged in a consumer promotion across 10 Indian cities. These were New Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Kanpur, Allahabad, Agra, Meerut and Ghaziabad.
As a part of the promotion, an event was held to launch a series of comic books based on the film. Referred to with the term 'Yomics' or 'Ycomics', their sales commenced on July 2012, before the film's release, and would continue until the Diwali festival. The books were 30 pages long and also consisted of characters from the film "Hum Tum". The first one was titled 'Ek Tha Tiger - Mahasagar Ki Suraksha'. Post release, the comics failed to generate a positive word-of-mouth. Reviewer Joginder Tuteja of Bollywood Hungama commended the design, but explained that the main story failed to meet his expectations of a "deeper" plot, "exciting" narrative and a "tighter" script.
Release.
"Ek Tha Tiger" released worldwide on August 15, the Independence day of India. It was screened in 3300 screens over the country which, at the time of its release, was the highest ever for a Bollywood film until Dabangg 2 released in 3700 screens. Ek Tha Tiger was released in 550 screens overseas. Around 60 percent of the first weekend sales received an advance booking prior to the release. Selected multiplexes increased the ticket prices of the film above the normal rate. The film did not release in Pakistan, a major market for Bollywood films, due to the Pakistani censors' analysis that it was showing the country in negative light. Director Kabir Khan had earlier claimed that it was not so.
Critical reception.
India.
"Ek Tha Tiger" received positive to mixed reviews from Indian critics.Taran Adarsh of "Bollywood Hungama" rated the film 4.5 stars out of 5 and termed it as a "high octane" thriller that "works big time", having "style and substance, both, besides dazzling action, stunning international locales and stylish execution." He refers to Salman Khan as the "trump card of this enterprise." Saibal Chatterjee of "NDTV" gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars and praised the "smart" script, "sharply focussed" screenplay, visuals and the performances of the cast. However, he felt that the "few and far" romance made the film "slow down a little", concluding that the film could not be termed as "great cinema", but wasn't "just harmless fun." Aniruddha Guha of the "Daily News and Analysis" gave it 3.5 stars and claimed that the film was "a full-blown Hindi film, with desh prem, farz and mohabbat as part of the recipe", concluding by calling it an "out-and-out Salman Khan film", which was "smart and stylish." Bollywood portal "Films of India" gave the film 4 out of 5 stars and said, "The movie is all that it was hyped up to be, it is full on entertainment Sallu style. Salman's mere presence ensures that you get your money's worth and this movie which has been made on a huge scale will rock the box office." Based on 47 reviews, review aggregate site "desimartini.com" gave the film the verdict, "The romantic chemistry doesn't soar but the thrilling action sequences and Salman save the day. A one time watch." The site's average audience rating is 3.5/5.
Gaurav Malani of "The Times of India" praised the film saying "Director Kabir Khan commendably balances the love story and the spy drama, with each element taking precedence at different junctures in the film as per the requirement. Chopra's story is credibly crafted into a riveting screenplay by Neelesh Misra and Kabir Khan. Salman Khan carries an urbane charm and looks uber-cool dressed in formals. He is resourcefully restrained sans his customary buffoonery. His acting ability is best exploited in this film after a long long time. Ek Tha Tiger, by far, is Salman Khan's most entertaining and accomplished works in recent times." Blessy Chettiar, also of the "Daily News and Analysis" gave it 3 out of 5 stars and labelled it an "action lover’s paradise". He said, "Director Kabir Khan ensures he exploits Salman’s screen presence, while also adding substance to all that jazz around. The twists in the tale are enough to keep you from snoozing due to an overdose of action." Giving the film 3 out of 5 stars, Sukanya Verma of "Rediff.com" wrote, ""Ek Tha Tiger" has a lot going for it with its two certified stars no one will contract an eyesore looking at and a supporting cast (Ranvir Shorey, Girish Karnad) that never lets you down along with plush production values typical to a Yash Raj product." Anupama Chopra of "Hindustan Times" also gave it 3 out of 5 stars and said that the film was Khan's best since "Dabangg" and had more of a story as well as greater coherence and emotion than both "Ready" and "Bodyguard" put together. She remarked, "In places, "Ek Tha Tiger" becomes downright silly. So the "modus operandi" might be to think of it as a fairy tale with spies and guns".Roshni Devi of "koimoi.com" gave it 3 out of 5 stars and praised the cinematography, action and music but criticized the stretched plot.
Rajeev Masand of "CNN-IBN" gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars noting "Despite its obvious flaws, 'Ek Tha Tiger' is far from unwatchable. At best, it's a satisfying watch. Just don't go in with high expectations." Jahanavi Samant of "Mid Day" gave the film 2.5 out of 5 stars and said, ""Ek Tha Tiger" is unable to decide whether it is a spy action film or a soppy love saga."
The film received some negative reviews as well. Kunal Guha of "Yahoo" movies gave it 1 out of 5 stars and said, "If you thought "Agent Vinod" made a Ronald McDonald out of the genre, "Ek Tha Tiger" takes a mousey tail and sticks it up his nose for Salman to swing from ear to ear." Blogger Mihir Fadnavis gave it 1.5 out of 5 stars and wrote, "A film of unremitting idiocy disguised as an upmarket big budget action movie, "Ek Tha Tiger" is about as reprehensible as masala comes, even in our decreasingly intellectual times. Pratim Dutta of "The Telegraph" gave 4/10, 5/10 and 5/10 stars for the film's script, acting and direction respectively. Mohammed Kamran Jawaid of "Dawn" termed the movie un-lively and said "Khan’s powerhouse charisma is enough to tug the movie to worldwide “financial” success. Critical success? Not so much."
Overseas.
The film received a positive to mixed reception overseas. Ronnie Scheib of "Variety" reviewed,"Kaif displays some impressive moves in her action-heroine debut, while Salman Khan's thinking-on-his-feet immediacy adds depth to his usual macho muscle. Local auds will no doubt derive a special thrill from the onscreen reunion of stars Khan and Kaif, once an offscreen item. Slickly produced 'Tiger' profits greatly from Aseem Mishra's gorgeous location lensing." Rubina A Khan of "The First Post" wrote, "The director, has a firm grip on the story and the screen play, without compromising on the entertainment value of the film at all. There's everything and more in Ek Tha Tiger that you'd want to see in a film – good looking lead cast, story, glamour, an endearing romance, some laughs, picturesque locations, thrilling and exquisite action, patriotism and most importantly, a good time at the movies!" Tuhin of Gulf News said, "The camerawork is outright bad, with the body doubles' faces very visible during the action scenes. Kaif, who has tried her hand at the stunts, is, however, fairly convincing. Though the pace could have been faster, it is a delight to watch Khan and Kaif together, resulting in a great Eid offering for Sallu fans". "The New York Times" gave a mixed review, praising the action scenes but criticizing the characters' romance as "cookie-cutter bland". According to the French journalist, Marjolaine Gout, the movie is "a roaring fairy tale where the damsel in distress fights back with fists and thighs" and points out that it's a "visual and comic feast". She gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars.
Box Office.
To summarize, the film was declared a blockbuster in both India and Overseas by Box Office India, only to become the highest grossing Bollywood film of 2012 and the second highest of all time. Yash Raj Films termed the film a "Historic Blockbuster".
Ek Tha Tiger grosses Rs 110 crore in six days.
Elaborate detail of the business of the film in various markets is given below.
Domestic.
"Ek Tha Tiger" had a bumper opening, with 100% occupancy at both multiplexes and single screens and it has shattered records all over by recording capacity on the widest release ever and collected around on its first day. Its a 40% jump from the previous record which was nett approx set by "Agneepath" (2012). It fell in the single screens across India on its second day and collected around . Ek Tha Tiger fell further on its third day and collected around thus taken its three days total to which is a new record for the weekend. The film showed good growth on Saturday and Sunday and collected in its extended five days weekend. "Ek Tha Tiger" collected a huge in its extended first week of nine days and nett in second week to make a total of in 16 days. Latter, the film had collected during the third week, in its fourth week and in fifth to make a total of in five weeks. Its final distributor share of is highest ever in Bollywood as of 29 November 2012.
Overseas.
'Ek Tha Tiger' had strong collections in overseas market despite not being released in Pakistan. The movie collected around in five days. It has collected around US$ 10.75 million near the end of its run overseas. Ek Tha Tiger is one of the highest-grossing Bollywood films in overseas markets. The film was declared a 'blockbuster' overseas by Box Office India.
Records.
After release the film mark several records. A record breaking box office opening as it collected in the first day and thus became biggest opening in the history of Indian cinema and the biggest single day collection ever. The film also broke the record of Opening weekend net gross (First 3 Days of Release), Opening week net gross (First 7 Days of Release) and entered 100 crore club the fastest in just 6 days of release breaking Salman Khan's own record set by Bodyguard in 7 Days. The film stood as the highest-grossing film in the month of August also. Collecting Rs 310 Crore worldwide the film became the second highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time.It ranked seventh on Google's List of Most Searched Movies in 2012.
and the second Bollywood film to gross over worldwide behind only "3 Idiots".
Home Media.
Yash Raj Films has launched a 2 disc edition of the DVD on 1 October 2012
Two weeks later, a 2 disc Blu-ray featuring Dolby TrueHD 96k upsampling and Dolby Surround 7.1 was launched This is very first Indian Blu-ray to feature this new technology.
