Jabardasth is a Telugu romantic comedy film written and directed by Nandini Reddy under the banner of Sri Sai Ganesh Productions. It stars Siddharth and Samantha in the lead roles and Nithya Menen in an important role. The film released on 22 February, 2013 with a U/A Certificate from the Censor Board Admist Good Expectations. The film is an unofficial remake of 2010 Hindi film "Band Baaja Baaraat". The film is to be dubbed in Tamil as "Dum Dum Pee Pee".
Plot.
The story of this film has been heavily inspired by the Bollywood hit film Band Baaja Baraat. Bairraju (Siddharth) is a perpetually bankrupt fellow who wants to get rich fast by trying his hand at various businesses. To escape from his creditors, he runs away to Bihar but his fortunes don’t change there either. He runs into trouble with the local strongman (Shayaji Shinde), who wants Bairraju to marry his sister. To escape from that scenario, Bairraju comes back to Hyderabad after a gap of 5 years.
He comes across Shreya (Samantha) at a wedding and secretly listens to her business plans. Shreya wants to set up a wedding planning agency and comes up with a scheme to learn the tools of the trade under top wedding planner Pinki Sharma. Armed with this information, Bairraju also approaches Pinki Sharma and reluctantly teams up with Shreya.
As time goes by, the duo decide to set up their own wedding planning company and they name it Shreyas Media. Business booms for a while but Bairraju’s extremely commercial nature creates differences between him and Shreya. A miffed Shreya kicks Bairraju out and he decides to start his own venture named ‘Bairraju Bampar Manazement’ (yes, that really is the spelling).
As competition between the two firms heats up, Saraswati (Nithya Menen) comes in like a breath of fresh air into Bairraju’s life. Life looks rosy for Bairraju until fate throws in a cruel twist. What is that twist? Whom does Bairraju end up with? That forms the story of the movie.
Reception.
Reviews were favorable from most quarters. Director Nandini Reddy has depended upon the key elements of 'Band Baaja Baaraat,' the treatement was pacy and rib-tickling now and then. Post-intermission, she seems to have lost the idea on how to continue it further. Result is the entry of Nithya Menon and Sreehari characters which are although unattached to main plot but drive the movie forward to climax." Akhil of mirchi9.com gave review stating "It is completely unethical on the part of Nandini Reddy to make a free make of Band Baaja Baraat. UTV had purchased the remake rights of the movie and is planning to do it in Telugu with Nani. And now Nandini had almost killed their prospect. And on the other side, she even failed to do complete justice the lifted script. Band Baaja Baraat is high on romance and feel which connects the audience with the movie which is completely absent in "Jabardast". Andhravilas gave review of 2.5/5 stating "The film is heavily ‘inspired’ by Hindi film Band Baaja Baarat ,The director has added completely farcical comedy into the original which doesn’t give any scope for emotion that was present in the original.The first half of the film especially the beginning is very over the top and then after some time it settles into a rhythm. It goes well till interval where it ends on a predictable note.""Mahesh S Koneru of 123telugu.com gave a review of 3/5 stating "If you have seen ‘"Band Bajaa Barat"’, you will find ‘"Jabardasth"’ to be extremely predictable." Jeevi of idlebrain.com gave a review of rating 3/5 stating "Nandini Reddy who has done a tender and romantic film like Ala Modalaindi changes the gears and tries her hands at a Priyadarshan kind of nonsensical comedy film with actors like Siddharth and Samantha. We have to wait and see how audiences embrace the movie." Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment gave a review of rating 3/5 stating ""Jabardasth" is a decent entertainer and it will be a treat for comedy lovers. Don't miss it if you are a fan of Siddharth." Cheruku Raja of APHerald.com gave a review of rating 3/5 stating ""Jabardasth" is a comedy entertainer and Nandini succeeded in entertaining the class, mass audience and justifies the price paid for ticket."
Box Office.
Despite Serial Bomb Blasts in Hyderabad before a day of its release, the movie netted 5.38 Crores on its First Day.
Soundtrack.
The film’s audio launch has been released on February 1.The audio launch was attended by Nandini Reddy, Samantha, Thaman, Siddharth, Srihari and Sunil with V. V. Vinayak being the chief guest. The audio got Decent response from the audience.
