Nicholas Peter "Nick" Grimshaw (born 14 August 1984), also known as Grimmy, is a British television and radio presenter. As well as hosting various shows for BBC Radio 1, he is notable for his work on Channel 4, E4, BBC One, BBC Two and Channel 4 youth strand T4. 
In September 2012 Grimshaw became the new host of "The Radio 1 Breakfast Show", replacing Chris Moyles.
Early life.
Born in St Mary's Hospital in Manchester, he was brought up in nearby Oldham and attended Our Lady's R.C. High School in Royton. Early work career included a Saturday job at Madeleine Lindley Ltd. Grimshaw attended the University of Liverpool, leaving in 2005 with a 2:2.
Radio.
Grimshaw's first taste of radio was at BBC Radio 1 which he joined in September 2007 on the BBC's youth strand Switch. He presented the show with friend and fellow DJ Annie Mac. He hosted the show for 9 months solo when Mac hosted a weekend lunchtime slot. From August 2008 to May 2009 Grimshaw hosted Radio 1's Weekend Breakfast Show. Grimshaw then went on to present the 10 pm - 12 midnight slot on BBC Radio 1 which he started on 1 June 2009, following the departure of Colin Murray from the station who left to follow his love of sport radio. This show was formerly hosted by John Peel. Although being a renowned and popular radio host, Grimshaw regularly joked over how long his position at BBC Radio 1 would last him and whether he would actually be able to complete his long list of '1000 Albums Everyone Says You Should Listen To But We Only Have Time To Play One Track So Here It Is' which was a nightly feature on his show.
Other features on his show included Peaceful Ponderings, an interactive minor problem-solving initiative broadcast on the Sunday night show he took part in with Annie Mac; This Week's Musical Showoff, an interactive new music sharing initiative; Fresh Off Stage, an interview with an important figure from the world of performing arts; and Rob da Bank's Monday Night Pop Quiz between a listener and a musician which culminated in an offensive word being broadcast live on air as the final answer. From 2010-2012, Grimshaw was the main stand in presenter for Scott Mills on BBC Radio 1, though he has now been replaced by Huw Stephens.
On 11 July 2012 it was announced Grimshaw would be replacing the long-standing Chris Moyles as host of "The Radio 1 Breakfast Show". His first programme was on 24 September 2012.
In November 2012 Grimshaw attracted criticism from Magic Radio breakfast presenter Neil Fox for comments he made about Radio 1's decision to omit Robbie Williams' "Candy" from its A list playlist - reportedly due to being "too old" for the station's target demographic. Some days later Grimshaw was in the headlines again after it was claimed he refused to promote Rihanna's latest album because she cancelled an interview with him - a claim which Grimshaw denied, noting that his snub was intended to be 'tongue in cheek'.
Television.
His career started on UK entertainment channel E4 hosting daily shows. He crossed over to Channel 4 in September 2007 hosting the daily breakfast show "Freshly Squeezed" alongside Alexa Chung and more recently Jameela Jamil which airs on Channel 4 at 7 am on weekdays. The pair went on to host various award shows for TV and coverage from music events and festivals for Channel 4. As well as hosting the radio show Switch for BBC Radio 1, he and Annie Mac teamed up to host music show "Sound" for BBC Two. He presented the first ever BBC Switch Awards show with Kimberley Walsh of Girls Aloud on BBC One. He was also part of the T4 presenting team on Channel 4 on Saturdays and Sundays.
Grimshaw will also be hosting the sixth series of "The Album Chart Show" for Channel 4, as a replacement for Sara Cox.
In Summer 2011, Grimshaw hosted a live 6-part series for Channel 4 on a Saturday morning entitled "New Look Style The Nation" in which hopeful fashion designers competed for a job at New Look. As well as hosting the show, Grimshaw was the sole person to decide upon six people who turned up at the open auditions, two of which were then selected to compete further by two fashion experts.
He appeared on "The Xtra Factor" on 13 November 2009, and has appeared as a panellist on 8 Out of 10 Cats and Never Mind The Buzzcocks. On 15 October 2012 he guest-hosted an episode of Never Mind The Buzzcocks.
On 7 February 2013, it was announced Grimshaw will be hosting a panel show Sweat the Small Stuff on BBC Three, which will start later in the year.
Personal life.
Grimshaw is gay. He appeared at number 8 on the The Independent's list of the 101 most influential LGBT people in Britain 2012. He resides in Primrose Hill, North London.
