Nicholas Theodore "Nick" Nemeth (born July 27, 1980), best known by the ring name Dolph Ziggler, is an American professional wrestler signed to WWE where he currently holds the Money in the Bank Contract for a World Heavyweight Championship match.
Nemeth signed a development contract with WWE in 2004, and was sent to Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW). He was brought up to the Raw brand in 2005 as Kerwin White's sidekick. He was, however, sent back to OVW shortly afterwards, where he joined the Spirit Squad. They debuted on "Raw" in January 2006, and won the World Tag Team Championship once before returning to OVW that November.
In September 2007, Nemeth was assigned to Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW), where he formed a tag team with Brad Allen. The pair won the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship once, and Nemeth later won the championship for the second time with Gavin Spears as his partner. He returned to "Raw" as Ziggler in September 2008, and was drafted to the SmackDown brand in April 2009. At the "SmackDown" tapings on July 28, Ziggler won the WWE Intercontinental Championship for the first time. He held the championship for five months, until January 2011. He was awarded, and lost, his only World Heavyweight Championship on February 15, 2011. That March he returned to the Raw roster, and won the WWE United States Championship for the first time three months later.
Amateur wrestling career.
Nemeth attended St. Edward High School in Lakewood, Ohio where he was an amateur wrestler, and holds the school record for most pins in a career with 82. At St. Edward, he was teammates with Gray Maynard and Andy Hrovat. During Nemeth's time at St Edward, the wrestling team won the National Championships on two occasions.
He wrestled collegiately at Kent State University, eventually setting what was then the record for most career wins in the team's history. Nemeth's record was passed in 2006, and as of 2010 he stands second all-time in career victories at Kent State. He had 121 career wins between 2000 and 2003. He was a three-time All-Mid-American Conference champion, winning the tournament in 2000, 2002, and 2003, and as of 2010 is the last wrestler from Kent State University to have won three amateur wrestling championships.
Professional wrestling career.
World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE.
Ohio Valley Wrestling (2004–2005).
Nemeth signed a contract with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE) in 2004. He was assigned to their developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), debuting as "Nick Nemeth". He feuded with Paul Burchill and challenged unsuccessfully for the OVW Television Championship, losing a championship match against then-champion Ken Doane on August 12, 2005.
Nemeth was called up to the Raw roster shortly afterwards, making his television debut on the September 19, 2005 episode of "Sunday Night Heat". He was made the enforcer and sidekick for Chavo Guerrero, Jr., who was using a golfer in-ring persona and going by the ring name of "Kerwin White". As such, Nemeth became White's caddy. His wrestling debut came on an episode of "Sunday Night Heat", teaming up with White in a tag team match against Shelton Benjamin and Matt Striker. After the death of Eddie Guerrero, Chavo Guerrero dropped the "Kerwin White" character, and Nemeth no longer played the role of his caddy and tag partner. After a few months of wrestling in dark matches and at house shows, he was sent back to OVW.
The Spirit Squad (2005–2006).
Nemeth became a part of the Spirit Squad faction, a group of five wrestlers who used the in-ring personas of male cheerleaders, and adopted the name Nicky in OVW during late 2005. The Spirit Squad members trained with real cheerleaders and gymnasts to ensure their characters were believable. On January 23, 2006, they had their WWE television debut as a group, appearing on "Raw" and helping Jonathan Coachman win a Royal Rumble qualifying match against Jerry "The King" Lawler by performing cheers for Coachman and distracting Lawler. They later became a part of the on-going scripted feud between WWE chairman Vince McMahon and Shawn Michaels. The heel (villainous) McMahon brought in the Squad to attack Michaels on numerous occasions, including placing them in multiple handicap matches.
They also wrestled in the tag team division, and on April 3, on "Raw", won the World Tag Team Championship when Kenny and Mikey, with outside help from the other three Squad members, defeated Big Show and Kane. After winning the championship, all five members of the Spirit Squad were recognized as the champions, allowing any combination of them to defend the championship.
In May, McMahon signed another Handicap match, with the Spirit Squad facing Michaels. The match never started, however; instead the Spirit Squad attacked Michaels, and, as part of the storyline, shattered his knee with a steel chair. McMahon brought Triple H to the ring to attack Michaels with a sledgehammer; however, after Triple H felt that the Squad had disrespected him, he attacked the group. This led to Triple H and Michaels reforming D-Generation X (DX) and they began a feud with the Spirit Squad. DX played various sophomoric jokes on the Squad and the McMahons, as well as defeating the Spirit Squad in handicap tag team matches at Vengeance and a clean sweep in an elimination handicap match at "Saturday Night's Main Event".
At the same time as their feud with DX and their alignment with McMahon, the Squad also wrestled other teams in "Raw"'s tag division over their World Tag Team Championship, successfully defending the championship against the teams of Jim Duggan and Eugene, Charlie Haas and Viscera, and Snitsky and Val Venis. They then entered a lengthy feud with The Highlanders, whom they eventually defeated to retain the championship at the Unforgiven pay-per-view in September. The Squad as a whole later began a losing streak with separate members losing singles matches to Ric Flair on consecutive episodes of "Raw", until Kenny managed to defeat him on the October 23 episode. It was then announced that Flair and a WWE legend, selected by interactive voting, would wrestle the team for the World Tag Team Championship at the Cyber Sunday pay-per-view in early November. The fans chose Roddy Piper, and he and Flair defeated Kenny and Mikey to win the championship.
The group disbanded on the November 27 episode of "Raw", when they were defeated in a five-on-three handicap match by DX and Flair. In a backstage segment later that night, DX placed all members into a crate stamped "OVW, Louisville, Kentucky", a reference to the developmental territory from which the Squad had come.
Brand switches (2007–2009).
Nemeth returned to OVW on January 17, 2007, at the television tapings, again using his Nick Nemeth ring name, along with Mike Mondo, formerly Mikey in the Spirit Squad, as the "Frat Pack". The pair teamed with Mike Kruel in a match against Seth Skyfire, Shawn Spears, and Cody Runnels. The team disbanded in the early parts of 2007. Nemeth then competed in several dark matches before the OVW television tapings, competing against several wrestlers including Chris Cage, Bradley Jay and Jake Hager, before he began teaming with Mondo again in August.
At the end of August, Nemeth and Mike Mondo were moved to the Florida Championship Wrestling (FCW) developmental territory and in his debut there, Nemeth gained the nickname "The Natural" and defeated Hade Vansen. In November 2007, Nemeth gained Big Rob as his manager, but their alliance was short-lived. At the start of 2008, he tweaked his name to "Nic Nemeth" and began teaming with Brad Allen, with the pair gaining Taryn Terrell as their valet. Nemeth and Allen started a frat boy type ring character with Terrell as a "sorority chick". On March 22, Nemeth and Allen won the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship by defeating defending champions Eddie Colón and Eric Pérez, but lost the championship back to Colón and Pérez on April 15. Throughout April and May 2008, Nemeth wrestled in several dark matches prior to "Raw", losing to Kofi Kingston and Ron Killings on several occasions. Soon after, he returned to the name "Nic Nemeth", and began teaming with Gavin Spears. The pair defeated Colón and Pérez to win the FCW Florida Tag Team Championship on August 16, but lost it to Heath Miller and Joe Hennig less than a month later.
On September 15, 2008, Nemeth re-debuted on "Raw", introducing himself in a backstage segment under the name "Dolph Ziggler". On October 10, 2008, Nemeth was suspended for 30 days for his first violation of WWE's Wellness Program policy. He returned to "Raw" on November 17 in a backstage segment with Rey Mysterio and Shawn Michaels. In his first match on "Raw" under the Ziggler name, he lost to Batista on the December 1 episode. The following week he got his first victory as Ziggler, by countout, against R-Truth. The next week on "Raw", he picked up his first televised pinfall victory, when he defeated Charlie Haas.
Intercontinental and World Heavyweight Champion (2009–2011).
On April 15, 2009, Ziggler was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2009 Supplemental Draft. He made his debut on the April 17 episode of "SmackDown", defeating the United States Champion, Montel Vontavious Porter (MVP) in a non-title match, and, as a result, the following week he demanded a match for the championship. On the May 1 episode of "SmackDown", however, he failed to win the championship, after he was pinned by MVP. Ziggler then started a rivalry with The Great Khali, losing to him by disqualification after attacking Khali with a steel chair. As a result, Khali began coming out to the ring during and after Ziggler's matches, in attempt to gain revenge and to stop Ziggler from cheating. Over the next few weeks, Ziggler defeated Khali by countout and disqualification after making it look like Khali had struck him with a steel chair. At The Bash pay-per-view, Ziggler defeated Khali by pinfall, after Kane interfered and attacked Khali.
Ziggler then entered an on-screen relationship with WWE Diva Maria and she became his valet. He simultaneously started a scripted rivalry with Intercontinental Champion Rey Mysterio, who defeated Ziggler at the Night of Champions and SummerSlam pay-per-views to retain the championship. In September, Mysterio lost the Intercontinental Championship to John Morrison, and Ziggler entered a feud with Morrison, losing to him at the Hell in a Cell pay-per-view. On the episode of "SmackDown", following Hell in a Cell, Ziggler ended his on-screen relationship with Maria after she cost him a match against Morrison. On the February 26, 2010 episode of "SmackDown", Ziggler defeated John Morrison and R-Truth in a triple threat qualifying match to compete in the Money in the Bank ladder match at WrestleMania XXVI, but was ultimately unsuccessful.
In June he began a romantic storyline with Vickie Guerrero, who began accompanying him to the ring. On the July 9 episode of "SmackDown", Ziggler defeated Chavo Guerrero and Montel Vontavious Porter in a triple threat match to qualify for the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view, where he once again failed to win the match. On July 28 at the tapings of the August 6 episode of "SmackDown" Ziggler defeated Kofi Kingston to win the WWE Intercontinental Championship for the first time. In his first title defense at SummerSlam, he retained the championship against Kingston when the match ended in a no contest due to interference from The Nexus. Ziggler was able to make a successful title defense against Kingston at the Night of Champions pay-per-view, and against Kaval at Survivor Series.
In November 2010, Ziggler was announced as a Pro for the fourth season of "NXT", with Jacob Novak as his Rookie. At , Ziggler successfully retained the Intercontinental Championship in a three-way ladder match against Kingston and Jack Swagger. On the January 4, 2011 episode of "NXT", Ziggler won a battle royal to earn the right to choose a new rookie, and chose Byron Saxton. His original rookie, Novak, was the first rookie eliminated later that night.
At the "SmackDown" tapings on January 4, Ziggler lost the Intercontinental Championship to Kingston after a five-month reign. That same night, Ziggler won a four-way match against Cody Rhodes, Drew McIntyre, and The Big Show to become the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship. Ziggler received his match for the championship at the Royal Rumble pay-per-view against Edge, but was unsuccessful. On February 4, Ziggler's girlfriend Vickie Guerrero, who was the Acting General Manager of SmackDown, announced that she had banned the spear – Edge's finishing move – and if Edge used it during the rematch between the two, Ziggler would be automatically awarded the championship. In the interim, Ziggler's second rookie, Byron Saxton, was also voted off of "NXT". On the February 11 episode of "SmackDown", Ziggler received a rematch for the championship, only to lose after being speared. On the February 14 episode of "Raw", Guerrero announced that Edge had lost the championship due to using the spear and that Ziggler would be crowned the new champion. On "SmackDown" on February 18, Guerrero fired Edge, claiming that he had attacked SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long several weeks prior, and awarded Ziggler the championship during a coronation ceremony later that night. Long returned during the ceremony however, and Guerrero revealed Ziggler as the attacker after being accused of orchestrating the attack by Long. Long rehired Edge and gave him his rematch, in which Edge regained the championship. Ziggler's first World Championship reign lasted only 11 minutes and 23 seconds. After the match, Long fired Ziggler in storyline.
United States Champion (2011–2012).
On the March 7 episode of "Raw", Ziggler was introduced as the newest member of the Raw roster, and defeated John Morrison in a singles match. Ziggler was accompanied by Guerrero, who had also been fired from "SmackDown", but she was forced to earn her spot on the Raw roster. Ziggler, along with Guerrero, and LayCool then feuded with Morrison, Trish Stratus and "Jersey Shore" guest star Snooki, culminating in a mixed tag team match at WrestleMania XXVII which Ziggler and his team lost. On the April 18 episode of "Raw", Vickie introduced the "new and improved" Dolph Ziggler. Ziggler came out with his hair cut short and brown and went on to defeat Evan Bourne in a singles match. He had re-bleached his hair by the May 23 episode of "Raw".
Ziggler beat United States Champion Kofi Kingston in a non-title match on the May 30 episode of "Raw", leading to a championship match at WWE Capitol Punishment which Ziggler won to earn his first United States Championship. The next night on "Raw", Kingston invoked his rematch clause in a two out of three falls match and won via disqualification, allowing Ziggler to retain. After Jack Swagger suggested to Guerrero that she should manage him in addition to Ziggler, a jealous Ziggler teased tension with Swagger. This, coupled with Ziggler's concurrent feud with Alex Riley, led to Ziggler to defend and retain his United States Championship in a fatal four-way match against Swagger, Riley, and John Morrison at Night of Champions.
On the September 19 episode of "Raw", Ziggler lost a non-title match to Zack Ryder when guest star Hugh Jackman helped Ryder by punching Ziggler in the face. Although Ziggler would later claim to have a broken jaw due to Jackman's punch, it was reported that the supposed injury was fake. Later that night, Guerrero officially began managing Swagger, and Swagger began interfering in Ziggler's matches to help him win. Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Air Boom for the WWE Tag Team Championship at Hell in a Cell and at Vengeance, where Ziggler also successfully defended the United States Championship against Ryder. He went on to successfully defend the championship against Morrison at Survivor Series. At , Ziggler lost the United States Championship to Ryder.
On the December 26 episode of "Raw", Ziggler defeated WWE Champion CM Punk in a gauntlet match for a championship opportunity following interference from John Laurinaitis. The following "Raw", Ziggler defeated Punk by countout after Laurinaitis interfered again; as a result, Ziggler did not win the championship. At the 2012 Royal Rumble pay-per-view, Ziggler failed to capture the WWE Championship from CM Punk. At the Elimination Chamber, Ziggler failed again to capture the WWE Championship after being eliminated second by Chris Jericho. Nemeth noted to Arda Ocal in an interview for The Score Television Network that the Elimination Chamber left him with multiple minor injuries and it is a match he least looks forward to working.
On the February 27 edition of "Raw", Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Primo & Epico for the WWE Tag Team Championship in a Triple Threat tag team match, also involving Kofi Kingston and R-Truth. On the March 19 edition of "Raw", Ziggler and Swagger were announced as the newest members of Team Johnny for the 12 man tag team match at WrestleMania XXVIII. On the April 2 edition of "Raw", Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Santino Marella for the United States Championship in a triple threat match. After the match, Ziggler would begin a feud with Brodus Clay, who headbutted Ziggler after he and Swagger tried to attack Marella. On the following episode of "Raw", Ziggler and Swagger were defeated by Clay and Marella in a tag team match. In the following weeks, Ziggler and Swagger would lose to Clay and Hornswoggle in singles and tag team matches. At Extreme Rules, Ziggler was again defeated by Clay. In May, Ziggler and Swagger unsuccessfully challenged Kofi Kingston and R-Truth for WWE Tag Team Championship, first at Over the Limit and second on the May 28 episode of "Raw", resulting in Ziggler showing signs of wanting to break away from Guerrero and Swagger. 
On the June 11 episode of "Raw", Ziggler pinned The Great Khali, Swagger and Christian in a fatal four way elimination match to become the number one contender to the World Heavyweight Championship, but at No Way Out, Ziggler lost the title match to champion Sheamus. On the following "Raw", Guerrero, finally tired of the bickering between Ziggler and Swagger, arranged for a match between them; Ziggler won the match and Guerrero's affections. Ziggler received another shot at the World title on the June 29 edition of "SmackDown", but was again defeated by Sheamus in a triple threat match, also involving Alberto Del Rio.
Mr. Money in the Bank (2012–present).
On the July 3 edition of "SmackDown", Ziggler defeated Alex Riley to qualify for a spot in the World Heavyweight Championship Money in the Bank ladder match. On July 13, Ziggler, Zack Ryder and Justin Roberts were involved in a car accident in San Diego while driving from Comic-Con; none of them suffered severe injuries. Two days later at the Money in the Bank pay-per-view, Ziggler defeated Christian, Cody Rhodes, Damien Sandow, Santino Marella, Sin Cara, Tensai, and Tyson Kidd to win the Money in The Bank ladder match; this guaranteed Ziggler the opportunity to challenge for the World Heavyweight Championship at a time of his choosing within the next year. Later that night, Ziggler would attempt to cash in the briefcase on Sheamus after Alberto Del Rio attacked him after their match, but Del Rio stopped Ziggler from cashing in. On the following episode of "SmackDown", Ziggler again attempted to cash in the briefcase on Sheamus following a tag team match with Alberto Del Rio, but was laid out by Rey Mysterio and Sheamus before he could do so. During this time, Ziggler began a feud with Chris Jericho after claiming he had lost his touch, which resulted in Jericho attacking him on two occasions, and defeating him in a singles match at SummerSlam. The night after SummerSlam, Ziggler defeated Jericho in a rematch; as a result Ziggler retained his Money in the Bank contract and Jericho's WWE contract was terminated. Following this, Ziggler began feuding with Randy Orton on "SmackDown" four days later, after Orton "RKO"d him when trying to cash his Money in the Bank contract on a vulnerable Sheamus. The following week on "SmackDown", Ziggler faced Orton in a match that was won by Orton. Three days later on "Raw", Ziggler defeated Orton in a rematch, pinning him while holding his tights. Ziggler faced Orton again at Night of Champions where he lost again, ending the feud. On November 18 at Survivor Series, Ziggler captained the traditional 5-on-5 elimination tag team match opposite Mick Foley. Ziggler won the match after pinning Orton with a superkick, making him the sole survivor of the match. 
Ziggler then began feuding with John Cena after he would side with Vickie Guerrero to help defame Cena and AJ Lee in a scandal had to do with both of them having a romantic relationship. On December 16 at , Ziggler retained his Money in the Bank briefcase in a ladder match after AJ interfered and turned on Cena. The following night on "Raw", Ziggler attempted to cash in his Money in the Bank briefcase on Big Show after Show was assaulted by Sheamus, but he was attacked by Cena before the match could start. Later, Ziggler teamed with AJ to face Cena and Vickie Guerrero, however, the match ended in a disqualification after the debuting Big E Langston attacked Cena, also starting an on-screen relationship between Dolph and AJ. Ziggler ended 2012 having wrestled the second most TV/PPV matches that year with 90, however he had the most TV/PPV losses with 57. 
On the January 7, 2013, episode of "Raw", Ziggler announced his entrance in the Royal Rumble and was defeated by Cena in a singles match later that night, despite outside interference from AJ and Langston. A week later, he would be defeated by Cena in a Steel Cage Match, despite interference from AJ and Langston, ending his feud with Cena. On the January 21 episode of "Raw", Ziggler won a "Beat the Clock Challenge", earning him the right to choose what number he can enter in the Royal Rumble match. Before he could choose, "Raw" Managing Supervisor Vickie Guerrero informed Ziggler that he could only choose either entrant number #1 or #2. Ziggler entered at #1 and he was the entrant who lasted the longest in the match, at nearly fifty minutes. During the match, he resumed his feud with the returning Chris Jericho and managed to eliminate Jericho. On the February 1st edition of Smackdown, Ziggler announced that he will not be participating in the 2013 Elimination Chamber because he is Mr. Money in the Bank. On the February 11 Raw Ziggler changed his mind about the chamber when he heard that Chris Jericho had qualified. He would go on to lose to Kane in a qualifying match later in the night. On the 18th February edition of "Raw", Ziggler lost a non-title match-up to Alberto Del Rio. Post-match, Big E attacked Del Rio and gave him a Big Ending, and then Ziggler tried and failed to cash in his Money in the Bank briefcase after Ricardo Rodriguez ran off with it.
Other media.
Nemeth appeared on the November 3, 2009 episode of "Deal or No Deal" with Maria Kanellis and Eve Torres. He then appeared on "Lopez Tonight" on August 9, 2010. Nemeth appears in a 2011 episode of "Silent Library" alongside Chris Masters, Trent Baretta, JTG, Caylen Croft, and Curt Hawkins. Nemeth made regular appearances on fellow WWE wrestler Zack Ryder's YouTube web series, "Z! True Long Island Story", via his own segment named 'Ask Z Heel'. The series ended on January 11, 2013.
On February 1, 2012, Nemeth debuted WWEFanNation's "WWE Download" and was the host of the YouTube series. The official "WWE Download" playlist on YouTube described the series as "Dolph Ziggler's sarcastic wit vs. your videos" and each episode consisted of Ziggler reviewing both viral and WWE videos. A new episode of "WWE Download" was uploaded every Monday until the show ended on 28 January, 2013, after 53 episodes.
Personal life.
Nemeth has been a fan of professional wrestling since he was five years old, when he attended a wrestling event at the Richfield Coliseum and decided to become a professional wrestler at age twelve. His younger brother, Ryan, has a developmental contract with WWE and wrestles in NXT under the ring name of Briley Pierce. Nemeth is a graduate of Kent State University, where he majored in political science with a pre-law minor. Prior to his WWE tryout, he was living in Phoenix, Arizona, and had been accepted to the law school at Arizona State University, where he was due to start his first semester. He is good friends with his former Spirit Squad teammates, particularly Michael Brendli, with whom he lived in Florida until 2008. Since then, he has returned to residing in Phoenix. Nemeth is also fluent in American Sign Language. Nemeth later revealed in Colt Cabana's "Art of Wrestling Podcast" that he chose the name "Dolph" because that was his grandfather's name and he said that his friend suggested the name "Ziggler".
Nemeth was previously in relationships with former WWE Diva Nikki Bella, and comedian Amy Schumer, who revealed on "The Howard Stern Show" that he was too athletic sexually.
