Leila Luliana da Costa Vieira Lopes (; born February 26, 1986) is an Angolan beauty queen who won the titles of Miss Angola UK 2010, Miss Angola 2010 and later Miss Universe 2011.
Personal life.
Lopes was born on February 26, 1986 in Benguela, Angola. Prior to being a contestant in beauty pageants, she studied business management at University Campus Suffolk in Ipswich, England. Lopes is actively involved in raising awareness about HIV/AIDS and the discrimination that people with the disease experience.
In February 2013, she became engaged to New York Giants defensive end, Osi Umenyiora, in Monaco.
Career.
Miss Angola UK 2010.
While living and studying in England, she participated in "Miss Angola UK" on October 8, 2010. Lopes won the title, giving her the opportunity to represent the British Angolan community in Miss Angola 2011.
Miss Angola 2010.
Lopes beat 20 other candidates to be named Miss Angola in Luanda on December 18, 2010, gaining her the right to represent Angola in Miss Universe 2011. She also obtained the "Photogenic Award" during the contest.
Miss Universe 2011.
On September 12, 2011, Lopes was crowned Miss Universe in São Paulo, Brazil, receiving the title from the former Miss Universe Ximena Navarrete of Mexico. She is currently the 60th Miss Universe titleholder, and is the first Angolan woman to hold the position. Lopes is the sixth woman of African descent to win the title since the beginning of the worldwide pageant (Trinidad and Tobago 1977,South Africa in 1978, Namibia in 1992,Trinidad and Tobago 1998, Botswana in 1999 and Angola in 2011) and the fourth African woman from the African continent to win following Mpule Kwelagobe, Miss Universe 1999 from Botswana. Lopes also became the first woman from Angola to win a "Big Four" beauty pageant.
In October, 2011, Lopes paid a visit to Indonesia where she attended local charity events and Puteri Indonesia 2011 Pageant held at Jakarta Convention Center, in Jakarta.
In December, 2011, Lopes was invited to attend the first edition of Miss Gabon Pageant in Libreville, Gabon where she crowned the first Gabonese representative to Miss Universe in history, Marie-Noëlle Ada Meyo from Ngounié Province.
Lopes traveled to Düsseldorf, Germany with her sister titleholders Alyssa Campanella and Danielle Doty for a week-long USO/Armed Forces Entertainment tour from March 9–14, 2012. During the week, she also participated the Beauty International Trade Show which took place at Düsseldorf Exhibition Centre.
Lopes walked the red carpet of the world-renowned Cannes Film Festival in France on May 23, 2012. She also attended the De Grisogono Glam Extravaganza held at the Hotel Du Cap Eden-Roc in Cap D’Antibes, France on the same day. Prior to her visit to France, she was in Lisbon, Portugal for a series of photoshoots and television appearances. Her short visit in Portugal was upon the invitation of Maxim Portugal Magazine.
In June, 2012, Lopes embarked on a 5-country West African tour that took her to Senegal, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo and Nigeria. Later that month, Lopes attended the Rio+20 United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
In October, Lopes traveled to Nicaragua for the "Fashion for Smiles", a spectacular fashion show which organized by Operation Smile Nicaragua with the collaboration from Silhuetas models, took place at the Crowne Plaza Convention Center in Managua with the participation of 15 of Miss Universe 2012 competitors from the Americas.
So far, during her reign, Lopes has traveled to Brazil, Singapore, Indonesia, Angola, Cambodia, Bahamas, Gabon, Jamaica, South Africa, Germany, Dominican Republic, Portugal, France, Senegal, Cote d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Guyana, Nicaragua, Namibia, Kenya, Mozambique and numerous trips in the USA.
Criticisms and controversies.
Legitimacy of Miss Angola UK 2010 victory.
After Lopes was crowned Miss Universe 2011, allegations arose that false documents were used to allow her to participate in Miss Angola UK (her win in this round gave her the ability to compete in Miss Angola and subsequently Miss Universe). It was claimed that Lopes had never lived outside of Angola at the time she competed in Miss Angola UK and therefore should not have been allowed to enter a competition that was exclusively for Angolan citizens living in the UK. The controversy began after anonymous witnesses stated that Lopes had joined the contest after the auditions had already finished taking place, and Mukano Charles an Angolan promoter, had told Miss Angola UK candidates that he had casted her privately. The concept of a private casting led some of the candidates to believe that it may have taken place in Angola.
Claims of bribery arose after Charles had been seen conversing with a judge while the contestants were changing outfits. In 2009, Mukano Charles was accused of involvement with counterfeit documents that allowed a Cape Verdean citizen to participate in Miss Angola and in October 2010, an anonymous colleague stated that Charles would bring women from Iraq and India and pass them off as Angolans so that they could compete in Miss Angola. Such incidences have led some to believe that Charles is involved in fraud and Lopes' alleged association with him in Miss Angola UK has resulted in these claims emerging.
The use of false documents has since been denied by both Lopes and the Miss Universe organisers and Lopes herself has stated that she had lived in England for a total of four years, including the two years that she was there studying. Any claims that Lopes was ineligible to compete in Miss Angola UK are yet to be backed up with any form of conclusive evidence.
