Kristin Laura Kreuk (; born December 30, 1982) is a Canadian actress and executive producer, best known for her roles as Lana Lang in the Superman-inspired television series "Smallville" and as Laurel Yeung in the Canadian teen drama "Edgemont". She has also starred in movies such as "" and "Irvine Welsh's Ecstasy".
Kreuk's latest role is as Catherine Chandler in The CW's series "Beauty and the Beast".
Early life.
Kreuk was born in Vancouver, British Columbia. Her father, Peter Kreuk, is of Dutch descent; her mother, Deanna Che, is of Chinese descent, but was born in Indonesia; her maternal grandmother was born in Jamaica of Chinese descent. Both parents are landscape architects. She has a sister named Justine, who is about five years younger. Kreuk trained in karate (she has a purple belt) and gymnastics at the national level until high school but quit in grade 11 due to scoliosis.
Career.
Television.
After filming the first season of "Edgemont" (a teenage soap opera set at a Vancouver-area high school) and getting herself an agent, Kreuk landed the lead role of Snow White in a TV movie titled "Snow White: The Fairest of Them All". The film, shot in Vancouver, also starred Miranda Richardson and was directed by Caroline Thompson. It aired on ABC, and later released on DVD, in 2002. In 2003, Kreuk ended her role on "Edgemont". In mid-2004, Kreuk took the role of Tenar for the Sci Fi Channel two-part miniseries "Legend of Earthsea". The miniseries was filmed in Vancouver, directed by Rob Lieberman and broadcast on December 13, 2004.
After "Snow White", Kreuk's agent sent an audition tape to screenwriters Alfred Gough and Miles Millar, who at the time were putting together the cast of a show they had created for the WB Network entitled "Smallville". The series, which was slated to be shot in Vancouver, revolves around the life of teenager Clark Kent before he becomes Superman. Gough and Millar called Kreuk to WB's studios in Burbank, California to audition for the role of Clark Kent's first love, Lana Lang. She was the first cast for the show. After seven seasons, Kreuk left "Smallville" in the beginning of 2008, when her character leaves town. She returned as a guest star in the show's season eight for five episodes to conclude her storyline. 
In 2009, Kristin Kreuk signed on for a multi-episode arc in season three of "Chuck". She played Hannah, a computer troubleshooter who joins the Buy More Nerd Herd after being laid off from her previous job.
In 2010, she portrayed Ben Hur's sister Tirzah in the TV movie "Ben Hur", which aired in Canada and later on "ABC" in the United States.
Kreuk was involved with two pilots that did not get picked up: an NBC 2010 sitcom entitled "Hitched" (which was co-created by Josh Schwartz, who was also the creator of "Chuck") and a 2011 CBS drama series called "17th Precinct", which was developed by Ronald D. Moore.
In February 2012, Kreuk was announced as the lead female character in The CW's reboot of "Beauty and the Beast", which was picked up on May 11, 2012, and started airing in Fall 2012.
Advertising work.
Neutrogena made her the spokesmodel for their new worldwide advertising campaign. In this role, Kreuk followed in the footsteps of fellow teen stars such as Jennifer Love Hewitt and Mandy Moore. In 2005, she renewed her contract with Neutrogena for another two years, making her the company's longest-serving model spokesperson.
Films.
Kreuk appeared in the 2004 comedy film "Eurotrip", playing the unfaithful girlfriend of the protagonist character.
In early 2005, Kreuk signed on to the 2007 Canadian independent film "Partition", playing Naseem, a vulnerable 17-year-old whose world is shattered by the trauma of the Partition of India in 1947; the character also falls in love with an ex-British Indian Army officer. 
In the summer of 2006, Kreuk starred in the short film, "Dream Princess" by comic book writer/artist Kaare Andrews. The film is a modern sci-punk retelling of the tale of "Sleeping Beauty", with a twist.
Kreuk starred in the 2009 film "", in which she played the title character, Chun Li. The film received generally negative reviews.
Kreuk was considered for 2008 film "Get Smart", but reportedly lost the role to Anne Hathaway. She also tested for 2011 film "", with the role going to Paula Patton.
In early 2010, Kreuk signed onto the Japanese horror film "Vampire". In 2010, Kreuk also starred in the music video "I Heard" by musician Hill Zaini.
Kreuk stars as Heather in the 2011 film, "Irvine Welsh's Ecstasy", based on Irvine Welsh's novel. She also stars as Tilda in the 2012 sci-fi comedy film "Space Milkshake".
Entrepreneur.
Kreuk with Rosena Bhura, of who Kreuk met on the set of Partition, started a production company called "Parvati Creative Inc", which focuses on “human-centric films as seen through a female lens”. "Parvati"'s first production was a short film starring Kreuk's boyfriend Mark Hildreth and directed by Rick Rosenthal called "Blink", of which Kreuk is listed as an executive producer. The second project was a comedy web series entitled ""Queenie"" which featured Kreuk's friend Olivia Cheng.
Personal life.
Kreuk currently resides in Toronto for the shooting of "Beauty and the Beast". When not acting she resides in her hometown Vancouver with her French bulldog Dublin. 
As of late 2011, she bought a home in Los Angeles with her actor boyfriend Mark Hildreth with whom she has been dating for the past 8 years and maintains a long distance relationship with him while she is on location in Toronto shooting Beauty and the Beast". 
Kreuk confirmed on "Live! with Kelly and Michael" in October 2012 that she is a pescatarian and eats salmon.
