The Pokémon franchise includes over 650 species of the title characters. Pokémon can be organized according to a number of different attributes. The list provides their English names and several formats of the Japanese names.
Pokémon can also be divided by the "generation" of games in which they were introduced and sorted by the other numbering systems introduced in those games. The first 151 Pokémon, introduced in "Pokémon Red" and "Blue", have Kanto Pokédex numbers (official as of those games’ remakes), which are the same as the first 151 National Pokédex numbers. Another 100 Pokémon appeared in "Pokémon Gold" and "Silver" to expand the list to 251 for the Johto regional Pokédex (to which 5 evolutions were added when the games were remade). The Hoenn regional Pokédex included 67 of these, alongside 135 new species that debuted in "Pokémon Ruby" and "Sapphire", bringing the total to 386. Next, the fourth generation combined 81 (in "Pokémon Diamond" and "Pearl) or 100 (in "Pokémon Platinum") of the 107 new creatures from "Pokémon Diamond" and "Pearl" with 70 or 110, respectively, of the previous ones to form the regional Pokédex of Sinnoh. This was the first time not all of the newly introduced Pokémon were included in the games' regional Pokédex. "Pokémon Black" and "White" introduced 156 all-new creatures, which made up the entirety of those titles' Unova Pokédex. This leaves the grand total standing at 649. In the sequel "Pokémon Black 2" and "White 2", the Unova Pokédex was heavily modified, 144 species from previous entries were added and arranged into the original Unova Pokédex making it having 300 species, though the grand total currently remains unchanged.
Pokémon may also be grouped into "families" of the Pokémon (eggs/fossils, for example) they evolve (or hatch or revive) from and into.
The Pokémon Rangers of Fiore, Almia and Oblivia use Pokédex-like devices called "Ranger Browsers", but their numbering systems are not currently included here.
MissingNo.
, or MissingNO, is a Pokémon species found in the video games "Pokémon Red" and "Blue" and "Pokémon Yellow". Standing for ""Missing Number"", MissingNo. These Pokémon are used as error handlers by game developer Game Freak; they appear when the game attempts to access data for a nonexistent Pokémon species. Due to the programming of three in-game events, players can encounter MissingNo. via a glitch. The species was first documented by Nintendo in the May 1999 issue of "Nintendo Power".
Encountering MissingNo. causes graphical errors and the mass replication of the sixth item in the player's item menu
