Jonathan Edward "Jon" Bernthal (born September 20, 1976) is an American actor, best known for his role as Shane Walsh on the AMC television series "The Walking Dead".
Early life.
Bernthal was born and raised in Washington, D.C. He is the son of Joan Lurie (née Marx) and Eric Lawrence "Rick" Bernthal, a lawyer with Latham & Watkins LLP. He has two brothers, Nicholas "Nick" Matthew Bernthal and Thomas "Tom" Bernthal. He is the grandson of the late musician and producer Murray Bernthal. He graduated from the Sidwell Friends School in Washington.
After high school, he studied at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs, New York and later attended The School of Moscow Art Theatre, in Moscow, Russia. During his time there, he also played professional baseball in the European Professional Baseball Federation (Confédération Européenne de Baseball). He was discovered by the director of Harvard University's Institute for Advanced Theatre Training at the American Repertory Theatre in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and graduated in 2002 from the American Repertory Theatre with a Master of Fine Arts.
Acting career.
Since 2002, Bernthal has performed in over 30 plays regionally and off-Broadway, including many with his own award-winning theatre company, Fovea Floods. He starred on the sitcom "The Class" from 2006 through 2007. Bernthal portrayed Shane Walsh in Frank Darabont's "The Walking Dead", based on the American comic book series of the same name. He was nominated for the Breakout Performance – Male award at the 2011 Scream Awards for his performance. He has since been cast as Joe Teague in "Lost Angels", Darabont's pilot for TNT.
Personal life.
Bernthal is married to Erin Angle, who is the niece of professional wrestler Kurt Angle. They have a son together who was born in August 2011, and are expecting birth of another baby in February of 2013. He is a cousin of Adam Schlesinger who performs with the band Fountains of Wayne. Together with his brother Nicholas Matthew Bernthal, who is an orthopaedic surgeon at UCLA, they help run a nonprofit organization called Drops Fill Buckets, "an impact-driven, entrepreneurial approach to making a difference".
Awards and nominations.
Ovation Awards
