The Celebrity Cricket League (CCL) is a non-professional men's cricket league in India, contested by Eight teams consisting of film actors from Eight major regional film industries of Indian cinema. The league commenced in 2011. Since its inception, television viewership of CCL matches have grown to become more popular than the International Cricket Council (ICC) games.
The CCL has been widely reported in the media.
History.
Establishment.
The CCL was inspired by the popularity of the Indian Premier League, a Twenty20 tournament with franchises in major Indian cities. Vishnu Vardhan Induri, a Serial Entrepreneur from Hyderabad is the Founder and Managing Director of CCL who started CCL in 2010 by selling franchise rights for four teams in the inaugural season. For the second season two additional teams were added.
First season.
The inaugural season of the league took place in 2011, which was contested by 4 teams - Chennai Rhinos, Telugu Warriors, Mumbai Heroes and Karnataka Bulldozers. With CCL Season 1, the organisers planned to create awareness about Anti Piracy. Chennai Rhinos defeated Karnataka Bulldozers in a thriller and emerged as the inaugural CCL champions.
Second season.
The second season was conducted from 13th Jan 2012 to 13th Feb 2012. Two new cricket teams, the Kerala Strikers and the Bengal Tigers were added to the CCL. Hindi Film Industry Team "Mumbai Heroes" selected Sharjah as its home ground. Chennai Rhinos defeated Karnataka Bulldozers for the second time in a row and emerged as the CCL 2 champions.
Third season.
The Third Season will have two new teams, Veer Marathi representing the Marathi Film Industry and Bhojpuri Dabbangs representing the Bhojpuri Film Industry. Season 3 Curtain Raiser Event was a grand affair in Mumbai on 19th Jan 2013, where Salman Khan, Katrina Kaif, Bipasha Basu, Prabhu Deva performed with many other celebrities. Opening Ceremony is at Kochi on 9th Feb 2013 where Kerala Strikers will be playing against Mumbai Heroes. Popular Bollywood actor Bipasha Basu is appointed as the brand ambassador for Celebrity Cricket League (CCL), Season 3 with Kajal Agarwal.
