Adrien Brody (born April 14, 1973) is an American actor and film producer. He received widespread recognition and acclaim after starring in Roman Polanski's "The Pianist" (2002), for which he became the youngest actor to win the Academy Award for Best Actor at age 29. Brody is also the only American actor to receive the French César Award.
Early life.
Brody was born in Woodhaven, Queens, New York, the son of Sylvia Plachy, a photojournalist, and Elliot Brody, a retired history professor and painter. Brody's father is of Polish Jewish descent; Brody's mother – who was raised as a Catholic – was born in Budapest, Hungary, the daughter of a Catholic Hungarian aristocrat father and a Czech Jewish mother. Brody was raised "without a strong connection" to Judaism or Catholicism. As a child, he performed magic shows at children's birthday parties as "The Amazing Adrien". He attended the I.S. 145 Joseph Pulitzer middle school and New York's Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School of Music & Art and Performing Arts (famous as the inspiration for television's "Fame"). His parents enrolled him in acting classes to distance him from the dangerous children with whom he associated. He attended summer camp at Long Lake Camp for the Arts in the Adirondacks in upstate New York. Brody attended the Stony Brook University before transferring to Queens College for a semester.
Career.
Taking acting classes as a youth, by age thirteen, he appeared in an Off-Broadway play and a PBS television film. Brody hovered on the brink of stardom, receiving an Independent Spirit Award nomination for his role in the 1998 film "Restaurant" and later praise for his roles in Spike Lee's "Summer of Sam" and Terrence Malick's "The Thin Red Line". He received widespread recognition when he was cast as the lead in Roman Polanski's "The Pianist" (2002). To prepare for the role, Brody withdrew for months, gave up his apartment and his car, was left by his then-girlfriend, learned how to play Chopin on the piano, and lost 29 lbs (13 kg). The role won him an Academy Award for Best Actor, making him, at 29, the youngest actor ever to win the award, and to date the only winner under the age of 30. He also won a César Award for his performance.
Brody appeared on "Saturday Night Live" on May 10, 2003, his first TV work, but he was banned from the show after giving an improvised introduction while wearing faux dreadlocks for Jamaican reggae musical guest Sean Paul (the show's producer, Lorne Michaels, is notorious for hating unscripted performances). However, the unscripted intro remains in reruns of the episode. Other TV appearances include NBC's "The Today Show" and on MTV's "Punk'd" after being tricked by Ashton Kutcher.
After "The Pianist" Brody appeared in four very different films. In "Dummy" (released in 2003 but originally shot in 2000, just prior to his work in "The Pianist") he portrayed Steven Schoichet, a socially awkward aspiring ventriloquist in pursuit of a love interest (his employment counsellor). He learned ventriloquism and puppetry for the role (under the tutelage of actor/ventriloquist Alan Semok) convincingly enough to perform all of the voice stunts and puppet manipulation live on set in real time, with no subsequent post dubbing. He played Noah Percy, a mentally disabled young man, in the film "The Village", by M. Night Shyamalan, shell-shocked war veteran Jack Starks in "The Jacket", writer Jack Driscoll in the 2005 "King Kong" remake, and father-to-be Peter Whitman in "The Darjeeling Limited" by Wes Anderson. "King Kong" was both a critical and box office success; it grossed $550 million worldwide and is Brody's most successful film to date in monetary terms. Additionally, Brody played a detective in "Hollywoodland". He has also appeared in Diet Coke and Schweppes commercials as well as Tori Amos' music video for "A Sorta Fairytale".
On January 5, 2006, Brody confirmed speculation that he was interested in playing the role of The Joker in 2008's "The Dark Knight". However, Christopher Nolan and Warner Bros. decided instead to cast Heath Ledger in the role. He was also in talks with Paramount to play Spock in J. J. Abrams "Star Trek XI", but it ultimately went to Zachary Quinto. Brody starred with Mark Ruffalo as gentleman con men in Rian Johnson's "The Brothers Bloom", released in May 2009. In 2010, he starred in "Splice", a science fiction film written and directed by Vincenzo Natali. Originally a Sundance film, "Splice" was adopted by Dark Castle Entertainment and distributed by Warner Bros. Most recently, he played the star role of Royce in "Predators" (a sequel to the original "Predator"), directed by Nimród Antal and produced by Robert Rodriguez.
In 2011, Brody starred in a Stella Artois beer ad called "Crying Beans," that premiered right after half-time of the Super Bowl XLV as part of Stella's "She Is a Thing of Beauty” campaign.
On January 16, 2012, Brody made his runway debut as a model for Prada Men Fall/Winter 2012 show. Also in January, he was named ambassador for the Gillette Fusion ProGuide Styler which the company began marketing the following month.
Personal life.
In 1992, Brody was seriously hurt in a motorcycle accident in which he flew over a car and crashed head-first into a crosswalk. He spent months recuperating. He has broken his nose three times doing stunts; the most recent was during the filming of "Summer of Sam". 
Brody began dating Spanish actress Elsa Pataky in 2006. For Pataky's 31st birthday in July 2007, Brody purchased her a 19th-century castle in New York state. Brody and Pataky were featured at their New York home in a 35-page spread for "HELLO!" magazine in October 2008. The pair broke up in 2009.
In 2010, Brody sued the "Giallo" filmmakers, alleging that they failed to pay his full salary.
