Zachary Knight "Zach" Galifianakis ( ; born October 1, 1969) is an Greek American stand-up comedian, actor and pianist known for his numerous film and television appearances including his own "Comedy Central Presents" special. He garnered attention for his role as Alan Garner in the comedy "The Hangover" films directed by Todd Phillips. He also co-starred in Phillips' road trip comedy "Due Date" (2010).
Early life.
Galifianakis was born in Wilkesboro, North Carolina. His mother, Mary Frances (née Cashion), ran a community center for the arts, and his father, Harry Galifianakis, was a heating oil vendor. Galifianakis' paternal grandparents emigrated from Crete, Greece, and Galifianakis was baptized in his father's Greek Orthodox faith. His mother has Ulster-Scots ancestry. He has two siblings, a younger sister, Merritt, and an older brother, Greg. His cousin is Washington Post cartoonist Nicholas Galifianakis. His uncle, Nick Galifianakis, was a congressman from North Carolina between 1967 and 1973. He attended Wilkes Central High School, and subsequently attended but did not graduate from North Carolina State University, where he was a communications major.
Early career.
Galifianakis' career began on television in 1996, when he played the recurring role of a stoner named Deuce in the short-lived sitcom "Boston Common". Then he joined "Saturday Night Live" as a writer but lasted only two weeks. Galifianakis co-starred in the film "Out Cold" and had small roles in "Corky Romano", "Below", "Bubble Boy", "Heartbreakers", "Into the Wild", "Super High Me", "Little Fish Strange Pond", and "Largo".
He had his own episode of "Comedy Central Presents", which first aired in September 2001. It included a stand-up routine and a segment with a piano, and concluded with an a cappella group (The Night Owls, introduced as his "12 ex-girlfriends") singing "Eternal Flame" by The Bangles while he made jokes. In 2002, he was the host of his own VH1 talk show called "Late World with Zach". It featured many of his friends and regular performers from the LA comedy and music venue Largo where he appeared frequently during this time period. One episode featured Largo regulars Jon Brion and Rhett Miller as musical guests. His next television role was as a coroner named Davis in the Fox drama "Tru Calling", which lasted from 2003 to 2005. He has also appeared many times on "Jimmy Kimmel Live!" and has made three appearances on "Reno 911!" as "Frisbee".
Galifianakis starred as Alan Finger on the Comedy Central show "Dog Bites Man", a fake news program that caught people during candid moments thinking they were being interviewed by a real news crew. In addition, he was on an episode of the Comedy Central show "The Sarah Silverman Program" as Fred the Homeless Guy. He also had a recurring guest role as a doctor on the animated Adult Swim show "Tom Goes to the Mayor" and appeared in several episodes of "Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!" in a recurring role as Tairy Greene.
In 2006, Galifianakis was featured in Fiona Apple's music video for the song "Not About Love" where he is seen lip-synching the lyrics to the song. A year later Kanye West employed Galifianakis and indie rock musician Will Oldham for similar purposes in the second version of the video for his song "Can't Tell Me Nothing". In June 2006 Galifianakis released the single "Come On and Get It (Up in 'Dem Guts)", a comedic rap/hip-hop/dance song which features Apple's vocals.
Galifianakis was, together with Patton Oswalt, Brian Posehn, and Maria Bamford, one of the four Comedians of Comedy, a periodic packaged comedy tour in the style of The Original Kings of Comedy and the Blue Collar Comedy Tour. They chose to perform at live rock clubs as opposed to comedy clubs to try to reach a different audience. Much of the tour was taped, and has been featured in both a short-lived TV series on Comedy Central and a full length movie that has appeared at SXSW and on Showtime.
On February 22, 2008, he made an appearance on the "". He interviewed various members of the "Jackass" cast.
Galifianakis starred in the independent film "Visioneers" which played in select cities in 2008. This was Galifianakis's first starring role in a film and was given a direct-to-DVD release. That same year, Galifianakis appeared in a web video series of advertisements for Absolut vodka, along with Tim Heidecker and Eric Wareheim, creating a parody of the "Golden Girls" in which one has a deep anger issue, breaking the fourth wall in exasperation and outright violence on the set. He also completed the pilot "Speed Freaks" for Comedy Central.
"Between Two Ferns with Zach Galifianakis".
Galifianakis has a series of videos on the Funny or Die website titled "Between Two Ferns With Zach Galifianakis" where he conducts interviews with popular celebrities between two potted ferns. He has interviewed Jimmy Kimmel, Michael Cera, Jon Hamm, Natalie Portman, Charlize Theron, Bradley Cooper (with a brief appearance by Carrot Top), Conan O'Brien and Andy Richter (with a brief appearance by Andy Dick), Ben Stiller, Steve Carell, Sean Penn, Bruce Willis, Tila Tequila, Jennifer Aniston and Will Ferrell. His interview style consists of typical interview questions, bizarre "non sequiturs" and sometimes inappropriate sexual questions and comments.
Mainstream performances: 2009–present.
Galifianakis co-starred as Alan Garner in the hit comedy "The Hangover" and earned the MTV Movie Award for the Best Comedic Performance. Following "The Hangover"'s release, Galifianakis was prominently advertised in subsequent films that featured him in supporting roles. These included "G-Force", "Youth in Revolt", and the Oscar-nominated film "Up in the Air".
Galifianakis also played a supporting role in the HBO series "Bored to Death". He hosted "Saturday Night Live" on March 6, 2010 during the show's 35th season, during which he shaved his beard mid-show for a sketch, and then closed the show wearing a fake beard. He hosted again on March 12, 2011 and shaved his head this time, in a Mr. T-like hairstyle, which was allegedly supposed to be used for a sketch that never aired due to time constraints.
In 2010, he starred in several films, including "Dinner for Schmucks", "It's Kind of a Funny Story", and "Due Date".
On October 29, 2010, while debating marijuana legalization on the show HBO's "Real Time with Bill Maher", Galifianakis appeared to have smoked marijuana on live television; host Bill Maher denied that it was real marijuana in an interview with Wolf Blitzer during an episode of "The Situation Room". 
In 2011, he returned as Alan Garner in the sequel, "The Hangover Part II", which was set in Thailand.
In 2011, he voiced Humpty Dumpty in DreamWorks Animation's "Puss in Boots".
Galifianakis starred alongside Will Ferrell in "The Campaign", a political comedy directed by Jay Roach and released in 2012. During an interview following the shoot, Galifianakis expressed a negative view of the Tea Party, stating, "I understand Tea Partyers’ anger with the system, but they are in way over their heads and often racially motivated, and I can’t be part of that."
Personal life.
On August 11, 2012, Galifianakis married Quinn Lundberg, co-founder of the Growing Voices charity, at the UBC Farm in Vancouver, Canada. Galifianakis is a frequent user of chewing tobacco. For his character in the 2007 film "Into the Wild", he was asked to put prunes in his mouth to appear as if he was using dipping tobacco; instead, he told them to get him the real stuff.
References.
Notes
