Searching for Sugar Man is a Swedish/British documentary directed by Malik Bendjelloul, detailing the efforts of two Cape Town fans, Stephen 'Sugar' Segerman and Craig Bartholomew Strydom, to find out if the rumored death of American musician Rodriguez was true, and, if not, to discover what had become of him. Rodriguez's music, which never took off in the United States, had become wildly popular in South Africa, but little was known about him there. The film is produced by Simon Chinn and John Battsek. In February 2013 it won the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature.
Production.
Initially using 8 mm film to record the movie, director Bendjelloul ran out of money for more film to record the final few shots. He resorted to filming the remaining shots on his smartphone using an app called 8mm Vintage Camera to complete the film.
Release.
"Searching for Sugar Man" was the opening film at the Sundance Film Festival, the Sheffield DocFest and the Traverse City Film Festival. It opened theatrically in the U.S. and the U.K. on July 27, 2012.
Reception.
Critical response.
Critical response for "Searching for Sugar Man" was very positive. The film currently holds a 96 percent "Certified Fresh" rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes. 
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film a glowing four-star review, writing "I hope you're able to see this film...and yes, it exists because we need for it to." "The New York Times" critic Manohla Dargis also wrote a positive review, calling the film "... a hugely appealing documentary about fans, faith and an enigmatic Age of Aquarius musician who burned bright and hopeful before disappearing." Critic Dargis subsequently named "Searching for Sugar Man" one of the 10 best films of 2012.
Omissions.
Numerous reviews have pointed out the omissions in the documentary, with Rodriguez being a huge star in Australia and New Zealand. He toured regularly and went five times platinum at a time when, according to the documentary, the trail was cold. He toured Australia in 1979, 1981, 2007, with the Mark Gillespie Band and Midnight Oil, and for the East Coast Blues & Roots Festival. 
Accolades.
"Searching for Sugar Man" won the Best Documentary category at the 2013 Academy Awards. The film also won the Best Documentary category at the 2013 BAFTA awards.
"Searching for Sugar Man" won the Special Jury Prize and the Audience Award for best international documentary at the Sundance Film Festival. The film also won the Audience Award at the Los Angeles Film Festival, the Audience Award at the Durban International Film Festival, the Audience Award at the Melbourne Film Festival, 2nd place Winner Audience Award at the Tribeca Film Festival and the Grand Jury Prize at the Moscow International Film Festival.
At the International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam held in November 2012, "Searching for Sugar Man" won both the Audience and the Best Music Documentary awards. 
At the Doha Tribeca Film Festival (DTFF) "Searching for Sugar Man" was awarded $50,000 (U.S.) where the film shared the "Best of the Fest" audience award with the Chinese feature film "Full Circle.
The Cinema Eye Honors for Nonfiction Filmmaking has nominated "Searching for Sugar Man" for five awards, tying with "The Imposter" for the most nominations. Winners of the 6th Annual Cinema Eye Honors will be announced on January 9, 2013 as Cinema Eye returns for a third year to New York City’s Museum of the Moving Image in Astoria, Queens, New York.
The International Documentary Association (IDA) awarded "Searching for Sugar Man" Best Feature and Best Music at the 28th Annual IDA Documentary Awards on December 7, 2012 at the Directors Guild of America building, Los Angeles, California.
Critics' Choice Awards
Soundtrack.
Searching for Sugar Man is a 2012 soundtrack album of the American musician Rodriguez.
As a result of the popularity of the documentary and Rodriguez' music appearing in the documentary film, the soundtrack contains a compilation containing his materials from his two studio albums.
The album has charted both in Sweden, where it reached #13 in the Swedish Albums Chart, and in New Zealand, where it reached #24.
