Leonard Simon Nimoy ( ; born March 26, 1931) is an American actor, film director, poet, singer, accordion player and photographer. Nimoy is best known for his role of Spock in (1966–1969), and in multiple film, television, and video game sequels.
Nimoy began his career in his early twenties, teaching acting classes in Hollywood and making minor film and television appearances through the 1950s, as well as playing the title role in "Kid Monk Baroni". In 1953, he served in the United States Army. In 1965, he made his first appearance in the rejected "Star Trek" pilot, "", and would go on to play the character of Mr. Spock until 1969, followed by seven feature films and guest slots in various sequels. His character of Spock had a significant cultural impact and garnered Nimoy three Emmy Award nominations; "TV Guide" named Spock one of the 50 greatest TV characters. After the original "Star Trek" series, Nimoy starred in "" for two seasons, hosted the documentary series "In Search of...", and narrated "Civilization IV", as well as making several well-received stage appearances.
Nimoy's fame as Spock is such that both his autobiographies, "I Am Not Spock" (1975) and "I Am Spock" (1995), detail his existence as being shared between the character and himself.
Early life.
Nimoy was born in Boston, Massachusetts in the West End, to Yiddish-speaking Orthodox Jewish immigrants from Iziaslav, Soviet Union (now Ukraine). Nimoy is four days younger than his Star Trek co-star William Shatner. His father, Max Nimoy, owned a barbershop in the Mattapan section of the city. His mother, Dora Nimoy (née Spinner), was a homemaker. Nimoy began acting at the age of eight in children's and neighborhood theater. His parents wanted him to attend college and pursue a stable career, or even learn to play the accordion—with which, his father advised, Nimoy could always make a living—but his grandfather encouraged him to become an actor. His first major role was at 17, as Ralphie in an amateur production of Clifford Odets' "Awake and Sing!". Nimoy took drama classes at Boston College in 1953 but failed to complete his studies, and in the 1970s studied photography at the University of California, Los Angeles. He has an MA in Education from Antioch College, an honorary doctorate from Antioch University in Ohio, and an honorary doctorate of humane letters from Boston University.
Nimoy served as a sergeant in the U.S. Army from 1953 through 1955, alongside fellow actor Ken Berry and architect Frank Gehry.
Career.
Stage and screen.
Nimoy's film and television acting career began in 1951, but after receiving the title role in the 1952 film "Kid Monk Baroni", a story about a street punk turned professional boxer, he played more than 50 small parts in B movies, TV shows such as "Perry Mason", and "Dragnet", and serials such as Republic Pictures' "Zombies of the Stratosphere" (1952). To support his family Nimoy often worked other jobs, such as delivering newspapers in the morning.
He played an Army sergeant in the 1954 science fiction thriller, "Them!", a professor in the 1958 science fiction movie "The Brain Eaters", and had a role in "The Balcony" (1963), a film adaptation of the Jean Genet play. Together with Vic Morrow, he produced a 1966 version of "Deathwatch", an English language film version of Genet's play "Haute Surveillance", adapted and directed by Morrow and starring Nimoy.
On television Nimoy appeared as "Sonarman" in two episodes of the 1957–1958 syndicated military drama, "The Silent Service", based on actual events of the submarine section of the United States Navy. He had guest roles in the "Sea Hunt" series from 1958 to 1960 and had a minor role in 1961 in "The Twilight Zone" episode "A Quality of Mercy". He also appeared in the syndicated "Highway Patrol". starring Broderick Crawford. 
In 1959, Nimoy he was cast as Luke Reid in the episode "Night of Decision" of the ABC/Warner Brothers western series, "Colt .45", starring Wayde Preston. The episode was directed by Leslie H. Martinson.
Nimoy appeared three times in ethnic roles on NBC's "Wagon Train", the No. 1 program of 1962. He portrayed Bernabe Zamora in "The Estaban Zamora Story" (1959), "Cherokee Ned" in "The Maggie Hamilton Story" (1960), and Joaquin Delgado in "The Tiburcio Mendez Story" (1961).
Throughout the 1960s, Nimoy appeared in "Bonanza" (1960), "The Rebel" (1960), "Two Faces West" (1961), "Rawhide" (episode, Incident Before Black Pass. 1961), "The Untouchables" (1962), "The Eleventh Hour" (1962), "Combat!" (1963, 1965), "Daniel Boone", "The Outer Limits" (1964), "The Virginian" (1965), "Get Smart" (1966), and "Mission Impossible (TV series) "(1969-1971). He appeared again in the 1995 "Outer Limits" series.
On the stage, Nimoy played the lead-role in a short run of Gore Vidal's "Visit to a Small Planet" in 1968, shortly before the end of the "Star Trek" series. This play was staged at the Pheasant Run Playhouse in St. Charles, Illinois (which has since been closed).
Nimoy and William Shatner first worked together on an episode of "The Man from U.N.C.L.E.", "The Project Strigas Affair" (1964). Their characters were from opposite sides of the Iron Curtain, though with his saturnine looks, Nimoy was predictably the villain, with Shatner playing a reluctant U.N.C.L.E. recruit.
Nimoy first worked with DeForest Kelley in "Man of Violence", a season two episode of "The Virginian".
"Star Trek".
Nimoy's greatest prominence came from his role in the original ' series. As the half-Vulcan, half-human Spock—a role he chose instead of one on the soap opera "Peyton Place"—Nimoy became a star, and the press predicted that he would "have his choice of movies or television series." He formed a long-standing friendship with Shatner, who portrayed his commanding officer, saying of their relationship, "We were like brothers." ' was broadcast from 1966 to 1969. Nimoy earned three Emmy nominations for his work on the iconic program that has defined American television science fiction, both for fans of science fiction, and beyond.
He went on to reprise the Spock character in ' and two episodes of '. The six Star Trek movies feature the original "Star Trek" cast including Nimoy, who also directed two of the films. He played the elder Spock in the 2009 "Star Trek" movie, directed by J. J. Abrams.
Nimoy was asked to read these verses as part of his narration for "Civilization IV".
After "Star Trek".
Following "Star Trek" in 1969, Nimoy immediately joined the cast of the spy series "", which was seeking a replacement for Martin Landau. Nimoy was cast in the role of Paris, an IMF agent who was an ex-magician and make-up expert 'The Great Paris'. He played the role during the of the show from 1969 to 1971.
He co-starred with Yul Brynner and Richard Crenna in the Western movie "Catlow" (1971). He also had roles in two episodes of Rod Serling's "Night Gallery" (1972 and 1973) and "Columbo" (1973) where he played a murderous doctor who was one of the few criminals with whom Columbo became angry. Nimoy appeared in various made for television films such as "Assault on the Wayne" (1970), "Baffled" (1972), "The Alpha Caper" (1973), "The Missing Are Deadly" (1974), "Seizure: The Story Of Kathy Morris" (1980), and "Marco Polo" (1982). He received an Emmy award nomination for best supporting actor for the TV film "A Woman Called Golda" (1982).
In 1975, Leonard Nimoy filmed an opening introduction to Ripley's World of the Unexplained museum located at Gatlinburg, Tennessee and Fisherman's Wharf at San Francisco, California. In the late 1970s, he hosted and narrated the television series "In Search of...", which investigated paranormal or unexplained events or subjects. He also has a memorable character part as a psychiatrist in Philip Kaufman's remake of "Invasion of the Body Snatchers".
During this time, Nimoy also won acclaim for a series of stage roles. He appeared in such plays as "Vincent", "Fiddler on the Roof", "The Man in the Glass Booth", "Oliver!", "Six Rms Riv Vu", "Full Circle", "Camelot", "One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest", "The King and I", "Caligula", "The Four Poster", "Twelfth Night", "Sherlock Holmes", "Equus" and "My Fair Lady".
Other work after "Star Trek".
In 1978, Nimoy played Dr. David Kibner in "Invasion of the Body Snatchers". He also did occasional work as a voice actor in animated feature films, including the character of Galvatron in "" in 1986.
Nimoy was featured as the voice-over narrator for the CBS paranormal series "" in 1991.
In 1991, Nimoy teamed up with Robert B. Radnitz to produce a movie for TNT about a "pro bono publico" lawsuit brought by public interest attorney William John Cox on behalf of Mel Mermelstein, an Auschwitz survivor, against a group of organizations engaged in Holocaust denial. Nimoy also played the Mermelstein role and believes: "If every project brought me the same sense of fulfillment that "Never Forget" did, I would truly be in paradise."
Nimoy performed as Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde in "The Pagemaster" in 1994. In 1998, he had a leading role as Mustapha Mond in the made-for-television production of Aldous Huxley's "Brave New World."
Together with John de Lancie, another ex-actor from the Star Trek series, Nimoy created "Alien Voices", an audio-production venture that specializes in audio dramatizations. Among the works jointly narrated by the couple are "The Time Machine", "A Journey to the Center of the Earth", "The Lost World", "The Invisible Man", and "The First Men in the Moon", as well as several television specials for the Sci-Fi Channel. In an interview published on the official "Star Trek" website, Nimoy said that "Alien Voices" was discontinued because the series didn't sell well enough to recoup costs.
From 1994 until 1998, Nimoy narrated the "Ancient Mysteries" series on A&E including "The Sacred Water of Lourdes" and "Secrets of the Romanovs". He also appeared in advertising in the United Kingdom for the computer company Time Computers in the late 1990s. In 1997, Nimoy played the prophet Samuel, alongside Nathaniel Parker, in The Bible Collection movie "David". He had a central role in "Brave New World", a 1998 TV-movie version of Aldous Huxley's novel where he played a character reminiscent of Spock in his philosophical balancing of unpredictable human qualities with the need for control. Nimoy has also appeared in several popular television seriesincluding "Futurama" and "The Simpsons"as both himself and Spock.
Nimoy appeared in "Hearts of Space" program number 142 – "Whales alive."
In 1999, he voiced the narration of the English version of the Sega Dreamcast game "Seaman" and promoted Y2K educational films.
In 2000, he provided on-camera hosting and introductions for 45 half-hour episodes of an anthology series entitled "Our 20th Century" on the AEN TV Network. The series covers world news, sports, entertainment, technology, and fashion using original archive news clips from 1930 to 1975 from the National Archives in Washington, D.C. and other private archival sources.
In 2003, he announced his retirement from acting to concentrate on photography, but subsequently appeared in several television commercials with William Shatner for Priceline.com. He appeared in a commercial for Aleve, an arthritis pain medication, which aired during the 2006 Super Bowl.
Nimoy provided a comprehensive series of voiceovers for the 2005 computer game "Civilization IV". He did the TV series "Next Wave" where he interviewed people about technology. He is the host in the documentary film "The Once and Future Griffith Observatory" currently running in the Leonard Nimoy Event Horizon Theater located at the recently reopened Griffith Observatory in Los Angeles, California.
In 2007, he produced the play, "Shakespeare's Will" by Canadian Playwright Vern Thiessen. The one-woman show starred Jeanmarie Simpson as Shakespeare's wife, Anne Hathaway. The production was directed by Nimoy's wife, Susan Bay.
Nimoy was given casting approval over who would play the young Spock in the newest film.
On January 6, 2009, he was interviewed by William Shatner on Biography Channel's "Shatner's Raw Nerve".
In May 2009, he made an appearance as the mysterious Dr. William Bell in the season finale of "Fringe", which explores the existence of a parallel universe. Nimoy returned as Dr. Bell in the autumn for an extended arc, and according to Roberto Orci, co-creator of "Fringe", Bell will be "the beginning of the answers to even bigger questions." This choice led one reviewer to question if "Fringe'"s plot might be a homage to the "Star Trek" episode "Mirror, Mirror", which featured an alternate reality "Mirror Universe" concept and an evil version of Spock distinguished by a goatee.
On the May 9, 2009 episode of "Saturday Night Live", Nimoy appeared as a surprise guest on the skit "Weekend Update". During a mock interview, Nimoy called old Trekkies who did not like the new movie "dickheads". In the 2009 "Star Trek" movie, he plays the older Spock from the original "Star Trek" timeline; Zachary Quinto portrays the young Spock.
Starring with Will Ferrell in the TV-based movie "Land of the Lost" in June 2009, he voiced the part of "The Zarn", an Altrusian.
Nimoy is also a frequent and popular reader for "Selected Shorts", an ongoing series of programs at Symphony Space in New York City (that also tours around the country) which features actors, and sometimes authors, reading works of short fiction. The programs are broadcast on radio and available on websites through Public Radio International, National Public Radio and WNYC radio. Nimoy was honored by Symphony Space with the renaming of the Thalia Theater as the Leonard Nimoy Thalia Theater.
Nimoy has also provided voiceovers for the "Star Trek Online" massively multiplayer online game, released in February 2010, as well as "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep" as Master Xehanort, the series' leading villain. Tetsuya Nomura, the director of "Birth by Sleep", stated that he chose Nimoy for the role specifically because of his role as Spock.
Retirement.
In April 2010, Leonard Nimoy announced that he was retiring from playing the signature character of Star Trek's Spock, citing both his advanced age and the desire to give Zachary Quinto the opportunity to enjoy full media attention with the Spock character. "Kingdom Hearts: Birth by Sleep" was to be his final performance. However, in February 2011, he announced his definite plan to return to "Fringe" and reprise his role as William Bell. His retirement from acting has not included voice acting, as his appearance in the third season of "Fringe" includes his voice (his character appears only in animated scenes), and he provided the voice of Sentinel Prime in '. In May 2011 Nimoy starred in the alternate version music video of Bruno Mars' "The Lazy Song". Aaron Bay-Schuck, the Atlantic Records executive who signed Bruno Mars to the label, is Nimoy's stepson. Nimoy provided the voice of Spock as a guest star in a Season 5 episode of the CBS sitcom, "The Big Bang Theory". The episode is titled "The Transporter Malfunction" and aired on March 29, 2012, and is frequently mentioned by several of the main characters (especially Sheldon Cooper, who idolizes Nimoy). He also lent his voice as narrator to the free documentary "Destiny in Space" showcasing video and images of space from nine shuttle missions over four years time. In Spring 2012, Nimoy reprised his role of William Bell in "Fringe", in the fourth season episodes "Letters of Transit" and "Brave New World" parts 1 & 2. Nimoy reprised his role as Master Xehanort in the recent title '. On August 30, 2012, Mr. Nimoy narrated a satirical segment about Mitt Romney's life on Comedy Central's "The Daily Show with Jon Stewart."
Photography.
Nimoy's interest in photography began in childhood; he still owns a camera that he rebuilt at the age of 13. His photography studies at UCLA occurred after "Star Trek" and "Mission: Impossible", when Nimoy seriously considered changing careers. His work has been exhibited at the R. Michelson Galleries in Northampton, Massachusetts and the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art.
Writing.
Nimoy has written two volumes of autobiography. The first was called "I Am Not Spock" (1975) and was controversial, as many fans incorrectly assumed that Nimoy was distancing himself from the Spock character. In the book, Nimoy conducts dialogues between himself and Spock. The contents of this first autobiography also touched on a self-proclaimed "identity crisis" that seemed to haunt Nimoy throughout his career. It also related to an apparent love/hate relationship with the character of Spock and the Trek franchise.
The second volume, "I Am Spock" (1995), saw Nimoy communicating that he finally realized his years of portraying the Spock character had led to a much greater identification between the fictional character and himself. Nimoy had much input into how Spock would act in certain situations, and conversely, Nimoy's contemplation of how Spock acted gave him cause to think about things in a way that he never would have thought if he had not portrayed the character. As such, in this autobiography Nimoy maintains that in some meaningful sense he has merged with Spock while at the same time maintaining the distance between fact and fiction.
Nimoy has also written several volumes of poetry, some published along with a number of his photographs. His latest effort is titled "A Lifetime of Love: Poems on the Passages of Life" (2002). His poetry can be found in the Contemporary Poets index of The HyperTexts. In the mid-1970s Nimoy wrote and starred in a one-man play called "Vincent" based on the play "Van Gogh" by Phillip Stephens.
In 1995, Nimoy was involved in the production of "Primortals", a comic book series published by Tekno Comix about first contact with aliens, which had arisen from a discussion he had with Isaac Asimov. There was a novelization by Steve Perry.
Music.
The albums were popular and resulted in numerous live appearances and promotional record signings that attracted crowds of fans in the thousands. The early recordings were produced by Charles Grean, who may be best known for his version of "Quentin's Theme" from the mid-sixties goth soap opera "Dark Shadows". These recordings are generally regarded as unintentionally camp, though his tongue-in-cheek performance of "The Ballad of Bilbo Baggins" received a fair amount of airplay when Peter Jackson's "The Lord of the Rings" films were released.
In addition to his own music career he directed a 1985 music video for The Bangles' "Going Down to Liverpool". He makes a brief cameo appearance in the video as their driver. This came about because his son Adam Nimoy (now a frequent television director) was a friend of Bangles lead singer Susanna Hoffs from college. He released a version of Johnny Cash's song "I Walk the Line".
Nimoy's voice appeared in sampled form on a song by the pop band Information Society in the late Eighties. The song, "What's on Your Mind (Pure Energy)" (released in 1988), reached No. 3 on the US Pop charts, and No. 1 on Dance charts. The group's self-titled LP contains several other samples from the original Star Trek television series.
Nimoy also appears in the alternate music video for the song "Lazy Song" by pop artist Bruno Mars.
Personal life.
Nimoy has long been active in the Jewish community, and he can speak and read Yiddish. In 1997, he narrated the documentary "A Life Apart: Hasidism in America", about the various sects of Hasidic Orthodox Jews. In October 2002, Nimoy published "The Shekhina Project", a photographic study exploring the feminine aspect of God's presence, inspired by Kabbalah.
Nimoy has been married twice. In 1954, he married actress Sandra Zober (1927–2011), whom he divorced in 1987. He had two children with her, director Adam Nimoy and Julie Nimoy, who both appeared in an Oldsmobile commercial, with the tagline "This is not your father's Oldsmobile". In 1988, he married actress Susan Bay, who is a cousin of director Michael Bay.
In a 2001 DVD, Nimoy revealed that he became an alcoholic while working on "Star Trek" and ended up in rehab. William Shatner, in his 2008 book "", speaks about how later in their lives Nimoy tried to help Shatner's alcoholic wife.
Nimoy still has the last pair of Spock's ears he wore on the series, as a memento. He has said that the character of Spock, which he played twelve to fourteen hours a day, five days a week, influenced his personality in private life. Each weekend during the original run of the series, he would be in character throughout Saturday and into Sunday, behaving more like Spock than himself: more logical, more rational, more thoughtful, less emotional and finding a calm in every situation. It was only on Sunday in the early afternoon that Spock's influence on his behavior would fade off and he would feel more himself again – only to start the cycle over Monday morning.
Nimoy also introduced the Vulcan nerve pinch in an early "Star Trek" episode "". Initially, Spock was supposed to knock out an evil Kirk in the Engineering room by striking him on the back of the head. Nimoy felt that the action was not in keeping with the nature of Spock's character, so he suggested the "pinch" as a non-violent alternative, suggesting that Vulcans have the ability to emit energy from their fingertips, which, if applied to the correct nerve cluster, could render a human unconscious. Nimoy explained this to the episode's director and, according to Nimoy, the director had no idea what he was talking about. However, Nimoy would express relief in later interviews and appearances that when he explained the concept to William Shatner, he understood it immediately, and Nimoy credits Shatner's reaction to the nerve pinch in the episode as what really sold it. In early scripts for "Star Trek", the nerve pinch was referred to as the "F.S.N.P.", which stood for "Famous Spock Neck Pinch."
He has remained good friends with co-star William Shatner (also of Ukrainian-Jewish descent) and was best man at Shatner's third marriage in 1997. Shatner is only four days older than Nimoy. He also remained good friends with DeForest Kelley until Kelley's death in 1999.
The Space Foundation named Nimoy as the recipient of the 2010 Douglas S. Morrow Public Outreach Award for creating a positive role model that inspired untold numbers of viewers to learn more about the universe.
In 2009, Nimoy was honored by his childhood hometown when the Office of Mayor Thomas Menino proclaimed the date of November 14, 2009 as "Leonard Nimoy Day" in the City of Boston.
