John Michael Green (born August 24, 1977) is an American author of young adult fiction and a YouTube vlogger and educator. His writings have been recognized with the Michael L. Printz Award and as the Stonewall Honor Book in Children & Young Adult Literature. He is also a #1 best selling author on the New York Times Bestseller list.
Early life and career.
Green grew up in Orlando, Florida, before attending Indian Springs School, a boarding and day school outside of Birmingham, Alabama. He graduated from Kenyon College in 2000 with a double major in English and Religious Studies. His first book, "Looking for Alaska," was largely inspired by his time at Indian Springs School.
After leaving college, Green spent five months working as a student chaplain in a children's hospital, and was enrolled at the University of Chicago Divinity School at the time, although he never actually attended. His experiences of working with children with life-threatening illnesses inspired him to later write "The Fault in Our Stars".
Green lived for several years in Chicago, where he worked for the book review journal "Booklist" as a publishing assistant and production editor while writing "Looking for Alaska." While there, he reviewed hundreds of books, particularly literary fiction and books about Islam or conjoined twins. He has also critiqued books for "The New York Times Book Review" and written for National Public Radio's "All Things Considered" and WBEZ, Chicago's public radio station. Green lived in New York City for two years while his wife attended graduate school.
Writings.
Green's first novel, "Looking for Alaska" (2005), won the 2006 Michael L. Printz Award presented by the American Library Association, and made the ALA 2005 Top 10 Best Book for Young Adults. The film rights to "Looking for Alaska" were purchased by Paramount in 2005, but after being stuck in development, is as of 2012 unlikely to be made.
His second novel, "An Abundance of Katherines" (2006), was a 2007 Michael L. Printz Award Honor Book, a finalist for the Los Angeles Times Book Prize.
Green collaborated on a book with fellow young adult authors Maureen Johnson and Lauren Myracle called "Let It Snow" (2008), which contains three interconnected short stories that take place in the same small town on Christmas Eve during a massive snowstorm. The story that he penned is called "A Cheertastic Christmas Miracle". On November 27, 2009, the book reached number 10 on the New York Times bestseller list for paperback children's books.
Green's third novel, "Paper Towns", was released on October 16, 2008. It debuted at number 5 on the New York Times bestseller list for children's books, and the movie rights to "Paper Towns" have been optioned by Mandate Pictures and Mr. Mudd. Green was hired to write the "Paper Towns" screenplay. On April 30, 2009, "Paper Towns" was awarded the 2009 Edgar Award for Best Young Adult Novel and the 2010 Corine Literature Prize.
Green collaborated with fellow young adult writer and friend David Levithan on a book entitled "Will Grayson, Will Grayson," which was released April 6, 2010. "Will Grayson, Will Grayson" received multiple awards, including a Stonewall Honor Book in Children & Young Adult Literature (for excellence in GLBT literature) and an Odyssey Award for Excellence in Audiobook Production Honor Book. John Green appeared on the sixty-first episode of Smart Mouths Podcast to discuss "Will Grayson, Will Grayson". 
In August 2009, Green confirmed he was writing a new book, titled "The Sequel", with an expected release in 2011. On a BlogTV show, he announced that he had scrapped "The Sequel". His fifth book, titled "The Fault in Our Stars" was officially announced on June 28, 2011, and was released on January 10, 2012. On a YouTube live show, John explained that several parts of "The Sequel" were reworked into "The Fault in Our Stars". John Green signed all 150,000 copies of the first printing, as well as his wife and his brother leaving their own symbols, a Yeti and an Anglerfish (known as the "Hanklerfish"), respectively. The New York Times Best Seller List for Children's Books listed "The Fault in Our Stars" at #1 for the weeks of January 29, 2012 and February 5, 2012.
Vlogbrothers.
Brotherhood 2.0 project.
John Green and his brother Hank ran a video blog project called "Brotherhood 2.0". The original project ran from January 1 to December 31, 2007, with the premise that the brothers would cease all text-based ("textual") communication for the year and instead converse by video blogs, made available to the public via YouTube (where they are known as the "vlogbrothers") and on their Brotherhood 2.0 website.
Vlogbrothers after Brotherhood 2.0.
In their December 31, 2007 video, the brothers revealed their decision to continue vlogging even though the project had ended. Following the conclusion of Brotherhood 2.0, a website was set up for their fans at http://www.nerdfighters.com.
The duo also created a sub-project of Vlogbrothers called Truth or Fail, a game show that is most frequently hosted by Hank in addition to a variety of guest hosts.
On January 21, 2010, Green went on paternity leave and "Secret Sister", acclaimed author Maureen Johnson made videos in his place until February 10, 2010. John's only vlog during that period was on January 28, when he read from J.D. Salinger's "The Catcher in the Rye" as a eulogy/tribute to the author; Miles, the narrator of "Looking for Alaska", is frequently compared to the narrator of "The Catcher in the Rye", Holden Caulfield.
Green "introduced" his son Henry Green upon his return to vlogging on February 15, 2010.
Starting in 2012, Green and his brother started a short-format education video series entitled Crash Course. Between January and November of 2012, John taught world history, and his brother taught biology. In November 2012, John and Hank began teaching two new courses, Literature and Ecology, respectively. 
Personal life.
Green currently resides in Indianapolis, Indiana with his wife, Sarah (also known as "The Yeti" in his video blogs, coined due to her request not to be seen on camera), his son Henry, and his dog, a West Highland Terrier, named Willy (full name: Fireball Wilson Roberts). According to his blog entry of May 16, 2007, Green was born in Indianapolis, but his family moved three weeks after he was born. He has also lived in East Lansing, Michigan; Birmingham, Alabama; Orlando, Florida; Chicago, Illinois; and New York City.
On the live Google+ hangout with Barack Obama on 14 February 2013, he announced the coming of his second child when asking whether to name the child Eleanor or Alice.
