Chashme Baddoor (translation: "Far be the evil eye") is film by directed by David Dhawan currently scheduled for release in 2013.
The film stars Ali Zafar, Siddharth, Taapsee Pannu, Divyendu Sharma and Rishi Kapoor in the lead roles. Juhi Chawla and Anupam Kher make a special appearance in the movie. 
The film is a remake of the 1981 film of same name. 
The film is set to release on 5 April 2013. The official theatrical trailer released on February 7, 2013.
Plot.
Sid (Ali Zafar), Jai (Siddharth) and Omi (Divyendu Sharma) live together in a small house in Goa. Large on life, wants and everything else, the only thing that seems to keep Omi and Jai going is the women in Goa. Sid, on the other hand, lives a straight and normal life. The two womanizing slackers now attempt to woo the new girl Seema (Taapsee Pannu) in the neighborhood.
Production.
This remake was filmed in Goa, India and produced by Viacom 18 Motion Pictures.
The film has been re-written by the original director, Sai Paranjpye. Regarding the film Ali Zafar says, "It’s a different film from Sai’s…young, a little over-the-top, adapted to modern times and coloured by David’s sensibilities"
Casting.
Sai Paranjpye, who rewrote the film recognized a similarity between Zafar and Shaikh, "Both Shaikh and Zafar are aristocratic and cultured. And there's a certain masoomiyat (innocence) about them. When my co-writer Renuka and I began to re-write Chashme baddoor for contemporary times, we immediately thought of Ali in Farooq's role."
Telugu & Tamil actor, Siddharth will be stepping into Ravi Baswani's role. Director, David Dhawan stated that it was difficult to cast this role because, "Ravi Baswani is the only member of the cast who is no more and I miss him. Ravi and I were roommates when we were both starting out in our careers. I had to put Ravi in safe hands. I had to cast someone who I knew would do justice to his part."
Divyendu Sharma will be playing Rakesh Bedi's role in the remake. 
Planned release.
The film was initially planned for a December 2012 release but it was shifted to February 2013. However, the film’s release was further postponed to April 19. Now the producers have decided to release the film on April 5.
Soundtrack.
The soundtrack is composed by Sajid-Wajid. The launch was on February 19, 2013.
