Sir Christopher Frank Carandini Lee, , (born 27 May 1922) is an English actor and singer. Lee initially portrayed villains and became best known for his role as Count Dracula in a string of popular Hammer Horror films. Other notable roles include Francisco Scaramanga in the James Bond film "The Man with the Golden Gun" (1974), Saruman in "The Lord of the Rings film trilogy" (2001–2003) and "The Hobbit film trilogy" (2012–2014), and Count Dooku in the final two films of the "Star Wars" prequel trilogy (2002, 2005).
He has performed roles in 275 films since 1946 making him the Guinness World Records title holder for most film acting roles ever. He was knighted for services to drama and charity in 2009, and received the BAFTA Fellowship in 2011. Lee considers his most important role to be that of Pakistan's founder Muhammad Ali Jinnah in the biopic "Jinnah" (1998), and his best role to be Lord Summerisle in the British cult classic "The Wicker Man" (1973), which he also considers his best film. 
Always noted as an actor for his deep, strong voice, he has, more recently, also taken to using his impressive singing ability, recording various opera and musical pieces between 1986 and 1998 and released the symphonic metal album ' in 2010 after having worked with several metal bands since 2005. A heavy metal follow-up titled ' is expected to be released in 2013. He was honoured with the "Spirit of Metal" award from the 2010 Metal Hammer Golden God awards ceremony.
Early life.
Lee was born in Belgravia, Westminster, London, as the son of Lieutenant-Colonel Geoffrey Trollope Lee, of the 60th King's Royal Rifle Corps, and his wife, Contessa Estelle Marie (née Carandini di Sarzano). Lee's mother was a famous Edwardian beauty who was painted by Sir John Lavery as well as by Oswald Birley and Olive Snell, and sculpted by Clare F. Sheridan. Lee's maternal great-grandfather was an Italian political refugee, whose wife, Lee's great-grandmother, was English-born opera singer Marie Carandini (née Burgess).
His parents separated when he was very young, and his mother took him and his sister to Switzerland. After enrolling in Miss Fisher's Academy in Wengen, he played his first villainous role as Rumpelstiltskin. The family returned to London, where Lee attended Wagner's private school. His mother then married Harcourt "Ingle" Rose, a banker and step-cousin of Ian Fleming, author of the James Bond novels. Lee spent some time at Summer Fields School, a preparatory school in Oxford (notable for sending many alumni to Eton). Lee applied unsuccessfully for a scholarship to Eton, although the interview was to prove portentous because of the presence of the noted ghost story author M.R. James. Lee later claimed in his autobiography that James had cut a very impressive figure. Sixty years later Lee played the part of M.R. James for the BBC.
Instead, Lee attended Wellington College, Berkshire, where he won scholarships in classics.
Service in World War II.
Initially, Lee volunteered to fight for the Finnish forces during the Winter War in 1939. He and other British volunteers were kept away from actual fighting, but he was issued winter gear and was posted on guard duty a safe distance from the front lines. 
He went on to serve in the Royal Air Force and intelligence services during World War II, including serving as an intelligence officer with the Long Range Desert Group in Northern Africa. 
He trained in South Africa as a pilot, but eyesight problems forced him to drop out. He eventually ended up stationed in North Africa as a Cipher Officer for No. 260 Squadron RAF and was with it through the campaigns in Sicily and Italy. He has mentioned serving in Special Operations Executive but has always declined to go into details.
After the war, Lee, who can speak fluent French and German, among other languages, was seconded to the Central Registry of War Criminals and Security Suspects. Here, he was tasked with helping to track down Nazi war criminals. Of his time with the organisation, Lee has said: "We were given dossiers of what they’d done and told to find them, interrogate them as much as we could and hand them over to the appropriate authority... We saw these concentration camps. Some had been cleaned up. Some had not." Lee then retired from the RAF to take up acting after the end of the war with the rank of Flight Lieutenant.
Acting career.
Early career.
In 1947, Lee gained a seven-year contract with the Rank Organisation after discussing his interest in acting with his mother's second cousin Nicolò Carandini, the Italian Ambassador. Carandini told Lee that performance was in his blood, as his great-grandmother Marie Carandini had been a successful opera singer, a fact of which Lee was unaware. He made his film debut in Terence Young's Gothic romance "Corridor of Mirrors" in 1947. He was a student at the Rank "charm school".
Also in 1947, Lee made an uncredited appearance in Laurence Olivier's film version of "Hamlet" as a spear carrier (marking his first film with frequent co-star and close friend Peter Cushing, who played Osric). In 1951 he appeared in "Captain Horatio Hornblower R.N." as a Spanish Captain. He was cast when the director asked him if he could speak Spanish and sword fight, which he could. He recalls that his breakthrough came in 1952 when Douglas Fairbanks, Jr. began making films at the British National Studios. He said in 2006, "I was cast in various roles in 16 of them and even appeared with Buster Keaton and it proved an excellent training ground." Also in 1952 he appeared in John Huston's Oscar-nominated "Moulin Rouge". Throughout the next decade, he made nearly 30 films, playing mostly stock action characters.
Lee's first film for Hammer was "The Curse of Frankenstein" (1957), in which he played Frankenstein's monster, with Cushing as the Baron. When he arrived at a casting session for the film, "they asked me if I wanted the part, I said yes and that was that." A little later, Lee co-starred with Boris Karloff in the film "Corridors of Blood" (1958), but Lee's own appearance as Frankenstein's monster led to his first appearance as the Transylvanian vampire in the 1958 film "Dracula" (known as "Horror of Dracula" in the United States). In 1959, Lee played in another film called "My Uncle is a Vampire".
Lee returned to the role of Dracula in Hammer's "" in 1965. Lee's performance is notable in that he has no lines, merely hissing his way through the film. Again, stories vary as to the reason for this: Lee states he refused to speak the poor dialogue he was given, but screenwriter Jimmy Sangster claims that the script did not contain any lines for the character. This film set the standard for most of the Dracula sequels in the sense that half the film's running time was spent on telling the story of Dracula's resurrection and the character's appearances were brief. Lee has gone on record to state that he was virtually "blackmailed" by Hammer into starring in the subsequent films; unable or unwilling to pay him his going rate, they would resort to reminding him of how many people he would put out of work if he did not take part.
His roles in the films "Dracula Has Risen from the Grave" (1968), "Taste the Blood of Dracula" (1969), and "Scars of Dracula" (1970) all gave the Count very little to do, but were all commercially successful. Although Lee may not have liked what Hammer was doing with the character, worldwide audiences embraced the films, which are now considered classics of the genre. Lee starred in two further Dracula films for Hammer in the early 1970s, both of which attempted to bring the character into the modern-day era. These were not commercially successful.
Lee's other work for Hammer included "The Mummy" (1959). Lee portrayed Rasputin in "Rasputin, the Mad Monk" (Lee apparently met Rasputin's assassin Felix Yussupov when he was a child) and Sir Henry Baskerville (to Cushing's Sherlock Holmes) in "The Hound of the Baskervilles" (1959). Lee later played Holmes himself in 1962's "Sherlock Holmes and the Deadly Necklace", and returned to Holmes films with Billy Wilder's British-made "The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes" (1970), in which he plays Sherlock's smarter brother, Mycroft. Lee played a leading role in the German film "The Puzzle of the Red Orchid" (1962), speaking German, which he had learned during his education in Switzerland. He auditioned for a part in the 1962 film "The Longest Day", but was turned down because he did not "look like a military man". Some film books incorrectly credit him with a role in the film, something he has to correct to the present day.
He was responsible for bringing acclaimed occult author Dennis Wheatley to Hammer. The company made two films from Wheatley's novels, both starring Lee. The first, "The Devil Rides Out" (1967), is generally considered to be one of Hammer's crowning achievements. According to Lee, Wheatley was so pleased with it that he offered the actor the film rights to his remaining black magic novels free of charge. However, the second film, "To the Devil a Daughter" (1976), was fraught with production difficulties and was disowned by its author. Although financially successful, it was Hammer's last horror film and marked the end of Lee's long association with the studio that brought him fame.
Like Cushing, Lee also appeared in horror films for other companies during the 20-year period from 1957 to 1977. Other films in which Lee performed include the series of Fu Manchu films made between 1965 and 1969, in which he starred as the villain in heavy oriental make-up; "I, Monster" (1971), in which he played Jekyll and Hyde; "The Creeping Flesh" (1972); and his personal favourite, "The Wicker Man" (1973), in which he played Lord Summerisle. Lee was attracted to the latter role by screenwriter Anthony Shaffer and apparently gave his services for free, as the budget was so small. 
Lee appeared as the on-screen narrator in Jess Franco's "Eugenie" (1970) as a favour to producer Harry Alan Towers, unaware that it was softcore pornography, as the sex scenes were shot separately.
In addition to doing films in the United Kingdom, Lee did films in mainland Europe: he appeared in two German films, "Count Dracula", where he again played the vampire count, and "The Torture Chamber of Dr. Sadism". Other films in Europe he made include "Castle of the Living Dead" and "Horror Express".
1970–1999.
In 1972, Lee was a producer of the horror film "Nothing But the Night", in which he also starred. It was the first and last film he ever produced as he did not enjoy the process.
Since the mid 1970s, Lee has eschewed horror roles almost entirely. Ian Fleming, author of the James Bond spy novels and Lee's step-cousin, had offered him the role of the titular antagonist in the first Eon-produced Bond film "Dr. No". Lee enthusiastically accepted, but the producers had already chosen Joseph Wiseman for the part. In 1974, Lee finally got to play a James Bond villain when he was cast as the deadly assassin Francisco Scaramanga in "The Man with the Golden Gun".
Because of his filming schedule in Bangkok, film director Ken Russell was unable to sign Lee to play the Specialist in "Tommy" (1975). That role was eventually given to Jack Nicholson. In an AMC documentary on "Halloween", John Carpenter states that he offered the role of Samuel Loomis to Peter Cushing and Christopher Lee before Donald Pleasence took the role. Years later, Lee met Carpenter and told him that the biggest regret of his career was not taking the role of Dr. Loomis.
Lee appeared on the cover of the 1973 Wings album "Band on the Run", along with others including chat show host Michael Parkinson, film actor James Coburn, world boxing champion John Conteh and broadcaster Clement Freud.
His first American film was the disaster film "Airport '77". In 1978, Lee surprised many people with his willingness to go along with a joke by appearing as guest host on NBC's "Saturday Night Live". He turned down the role of Dr. Barry Rumack in the 1980 disaster spoof "Airplane!".
In 1982, Lee appeared in "The Return of Captain Invincible". In this film, Lee plays a fascist who plans to rid America (and afterwards, the world) of all non-whites. Lee sings on two tracks in the film ("Name Your Poison" and "Mister Midnight"), written by Richard O'Brien (who had written "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" seven years previously) and Richard Hartley. In 1985, he appeared alongside Reb Brown and Sybil Danning in "". Lee made his latest appearances to date as Sherlock Holmes in 1991's "Incident at Victoria Falls" and 1992's "Sherlock Holmes and the Leading Lady".
In addition to more than a dozen feature films together for Hammer Films, Amicus Productions and other companies, Lee and Peter Cushing both appeared in "Hamlet" (1948) and "Moulin Rouge" (1952) albeit in separate scenes; and in separate instalments of the "Star Wars" films, Cushing as Grand Moff Tarkin in the original film, Lee years later as Count Dooku. The last project which united them in person was a documentary, "Flesh and Blood: The Hammer Heritage of Horror" (1994), which they jointly narrated. It was the last time they saw each other as Cushing died two months later. While they frequently played off each other as mortal enemies onscreen—Lee's Count Dracula to Cushing's Professor Van Helsing—they were close friends in real life.
In 1994, Lee played the character of the Russian commandant in "".
In 1998, Lee starred in the role of Muhammad Ali Jinnah, founder of modern Pakistan, in the film "Jinnah". While talking about his favourite role in film at a press conference at the Brussels International Fantastic Film Festival, he declared that his role in "Jinnah" was by far his best performance.
Lee was at one point considered for the role of comic book villain/hero Magneto in the screen adaptation of the popular comic book series "X-Men", but he lost the role to Ian McKellen.
2000–2009.
He has had many television roles, including that of Flay in the BBC television miniseries, based on Mervyn Peake's novels, "Gormenghast" (2000), and Stefan Wyszyński in the CBS film "John Paul the Second" (2005). He played Lucas de Beaumanoir, the Grand Master of the Knights Templar, in the BBC/A&E co-production of Sir Walter Scott's "Ivanhoe" (1997). He played a role in the made-for-TV series "La Révolution française" (1989) in part 2, "Les Années Terribles", as the executioner, Sanson, who beheaded Louis XVI, Marie Antoinette, Robespierre and others. In 1967 he starred in an episode of "The Avengers" entitled "Never, Never Say Die."
Lee played Saruman in the "The Lord of the Rings film trilogy". In the commentary, he states he had a decades-long dream to play Gandalf but that he was now too old and his physical limitations prevented his being considered. The role of Saruman, by contrast, required no horseback riding and much less fighting. Lee had met J.R.R. Tolkien once (making him the only person in "The Lord of the Rings" film trilogy to have done so) and makes a habit of reading the novels at least once a year. In addition, he performed for the album "The Lord of the Rings: Songs and Poems by J.R.R. Tolkien" in 2003. Lee's appearance in the final film in the trilogy, "", was cut from the theatrical release, but the scene was reinstated in the extended edition.
"The Lord of the Rings" marked the beginning of a major career revival that continued in ' (2002) and ' (2005), in which he played the villainous Count Dooku. His autobiography states that he did much of the swordplay himself, though a double was required for the more vigorous footwork.
Lee is one of the favourite actors of Tim Burton and has become a regular in many of Burton's films, having now worked for the director five times since 1999. He had a small role as the Burgomaster in the film "Sleepy Hollow". In 2005, Lee then went on to voice the character of Pastor Galswells in "Corpse Bride" co-directed by Burton and Mike Johnson and play a small role in the Burton's reimagining of the Roald Dahl tale "Charlie and the Chocolate Factory" as Willy Wonka's strict dentist father Dr. Wilbur Wonka.
In 2007, Lee collaborated with Burton on ', playing the spirit of Sweeney Todd's victims called the Gentleman Ghost alongside Anthony Head, with both singing "The Ballad of Sweeney Todd", its reprises and the Epilogue. These songs were recorded, but eventually cut since Burton felt that the songs were too theatrical for the film. Lee's appearance was completely cut from the film, but Head still has an uncredited one-line cameo. In 2008, he was offered the role of King Balor in Guillermo del Toro's ' but had to turn it down due to prior commitments.
In late November 2009, Lee narrated the Science Fiction Festival in Trieste, Italy. Also in 2009, Lee starred in Stephen Poliakoff's British period drama "Glorious 39" with Julie Christie, Bill Nighy, Romola Garai and David Tennant, Academy Award-nominated director Danis Tanović's war film "Triage" with Colin Farrell and Paz Vega, and Duncan Ward's comedy "Boogie Woogie" alongside Amanda Seyfried, Gillian Anderson, Stellan Skarsgård and Joanna Lumley.
2010 onwards.
In 2010, Lee marked his fourth collaboration with Tim Burton by voicing the Jabberwocky in Burton's adaptation of Lewis Carroll's classic book "Alice in Wonderland" alongside Johnny Depp, Helena Bonham Carter and Anne Hathaway. While he only had two lines, Burton said that he felt Lee to be a good match for the iconic character because he is "an iconic guy".
Lee won the "Spirit of Hammer" award in the Metal Hammer Golden Gods 2010. The award was presented by Tony Iommi.
In 2010, Lee received the Steiger Award (Germany) and, in February 2011, Lee was awarded the BAFTA Fellowship.
In 2011, he appeared in a Hammer film for the first time in thirty-five years, the last being 1976's "To the Devil a Daughter". The film was called "The Resident" and he appeared alongside Hilary Swank and Jeffrey Dean Morgan. Whilst filming scenes for the film in New Mexico in early 2009, Lee injured his back when he tripped over power cables on set. He had to undergo surgery and as a result was unable to play the role of Sir Lachlan Morrison in "The Wicker Tree", the sequel to "The Wicker Man". Very disappointed, director Robin Hardy recast the role but Lee was determined to appear in the film, so Hardy wrote a small scene specially for him. Lee appears as the unnamed "Old Gentleman" who acts as Lachlan's mentor in a flashback. Hardy has stated that fans of "The Wicker Man" will recognise this character as Lord Summerisle, but Lee himself has contradicted this, stating that they are two unrelated characters. Also in 2011, Lee appeared in the critically acclaimed "Hugo", directed by Martin Scorsese.
On 11 January 2011, Lee announced on his website that he would be reprising the role of Saruman for the prequel film "". Lee had originally said he would have liked to have shown Saruman's corruption by Sauron, but would not be comfortable flying to New Zealand at his age. Lee went on to say that if a film were made, he would love to voice Smaug, as it would mean he could record his part in England and not have to travel. A July 2011 behind-the-scenes featurette showed Jackson at the Pinewood Studios in London and Lee in make-up and costume as Saruman, so it would seem that production has been adjusted to accommodate Lee's travel concerns and allow him to participate in the film. Lee has stated that he worked on his role for the films over the course of four days and that he is portraying Saruman as a kind and noble wizard, before his subsequent fall into darkness, which audiences have seen in "The Lord of the Rings" film trilogy.
In 2012, Lee marked his fifth collaboration with Tim Burton by appearing in his film adaptation of the gothic soap opera "Dark Shadows".
Voice work.
Lee is fluent in English, Italian, French, Spanish and German, and moderately proficient in Swedish, Russian and Greek. He was the original voice of Thor in the German dubs in the Danish 1986 animated film "Valhalla", and of King Haggard in both the English and German dubs of the 1982 animated adaptation of "The Last Unicorn".
Lee provided the off-camera voice of "U. N. Owen", the mysterious host who brings disparate characters together in Agatha Christie's "Ten Little Indians" (1965). The film was produced by Harry Alan Towers, for whom Lee had worked repeatedly in the 1960s. Even though he is not credited on the film, the voice is unmistakable. He also provided all the voices for the English dub of "Monsieur Hulot's Holiday" (1953).
He contributed his voice as Death in the animated versions of Terry Pratchett's "Soul Music" and "Wyrd Sisters" and reprised the role in the Sky1 live action adaptation "The Colour of Magic", taking over the role from the late Ian Richardson.
Lee provided the voices for the roles of DiZ (Ansem the Wise) in the video games "Kingdom Hearts II" and "Kingdom Hearts 358/2 Days", but was replaced by veteran voice actor Corey Burton for ', "Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep", and '. He was the voice of Lucan D'Lere in the trailers for "Everquest II".
Lee reprised his role as Saruman in the video game "" along with the other actors of the films. He also narrated and sang for the Danish musical group The Tolkien Ensemble, taking the role of Treebeard, King Théoden and others in the readings or singing of their respective poems or songs. In 2007, he voiced the transcript of "The Children of Húrin", by J.R.R. Tolkien for the audiobook version of the novel.
In 2005, Lee provided the voice of the Pastor Galswells in "The Corpse Bride" co-directed by Tim Burton and Mike Johnson. He served as the narrator on "The Nightmare Before Christmas"'s poem written by Tim Burton as well.
Lee reprised his role as Count Dooku in the 2008 animated film "" but did not voice the character in the . Corey Burton took his place for the series. In 2010, he collaborated again with Tim Burton, this time by voicing the Jabberwocky in Burton's adaptation of Lewis Carroll's classic book "Alice in Wonderland".
Lee has been signed by Falcon Picture Group to host the syndicated radio series "Mystery Theatre", a nightly two-hour program featuring classic radio mystery shows. The programme is distributed by Syndication Networks Corporation with a launch date of 2 March 2009.
Some thirty years after playing Francisco Scaramanga in "The Man with the Golden Gun", Lee provided the voice of Scaramanga in the video game "".
Music career.
With his classically-trained bass voice, Lee sings on the "The Wicker Man" soundtrack, performing Paul Giovanni's psych folk composition, "The Tinker of Rye". He sings the closing credits song of the 1994 horror film "Funny Man". His most notable musical work on film, however, appears in the superhero comedy/rock musical "The Return of Captain Invincible" (1983) in which Lee performs a song and dance number called "Name Your Poison", written by Richard O'Brien. Lee appears on Peter Knight and Bob Johnson's (from Steeleye Span) 1970s concept album "The King of Elfland's Daughter". In the 1980s, during the height of Italo Disco, he provided vocals to Kathy Joe Daylor's song "Little Witch".
He first came in touch with metal music by singing a duet with Fabio Lione, the lead vocalist of the Italian symphonic power metal band Rhapsody of Fire, on the single "The Magic of the Wizard's Dream" from the "Symphony of Enchanted Lands II" album. Later he appeared as a narrator on the band's four albums "", "Triumph or Agony", "The Frozen Tears of Angels" and "From Chaos to Eternity" as well as on the EP "The Cold Embrace Of Fear - A Dark Romantic Symphony", portraying the Wizard King. He also worked with Manowar while they were recording a new version of their first album, "Battle Hymns". The original voice was done by Orson Welles. The new album, "Battle Hymns MMXI", was released on 26 November 2010.
In 2006, he bridged two disparate genres of music by performing a heavy metal variation of the Toreador Song from the opera "Carmen" with the band Inner Terrestrials. The song was featured on his album "Revelation" in 2007. 
His first complete metal album was "", which was critically acclaimed and awarded with the "Spirit of Metal" award from the 2010 Metal Hammer Golden Gods ceremony. It was released on 15 March 2010. In June 2012, he released a music video for the song "The Bloody Verdict of Verden".
On his 90th Birthday (27 May 2012) he announced the release of his new single "Let Legend Mark Me As the King" from his upcoming album "", signifying his move onto "full on" heavy metal. That makes him the oldest performer in the history of the genre. The music was arranged by Richie Faulkner from the band Judas Priest and features World Guitar Idol Champion, Hedras Ramos.
In December 2012 he released an EP of heavy metal covers of Christmas songs called "A Heavy Metal Christmas".
Honours.
In 1997, he was appointed a Commander of the Venerable Order of Saint John. On 16 June 2001, as part of that year's Queen's Birthday Honours, Lee was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire "for services to Drama". He was made a Knight Bachelor "For services to Drama and to Charity" on 13 June as part of the Queen's Birthday Honours in 2009. He was knighted by Prince Charles. Lee was named 2005's 'most marketable star in the world' in a "USA Today" newspaper poll, after three of the films he appeared in grossed US$640 million. In 2011, Lee was awarded the BAFTA Academy Fellowship by Tim Burton.
In 2011, accompanied by his wife Birgit and on the 164th anniversary of the birth of Bram Stoker, Lee was honoured with a tribute by University College Dublin, and described his honorary life membership of the UCD Law Society as "in some ways as special as the Oscars". He was awarded the Bram Stoker Gold Medal by the Trinity College Philosophical Society, of which Stoker was President, and a copy of "Collected Ghost Stories of MR James" by Trinity College's School of English.
The government of France made him a Commander of the Order of Arts and Letters in 2011.
Personal life.
The Carandinis, Lee's maternal ancestors, were given the right to bear the coat of arms of the Holy Roman Empire by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa. Cinemareview cites: "Cardinal Consalvi was Papal Secretary of State at the time of Napoleon and is buried at the Pantheon in Rome next to the painter Raphael. His painting, by Lawrence, hangs in Windsor Castle".
Lee is a step-cousin of Ian Fleming, author of the James Bond spy novels, and a distant relative of Robert E. Lee and the astronomer John Lee.
He has been married to former Danish model Birgit "Gitte" Lee since 1961. They have a daughter named Christina Erika Carandini Lee, who married Juan Francisco Aneiros Rodriguez in July 2001. Lee is also the uncle of the British actress Dame Harriet Walter. Both Christopher Lee and his daughter Christina provided spoken vocals in Rhapsody of Fire's album "From Chaos to Eternity".
Contrary to popular belief, Lee does not have a vast library of occult books. When giving a speech at the University College Dublin on 8 November 2011 he said: "Somebody wrote I have 20,000 books. I'd have to live in a bath! I have maybe four or five."
Known for his imposing height, Lee currently stands 6 ft 4 in tall, having lost an inch in height. 
Lee is a supporter of the British Conservative Party. He described Michael Howard as "the ideal person to lead the party" in 2003 and supports William Hague and David Cameron.
