Boy Meets World is an American television sitcom that chronicles the coming of age events and everyday life-lessons of Cory Matthews (played by Ben Savage), a Philadelphian who grows up from a young boy to a married man. The show aired for seven seasons from 1993 to 2000 on ABC, part of the network's TGIF lineup. The entire series has been released on DVD, as well as on iTunes.
Synopsis.
Grade School.
The first season of the show begins with Cory Matthews and his best friend Shawn Hunter, two average sixth-graders who come from different backgrounds. They do not care about schoolwork, despite the efforts of Mr. Feeny, their longtime teacher. Their primary interests are in sports, though later on Shawn and then Cory begin to express interest in girls. This season focuses specifically on Cory's relationships with the other characters in the show. He begins to understand his parents more and respect them for all that they do for him. His relationship with his older brother Eric becomes confusing as Eric's constant obsession with girls is foreign to Cory and he becomes more protective of his little sister, Morgan. Cory also begins to show interest in Topanga, a smart outsider in his class, though he often hides this by insulting and berating her. Cory and Shawn's friendship endures real tests for the first time, and Cory must often choose between doing what Shawn wants him to do and what is best for Shawn and their friendship.
High school.
During the second season, Cory and Shawn start high school and meet Mr. Jonathan Turner, an unconventional English teacher. Although they initially view Mr. Turner as cool, they soon realize that he is a teacher first, hence why Cory called him "Feeny with an earring." Throughout the second season, Cory and Shawn try a variety of ways to become popular with their classmates. In doing so, they almost get into fights with the school bullies and even get in trouble with their school principal, Mr. Feeny. Eventually, Shawn becomes cool and popular at school, but still keeps his friendship with the less popular Cory. Shawn’s mother, Virna, deserts Shawn and his father, Chet, which upsets Shawn greatly. Chet then leaves to find Virna. After this occurred, Shawn lived briefly with Cory and his parents but soon figures out that it was just not the right fit for him. Later, Shawn moves in with Mr. Turner. Cory tries at some points to begin a relationship with Topanga, but this is mostly because he does not want to be left out of the dating game. Sensing this, Topanga is wary of his advances, and despite the mutual attraction, the two do not date during this season.
During the third season, Cory finally admits that he wants to ask out Topanga, but cannot work up the courage to do it. Consequently, his best friend Shawn asks her out. Although Cory was hurt, he soon realized Shawn set the whole thing up so he could unite Cory and Topanga and make Cory confess his feelings for her. He tells her how he feels, and they become boyfriend and girlfriend. Later in the third season, Cory and Topanga are worried that their relationship has hit a rut, and decide it would be best to break up while they are still able to keep the friendship. They get back together a few months later, when Cory follows her to Disney World to win her back. Eric spends this season desperately trying to make up for his first three years of slacking off in high school. He makes progress, but it is not enough; he is not accepted to any universities as of his high school graduation. He decides then to take a year off and figure things out, beginning with a summer road trip. After finding out in the season finale that Cory feels estranged from him, Eric invites Cory along for the ride. Shawn nearly makes several life-changing blunders this season, but Cory and now Mr. Turner help him to make the right choices. Cory endures several tests of character this season - everything from being credited with a great deed which he did not deserve, to being insistently pursued by another girl while he is with Topanga. Sometimes Cory makes the right decision, sometimes the wrong one, but he learns from each.
The fourth season opens with Cory and Eric's return from their road trip. In this season, Eric finds himself confronted with life after high school. After having a couple of jobs and meeting people that teach him some interesting lessons, Eric decides to retake the SAT and give college another try. Alan decides to quit his job and open a sporting goods store, with Eric as his partner. Topanga’s mother is transferred at her job to Pittsburgh, which is over 300 miles from Philadelphia. The news devastates Cory, but Topanga runs away from her new house and returns to Philadelphia. Topanga’s parents decide that she can live with her Aunt Prudence in Philadelphia until she graduates. Shawn's mother returns for a brief period, but then leaves again under unknown circumstances at some point between season 4 and season 6.
Later that school year, Mr. Turner gets into a severe motorcycle accident in which he almost dies. The next year, Eric moves out of his parents’ house and begins college at the fictional Pennbrook University (a pastiche of local Philadelphia schools including Saint Joseph's University and the University of Pennsylvania). He moves into an apartment with Jack, who turns out to be Shawn’s half-brother. Shawn clearly shows his hatred toward Jack after he refuses to live with him because he did not like the fact that Jack never called or checked to see if Shawn and his dad were doing okay. (Shawn eventually discovers that Jack never received any of Shawn's letters or he would have come to see him immediately). However, after being convinced by his father and others around him, Shawn moves in with them, but he has nothing in common with Jack, which causes a lot of tension. A new student, Angela Moore, moves to Philadelphia and begins to date Shawn. Over winter break, the students go skiing on a school trip. Cory sprains his ankle and Lauren, a ski-lodge employee, takes care of him. The two kiss, but Cory lies to Topanga, and tells her that they are both Herberts. When Topanga finds out that he lied, they break up. Cory, upset about the break-up, gets drunk and is arrested, along with Shawn. The two agree never to drink again, but Shawn breaks the promise and shows up at school drunk. With the help of Angela and Jack, Shawn realizes that alcoholism runs in his family and that he needs to stop drinking.
Topanga forgives Cory after encountering her own kiss with an old friend from grade school. She realizes no kiss means more than the ones she shares with Cory. Cory and Topanga reunite and attend the prom together, where they are named King and Queen. On prom night, Cory's mother Amy announces that she is pregnant. Mr. Feeny decides to retire at the end of the school year and move to Wyoming- however, he soon returns from retirement and goes back to teaching. Topanga is accepted to Yale, but Cory does not want her to leave him. At graduation, Topanga tells Cory that she decided not to go to Yale because she wants to be with him — then she proposes. The couple's parents are upset that they got engaged so young, but Cory and Topanga decide to elope. However, at the last minute, they decide that they want to get married “the right way,” in front of family and friends.
College.
Shawn, Cory, Topanga, and Angela join Jack and Eric at Pennbrook. Rachel McGuire, a new student from Texas, moves in with Eric and Jack, causing tension as both boys have crushes on her. Angela and Shawn break up due to his claim that they should meet new people, and, despite Cory’s efforts, decide to stay just friends. They eventually are brought back together by way of Angela's father during his visit to the college, recruiting students for his R.O.T.C. program of basic training in the army. Mr. Feeny returns to take some classes, but then is offered a teaching job at the university. During their freshman year, Stuart (played by Ben Savage's brother Fred Savage), one of their professors, makes inappropriate (and unwelcome) sexual advances towards Topanga, causing Cory to shove him through a glass door at the Student Union. Cory is suspended, but for only one day; the Dean believes that Stuart had crossed the line. Mr. Feeny and the Dean eventually gain feelings for one another and begin dating.
Cory and Topanga face a major blip in their marriage plans when Topanga’s parents go through a divorce and she decides to call off the wedding. She breaks up with Cory completely and tells him that she doesn’t believe in love. Topanga is convinced that she is doing what is best for herself and for Cory, until her mother comes to explain everything, and tell her that love is worth the risk.
Shawn and Jack's father dies of a heart attack, and Jack reacts by admitting feelings for Rachel. They start dating, which causes problems for Jack and Eric. Eric decides to move out of the apartment so that he doesn’t get in the way of Jack and Rachel, and we later find out that he sleeps in Mr. Feeny’s car. Shawn goes on a road trip to deal with his father's death, saying he won't come back. He does return however when Cory's brother Joshua is born prematurely and has a small chance of survival. Shawn receives a letter from his mother confessing she is not his biological mother. Shawn unsuccessfully searches for his biological mother. Alan offers to adopt Shawn, but they decide that it isn’t necessary because Shawn is already part of the family.
Shawn and Cory have challenges in their relationship throughout the season, particularly on the day of Cory’s wedding. Shawn admits that he is no longer Cory’s best friend, and gives him away to Topanga. Cory and Topanga get married and move into a shabby apartment for married couples on campus. They struggle for a while, wondering why their parents refuse to help them. They eventually make it a wonderful home, and realize that they are capable of doing things on their own as a married couple. The group is growing up - they have to start thinking about what to do with their lives. In one episode, the newer friends get involved in a prank war with the originals (Jack, Rachel, and Angela vs. Cory, Shawn, and Topanga). The friends are almost completely torn apart, until Eric brings them back together and reminds them of the importance of their relationships.
In the series finale, Cory, Topanga, Shawn and Eric all head to New York, where Topanga was offered a dream internship at a law firm. Angela decides to move overseas with her father, and Jack and Rachel join the Peace Corps in Guatemala. The final scene has Cory, Topanga, Shawn and Eric meeting with Mr. Feeny in their old sixth grade classroom, with each one telling him how important he is in their life, and to cherish each other forever.
Episodes.
This table also features seasonal Nielsen rankings (based on average total viewers per episode) of "Boy Meets World" on ABC.
"Note: U.S. network television seasons generally start in late September and end in late May, which coincides with the completion of the May sweeps."
Production notes.
Theme music and introductions.
"Boy Meets World" used a number of theme songs and opening title sequences over its seven year run. Season one was the only season of the series that incorporated the names of the main cast and series creators within the opening title sequence, while those credits were shown along with the credits for producers and that episode's director and writers during the show's cold open for the remainder of the series. Every episode of seasons one and four through seven utilized a single theme song for every episode; however the entire second season and part of season three used various instrumental themes composed by Ray Colcord (who also composed the incidental music used between scenes and commercial breaks throughout the show's run), this practice ended with "The Last Temptation of Cory" (season 3, episode 9) as one of the cycled themes became the sole opening title music for the rest of that season. The final theme, written and performed by Phil Rosenthal, remained for seasons five through seven, though the visuals changed from seasons 5 to 6 to include Trina McGee-Davis (when she moved from guest star to regular cast member in season 5) and Maitland Ward (who was added as a regular cast member in season 6).
ABC Family was the first network since ABC to show all the accurate introductions for each of the show's seven seasons. For the broadcast syndication and Disney Channel airings between 1997 and 2007, the opening title sequence from season four (along with a slightly modified version of the theme music from that season) anachronistically replaced the title sequences for the first three seasons, while the opening titles for seasons four through seven were kept intact.
Philadelphia references.
It is one of many television shows to take place primarily in the Philadelphia area, and makes multiple local references. These include Cory's love for the Phillies and Morgan's often wearing a Philadelphia Eagles jacket. Eric mentions that he and his father always talk about the Eagles, 76ers, Flyers, and Phillies, the four major sports teams in Philadelphia, and his attempts to be accepted into Swarthmore College — finally ending with Cory and most of the cast attending Pennbrook, an institution that appears to be a pastiche of Penn and Saint Joseph's University. In the episode "Starry Night," Cory and Topanga visit the Philadelphia Museum of Art for a Van Gogh exhibition.
The name of John Adams High School is an homage to William Daniels' long-running role in the Tony-award-winning Broadway play (and later film) "1776", in which Daniels played Founding Father John Adams.
Syndication.
Disney-ABC Domestic Television (sister company to Touchstone Television, now ABC Studios) currently handles the syndication rights to the series.
"Boy Meets World" reruns began airing in off-network syndication from September 8, 1997 and ran until September 2000. During the latter month, Disney Channel assumed syndication rights (leaving season 7 as the only season that did not air on off-network syndication), with the series running on the cable channel until 2007. To the consternation of some longtime fans of the show, Disney Channel edited many episodes that contained scenes with suggestive content deemed inappropriate for the channel's target audience of 7-14 year olds. All 158 episodes aired during the series' initial run on the Disney Channel, however due to the adult subject matter and complaints from parents, Disney Channel omitted three episodes from later airings: season five's "If You Can't Be with the One You Love..." (due to its depictions of underage drinking) and "Prom-ises, Prom-ises" (whose main storyline involves Cory and Topanga contemplating losing their virginity on the night of their prom), and season six's "The Truth About Honesty" (due to its sexual references).
ABC Family has aired "Boy Meets World" from 2004 to August 2007 and again since April 1, 2010. Though the network in a way inherited the syndication rights to the show from Disney Channel, the episode prints broadcast by ABC Family differed from those seen on Disney Channel and in broadcast syndication as it incorporated scenes cut from the Disney Channel broadcasts (though small portions of certain scenes from episodes during the earlier seasons were cut due to time constraints) and featured the three episodes that Disney chose not to air, incorporated each season's corresponding opening title sequence, and restored the placement of the teaser scenes during the season one episodes to running before the opening titles in the manner that they were shown in the original ABC telecasts (instead of having the cast and creators' names shown during the teasers). The series also began airing on MTV2 in November 2011.
Internationally, reruns of the series have been broadcast on ABC Spark, the Canadian version of ABC Family, since the network debuted in March 2012. In Brazil, the show was aired by SBT (terrestrial television) and Disney Channel Brazil (cable television) to the year 2005.
Spin-off.
In November 2012, it was reported that Disney Channel was in the early stages of development of a follow-up series titled "Girl Meets World", which will center on Cory and Topanga's 12-year-old daughter. "Boy Meets World" co-creator Michael Jacobs will develop the series and serve as its executive producer and showrunner. On November 26, 2012, it was confirmed by Ben Savage and Danielle Fishel that they would be reprising their roles as Cory Matthews and Topanga Lawrence-Matthews in the series. According to a statement from Fishel, it is unknown if other cast members from "Boy Meets World" will return for the new show. It was later announced in February that Michael Jacobs has reached out to all of the former Boy Meets World cast members and told each one of them that whoever wants to be part of the new show will be and those who don't want to be will not be. 
Auditions began in mid-November 2012 for the lead roles of Riley Matthews, the daughter of Cory and Topanga, Maya, a witty friend of Riley's who has a troubled past and Elliot, Riley's older brother. The character of Cory Matthews is also reported to be a seventh-grade history teacher who looks after Riley and Maya in the series. The pilot is expected to be taped in February 2013.
On January 28, 2013, it was announced that Rowan Blanchard (co-star of in the 2011 film "") was cast in the role of Riley Matthews. This was followed three days later on January 31 by the announcement of the casting of Sabrina Carpenter in the role of Riley's best friend Maya Fox (although Carpenter is signed as an artist on Disney-owned record label Hollywood Records, there are no plans to make the character of Maya a singer). Additional characters that have also been announced but are yet to be cast that include Shamus Farkle, who will be a kid genius character in the vein of Stuart Minkus, and Tristan Friar, a transplant from Austin, Texas who will serve as a potential love interest for Riley.
DVD releases.
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment (as Buena Vista Home Entertainment) released the first three seasons of "Boy Meets World" on DVD between 2004 and 2005. Because the sales figures did not meet the company's expectations, no further seasons were released. As of 2009, these releases have been discontinued and are out of print.
On August 4, 2008, it was announced that Lionsgate Home Entertainment had acquired the rights to the series. They subsequently re-released the first three seasons on DVD on September 7, 2010, with the same special features from the original releases. Season 4 was released on December 7, 2010. Season 5 was released on May 3, 2011. Season 6 was released on July 5, 2011. Season 7 was released on October 4, 2011, completing the series' run on DVD. Ultimately, Lionsgate was able to release all seven seasons in almost a year's time on November 22, 2011. All seven seasons of the series are available for download at iTunes Store.
