Sir Roger George Moore, (born 14 October 1927), is an English actor who portrayed adventurer Simon Templar ("The Saint") on television, Lord Brett Sinclair in the adventure series "The Persuaders!", and British secret agent James Bond in the official film series for seven films between 1973 and 1985. He also does extensive charity work involving the children's organisation UNICEF. 
Early life.
Moore was born on 14 October 1927 in Stockwell, now part of the London Borough of Lambeth, in London. The only child of George Alfred Moore, a policeman, and Lillian "Lily" (née Pope), a housewife, he attended Battersea Grammar School, but was evacuated to Holsworthy, Devon, during World War II. He was then educated at Dr Challoner's Grammar School in Amersham, Buckinghamshire. He then attended the College of the Venerable Bede at the University of Durham, but never graduated. 
At 18 years old, shortly after the end of the war, Moore was conscripted for national service. On 21 September 1946, he was commissioned into the Royal Army Service Corps as a second lieutenant. He was given the service number 372394. He eventually became a captain. Moore served commanding a small depot in West Germany. He later transferred to the entertainment branch (under luminaries such as Spike Milligan).
Immediately prior to his national service, he did a brief stint at RADA (the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art), during which his fees were paid by film director Brian Desmond Hurst, who also used Moore as an extra in his film "Trottie True". At RADA, Moore was a classmate of his future Bond costar Lois Maxwell, the original Miss Moneypenny. Moore first appeared in films during the mid to late-1940s, as an extra. Moore's film idol as a child was Stewart Granger. At the age of 17, Moore appeared as an extra in the film "Caesar and Cleopatra" (1945), finally meeting his idol on the set. Moore later worked with Granger in "The Wild Geese".
Career.
Early work (1945–1961).
In the early 1950s, Moore worked as a model, appearing in print advertisements for knitwear (earning him the amusing nickname "The Big Knit"), and a wide range of other products such as toothpastean element that many critics have used as typifying his lightweight credentials as an actor. His earliest known television appearance was on 27 May 1950, in "Drawing Room Detective", a one-off programme. Presented by veteran BBC announcer Leslie Mitchell, it invited viewers at home to spot clues to a crime during a playlet, whose actors also included Alec Ross (first husband of Sheila Hancock) and Michael Ripper.
Although Moore won a contract with MGM in the 1950s, the films which followed were not a success and, in his own words, "At MGM, RGM (Roger George Moore) was NBG bloody good." His starring role in "The Miracle", a version of the play "Das Mirakel" for Warner Bros., had been turned down by Dirk Bogarde.
Eventually, it was television in which Moore made his name. He was the eponymous hero in the serial "Ivanhoe", a very loose adaptation of the romantic novel by Sir Walter Scott, and he also appeared in the ABC/Warner Brothers series "The Alaskans". He played Beau Maverick, an English-accented cousin of frontier gamblers Bret Maverick (James Garner) and Bart Maverick (Jack Kelly) in the ABC/WB western "Maverick". 
In 1961, Moore appeared as the questionable character "14 Karat John" in a two-part episode, "Right Off the Boat" of the ABC/WB drama, "The Roaring 20s", with Dorothy Provine, Rex Reason, John Dehner, and Gary Vinson.
"The Saint" (1962–1970).
Worldwide fame arrived after Lew Grade cast Moore as Simon Templar in a new adaptation of "The Saint", based on the novels by Leslie Charteris. Moore said in an interview, during 1963, that he wanted to buy the rights of Leslie Charteris's character and the trademarks. He also joked that the role was supposed to have been meant for Sean Connery who was unavailable. The television series was made in the UK with an eye on the American market, and its success there (and in other countries) made Moore a household name – and in spring 1967 he eventually had reached the level of an international top star. It also established his suave, quipping style which he would carry forward to James Bond. Moore would also go on to direct several episodes of the later series, which moved into colour in 1967.
"The Saint" ran from 1962 for six seasons and 118 episodes, making it (in a tie with "The Avengers") the longest-running series of its kind on British television. However, Moore grew increasingly tired of the role, and was keen to branch out. He made two films immediately after the series had ended: "Crossplot", a lightweight 'spy caper' movie, and the more challenging "The Man Who Haunted Himself" (1970). Directed by Basil Dearden, it gave Moore the opportunity to demonstrate a wider versatility than the role of Simon Templar had allowed, although reviews at the time were lukewarm, and both did little business at the box office.
"The Persuaders" (1971–1972).
Television lured Moore back to star, alongside Tony Curtis, in "The Persuaders!". It features the adventures of two millionaire playboys across Europe. It was for this series that Moore was paid the then unheard-of sum of £1 million for a single series, making him the highest paid television actor in the world. However, Lew Grade claimed in his autobiography "Still Dancing", that Moore and Curtis "didn't hit it off all that well". Curtis refused to spend more time on set than was strictly necessary, while Moore was always willing to work overtime.
According to the DVD commentary, neither Roger Moore, an uncredited co-producer, nor Robert S. Baker, the credited producer, ever had a contract other than a handshake with Lew Grade. They produced the entire 24 episodes without a single written word guaranteeing that they would ever be paid.
The series failed in America, where it had been pre-sold to ABC, but it was successful in Australia and in Europe. In Germany, where the series was aired under the name "Die Zwei", it became a hit through a special funny dubbing that only barely used translations of the original dialogue. And in Britain it was also popular, although on its premiere on the ITV network, it was beaten in the ratings by repeats of "Monty Python's Flying Circus" on BBC1. Channel 4 repeated both "The Avengers" and "The Persuaders!" in 1995; it has not been shown on any of the five main UK terrestrial channels since. Since then, "The Persuaders!" has been issued on DVD, while in France, where the series (entitled "Amicalement Vôtre") had always been popular, the DVD releases accompanied a monthly magazine of the same name.
James Bond (1973–1985).
Because of his commitment to several television shows, in particular the long-lasting series "The Saint", Roger Moore was unavailable for the James Bond franchise for a considerable time. His participation in "The Saint" was not only as actor, but also as a producer and director, and he also became involved in developing the series "The Persuaders!". Moore stated in his autobiography "My Word Is My Bond" (2008) that he had neither been approached to play James Bond in "Dr. No", nor does he feel that he had ever been considered. It was only after Sean Connery had declared in 1966 that he would not play Bond any longer that Moore became aware that he might be a contender for the role. But after George Lazenby was cast in 1969's "On Her Majesty's Secret Service" and then Connery played Bond again in "Diamonds Are Forever", Moore didn't consider the possibility until it seemed abundantly clear that Connery had in fact stepped down as Bond for good. At that point Moore was approached, and he accepted producer Albert Broccoli's offer in August 1972. Moore says in his autobiography that he had to cut his hair and lose weight, but although he resented that, he was finally cast as James Bond in "Live and Let Die" (1973).
Moore played Bond in "Live and Let Die" (1973); "The Man with the Golden Gun" (1974); "The Spy Who Loved Me" (1977); "Moonraker" (1979); "For Your Eyes Only" (1981); "Octopussy" (1983); and "A View to a Kill" (1985).
Moore is the longest-serving James Bond actor, having spent 12 years in the role (from his debut in 1973, to his retirement from the role in 1985), and having made seven official films in a row. Moore is the oldest actor to have played Bond - he was 45 in "Live and Let Die" (1973), and 58 when he announced his retirement on 3 December 1985.
Moore's Bond was very different than the character created by Ian Fleming. Screenwriters like George MacDonald Fraser provided scenarios in which 007 was a kind of seasoned, debonair playboy who would always have a trick or gadget in stock when he needed it. This was designed to serve the contemporary taste in the 1970s.
In 2004 Moore was voted 'Best Bond' in an Academy Awards poll, and he won with 62% of votes in another poll in 2008. In 1987 he hosted "Happy Anniversary 007: 25 Years of James Bond".
During Moore's Bond period he starred in 13 other films, including the thriller "Gold" (1974), an unorthodox action film "The Wild Geese", and played a millionaire so obsessed with Roger Moore that he had had plastic surgery to look like his hero in "Cannonball Run" (1981). He even made a cameo as Chief Inspector Clouseau, posing as a famous movie star, in "Curse of the Pink Panther" (1983) (for which he was credited as "Turk Thrust II"). However, most of these films were not critically acclaimed or commercially successful. Moore was widely criticised for making three movies in South Africa under the Apartheid regime during the 1970s.
Post-James Bond career (1985–present).
Moore did not act on screen for five years after he stopped playing Bond. In 1990 he appeared in several films and writer-director Michael Feeney Callan's television series "My Riviera"; he starred in the film "Bed & Breakfast" which was shot in 1989. In the words of his friend Michael Caine, with whom he co-starred in the unsuccessful "Bullseye!" (also 1990), "Now he can't get a job." At the age of 74, Moore played against type with his portrayal of a flamboyant homosexual in "Boat Trip" (2002).
The satirical British TV show "Spitting Image" once had a sketch in which their latex likeness of Moore, when asked to display emotions by an offscreen director, does nothing but raise an eyebrow. Moore himself has stated that he thought the sketch was funny, and took it in good humour. Indeed, he had always embraced the 'eyebrows' gag wholeheartedly, slyly claiming that he "only had three expressions as Bond: right eyebrow raised, left eyebrow raised and eyebrows crossed when grabbed by Jaws." "Spitting Image" continued the joke, featuring a Bond movie spoof, "The Man with the Wooden Delivery", with Moore's puppet receiving orders from Margaret Thatcher to kill Mikhail Gorbachev. Many other comedy shows of that time ridiculed Moore's acting, Rory Bremner once claiming to have had a death threat from an irate fan of Moore's, following one such routine.
Moore confirmed he has completely retired from acting in an article for "The Sunday Telegraph" in April 2009. In a commercial for London's 2012 Olympic bid, Moore once again suited up as James Bond. He appeared alongside Samantha Bond, who played Miss Moneypenny in the Bond films during the Pierce Brosnan era. He still appears regularly on chat shows, chiefly to promote the work of UNICEF.
In 2009, Moore appeared in an advert for the Post Office.
He also played the role of a secret agent in the Victoria Wood Christmas Special on BBC1 show over the festive period in 2009. Filming all his scenes in the London Eye, his mission was to eliminate another agent whose file photo looks just like Pierce Brosnan.
In 2010 he provided the voice of a talking cat called Lazenby in the film "", which contained several references to, and parodies of, Bond films.
In 2012 Moore took to the stage for a series of seven Evenings With" in UK theaters and, in November, guest-hosted "Have I Got News For You".
Humanitarian work.
Moore was shocked by the poverty he saw when filming "Octopussy", his sixth film as James Bond, in India in 1983. His friend Audrey Hepburn had impressed him with her work for UNICEF, and consequently he became a UNICEF Goodwill Ambassador in 1991. He was the voice of 'Santa' in the 2004 UNICEF cartoon "The Fly Who Loved Me".
Moore was involved in the production of a video for PETA that protests against the production and wholesale of foie gras. Moore narrates the video. His assistance in this situation, and being a strong spokesman against foie gras, has led to the department store Selfridges agreeing to remove foie gras from their shelves.
Personal life.
Moore left his first wife, skater Doorn Van Steyn, for singer Dorothy Squires, who was 12 years his senior and, at that time, considerably better known than he was, and they lived together for a short time in Dafen, Llanelli, South Wales. In turn, while filming in Italy in 1961, he abandoned Squires (who sued him for attempted reinstatement of conjugal rights) for Italian actress Luisa Mattioli. Moore has reported that his marriage with Steyn was was often violent, and claimed she once threw a teapot at him, and his marriage to Squires was also similarly tempestuous. He lived with Mattioli until their marriage in 1969, after Squires finally granted Moore a divorce. Moore has a daughter and two sons with Mattioli. Moore unexpectedly ended this marriage in 1993. In March 2002 he married former Côte d'Azur neighbour, the Danish-Swedish multi-millionaire Kristina 'Kiki' Tholstrup.
Moore's daughter Deborah Moore played Chief Inspector Hannah Bernstein in two films based on the Sean Dillon novels of Jack Higgins, and later made a guest appearance as a flight attendant in "Die Another Day". Elder son Geoffrey Moore is an actor and used to own a restaurant in London; he also co-starred in his father's movie "Sherlock Holmes in New York" (cast as a son Holmes never knew he had). Younger son Christian Moore is a film producer.
For a period after early success in "The Saint," Moore lived in Royal Tunbridge Wells, Kent, then moved to Surrey before relocating to Hollywood. In the 1960s he lived at Gordon Avenue, Stanmore, Middlesex. At one stage he also lived in Westfield Road, Mill Hill within reach of the Elstree Studios and in the 1970s in Denham, Buckinghamshire, close to Pinewood Studios. During filming of "The Spy Who Loved Me", "villain" Curd Jürgens made the offer to Moore to spend some time at his home in Gstaad, Switzerland, which Moore enjoyed having taken up skiing. When he married Kiki Tholstrup, he set up a routine of spending winters in Crans-Montana, Valais (Switzerland) and summers at his apartment in Monaco. After 15 years in Gstaad, he now resides in the winter at his chalet in Crans-Montana, Valais.
Moore was diagnosed with prostate cancer in 1993 and following major surgery is now in remission. Moore also has a pacemaker which was fitted in 2003 after he collapsed whilst on stage in New York.
Moore is a lifelong supporter of the Conservative Party, and he publicly endorsed the party during the 2001 general election campaign. In 2011 Moore gave his support to Conservative Prime Minister David Cameron on his policy on the European Union, stating: "I think he's doing absolutely wonderfully well, despite the opposition from many members of his own party. Traitors, I call them. I mean any hardliner within the Conservative Party who speaks out against their leader. You should support your leader."
Royal circles.
Moore has a friendship with some of the Danish royals; Prince Joachim and his then-wife Alexandra, Countess of Frederiksborg invited him and his wife Kiki to attend the christening of their youngest son, Prince Felix.
On 24 May 2008 he and his wife attended the wedding of Prince Joachim and his French fiancée Marie Cavallier. He is also known to be a friend of King Carl XVI Gustaf of Sweden.
On 1 and 2 July 2011 he and his wife attended the wedding of Prince Albert of Monaco and Charlene Wittstock.
Honours.
In 1999, Moore was created a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE), and advanced to Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire (KBE) on 14 June 2003. The citation on the knighthood was for Moore's charity work, which has dominated his public life for more than a decade. Moore said that the citation "meant far more to me than if I had got it for acting... I was proud because I received it on behalf of UNICEF as a whole and for all it has achieved over the years".
On 11 October 2007, three days before he turned 80, Moore was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work on television and in film. Attending the ceremony were family, friends, and Richard Kiel, with whom he had acted in "The Spy Who Loved Me" and "Moonraker". Moore's star was the 2,350th star installed, and is appropriately located at 7007 Hollywood Boulevard.
In 2008, the French government appointed Moore a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres.
On 21 November 2012, Moore was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Arts degree from the University of Hertfordshire, for his outstanding contribution to the UK film and television industry for over 50 years, in particular film and television production in the County of Hertfordshire.
Awards.
For his charity work
Lifetime achievements awards
For his acting
Publications.
Moore wrote a book about the filming of "Live and Let Die", based on his diaries. "Roger Moore as James Bond: Roger Moore's Own Account of Filming Live and Let Die" was published in London in 1973, by Pan Books. The book includes an acknowledgment to Sean Connery, with whom Moore has been friends for many years: "I would also like to thank Sean Connery – "with" whom it would not have been possible."
Moore's autobiography "My Word is My Bond" (ISBN 0061673889) was published by Collins in the US in November 2008. It was published in the UK by Michael O'Mara Books Ltd on 2 October 2008 (ISBN 9781843173182).
On 16 October 2012, "Bond On Bond" was published to tie in with the 50th anniversary of the James Bond films. The book, with many pictures, is based on Moore's own memories, thoughts, and anecdotes about all things 007.
