Michonne is a fictional character from the comic book series "The Walking Dead" and is portrayed by Danai Gurira in the television series of the same name. Producer Frank Darabont stated in an interview with Fearnet in 2011 that Michonne would officially appear in the third season of the show. After Darabont was fired, there was speculation that those plans may have changed. However, in an interview with The Watercooler in late January 2012, Gale Anne Hurd confirmed that Michonne will appear in future seasons. This appearance was confirmed in the second season finale.
Appearances.
Comics.
Michonne (pronounced "Me-shone"; ) is introduced as a mysterious woman armed with a katana. She first appears towing two armless, jawless zombies in shackles, and she causes no small consternation among the group. She saves Otis from zombies and follows him to the abandoned prison where the group is located. She immediately bonds with Tyreese, recognizing him from his days in the NFL, and sharing a passion for weightlifting. After showing signs of attraction, she performs oral sex on him. Having seduced him, she precipitates the breakup of Tyreese and Carol, which results in a relationship between Tyreese and Michonne.
Michonne reveals that she was previously a lawyer coming out of a marriage, in which she lost all her children. At first, she appears to have suffered from some kind of trauma or mental illness, often carrying on conversations with herself when she was alone. Michonne would converse with her deceased boyfriend, as Andrea first notices in the prison. Michonne later admits to Rick Grimes that she has imaginary conversations with her dead boyfriend to keep herself from breaking down; it is a coping mechanism to deal with the horror of the real world. In return, Rick shows her a rotary telephone he used to "call" his wife, Lori, making Michonne feel much better about her mental health.
Michonne is among the small group that is sent out to investigate the recent crash of a helicopter and stumbles upon the town of Woodbury. When the Governor betrays and captures them, violently rapes, tortures, and uses her as a toy. However, he soon realizes she must be dealt with when she proceeds to kill all the participants in a gladiator-style tournament. Upon escaping, Michonne remains behind, saying "she has to take care of some things". She then sadistically tortures the Governor before making her way back to the prison with the rest of the group. When the Governor retaliates, Michonne and Tyreese go on the offensive, attempting guerrilla warfare in order to buy the prison time to prepare for the next attack. However, this battle at the prison results in Michonne's fleeing after nearly being captured, and Tyreese's being captured and used as a bargaining tool in order to get into the prison. When this fails, the Governor kills Tyreese with Michonne's katana. Moments later, she returns and reclaims her sword, disappearing into the woods nearby.
After the events at the prison, she returns to look for the RV survivors. Putting Tyreese's reanimated remains to peace. After finding nothing but footprints, she begins to follow them and stumbles upon Rick and his son, Carl; she saves Carl from a roamer and then joins up with Rick and Carl. She bonds with them and keeps Rick's self-conversations secret. Michonne protects Carl as a mother would, and she goes to great lengths to protect Rick due to her respect for him. Later, they rejoin the other remaining members of the survivor group at Hershel's farm.
Michonne travels with the survivors in search of safety, and inquires about Morgan Jones's whereabouts. When Rick asks if she finds Morgan attractive, Michonne admits that she does, but is still grieving over the loss of Tyreese. When the survivors locate the town of Alexandria, a safe haven from the undead, it appears that Michonne and her friends are finally given an opportunity to rest. However, Michonne has a difficult time relinquishing her sword, as seen with her confrontation with Alexandria resident Douglas. Another resident, Olivia, persuades Douglas to allow Michonne to keep her weapon. Shortly thereafter, Michonne settles into her new "home" and even hangs a mantle for her sword. She recalls all of the horrific ways that she has used that sword to survive, and finally proclaims "I am through with you."
Michonne begins to let her guard down, and Rick asks Douglas if there is a job for her in the community. Since there is no need for lawyers, Douglas recommends making her a constable, to uphold the law in Alexandria. Michonne attends a welcome party held by Douglas in honor of Alexandria's new residents. Through the majority of the party, she is quiet and reserved. When one of Alexandria's residents, Barbara, tries playing matchmaker between Michonne and a young man named Heath, Michonne steadily grows weary with the conversation between the party-goers and attempts to leave. Barbara makes an attempt to dissuade her from leaving, and although she means well, she becomes insistent about what Michonne would care to eat. Barbara continues to reiterate how worried she would be to cook a meal that Michonne did not enjoy, and Michonne angrily asks if that is what she truly concerns herself about. The guests grow silent, prompting Michonne to leave. She finds Morgan, who confesses to having left the party earlier, and the two commiserate about not caring for chipper people. Michonne admits their conversation made her feel even more alone. She then lets her guard down, and rests her head on Morgan's shoulder. The two end up having sex that night, however she's annoyed and turned off by Morgan's refusal to let go of the fact that his wife is dead and gone. Even after her boyfriend's death and Tyreese's death, Michonne ends up falling for Morgan. The two ultimately get a chance to make up afterwards, with her agreeing to take things slow and get to know each other better. She's devastated when he gets bitten, and stays with him until he dies, when she kills him herself.
Later, she, Rick, and Abraham stumble upon a man who claims to be from another larger town. She does not trust him; however, she trusts Rick's judgment. She remains a vital member in the survivor group.
Television.
Michonne makes her first appearance near the end of the second season finale, "Beside the Dying Fire", wherein she saves Andrea from a walker by decapitating it with her katana. It is shown that, as in the comics, she is accompanied by two walkers that are chained to her side by side with their arms and lower jaws removed (to prevent them from attacking her or others). In removing their ability to eat, Michonne effectively tamed these walkers. Michonne has demonstrated economic uses for her pet walkers, such as using them as human pack mules by loading supplies onto their backs as well as a camouflage/repellent, as their presence and scent fools other walkers into thinking those accompanying them are also walkers. The walkers were later dispatched by Michonne herself shortly before being discovered by Merle.
Since rescuing Andrea, Michonne has developed a strong bond with Andrea in season 3, having survived the winter months together. When Andrea starts experiencing severe flu-like symptoms, the two are forced to relocate in search of proper medical supplies. After taking cover in the woods, they are later discovered by Merle, one of the Governor's men. The two are brought back to a thriving small town called Woodbury. Andrea, taken in by the Governor's charm and hospitality, is hesitant to leave the community, seeing it as one of the last fringes of civilization. Despite this, Michonne remains wary of the Woodbury community, and, particularly, the Governor.
After failing to convince Andrea to leave Woodbury, Michonne sets off on her own into the wilderness, pursued shortly afterwards by Merle and his crew. After ambushing Merle's party twice and receiving significant injuries both times, she spies Maggie and Glenn on a supply run in a nearby town and over hears directions to the prison, but does not make contact with them. While observing them, she sees Merle ambush and capture the pair. After they leave for Woodbury, Michonne is passed by a group of walkers who do not attack her due to her scent being masked by the gore on her clothes from a walker she killed earlier. She follows the directions and discovers the prison.
Michonne approaches the prison gates in a herd of walkers, as she is somewhat disguised as a walker herself and carries a basket of infant supplies. However, the herd soon senses her and she faints from exhaustion. Rick and the others save her and she is brought into the prison. In exchange for having her gun shot treated by Hershel, Michonne explains Glenn and Maggie's whereabouts and details Woodbury's location and fortification, as well as describes the Governor as a "Jim Jones type". She then accompanies some of the group on their way to Woodbury to rescue Glenn and Maggie.
Michonne breaks up from the larger group and proceeds to discover the Governor's zombified daughter, Penny, whom she kills despite his pleas not to. She and the Governor get into a fight, which she wins. Andrea's arrival and intervention is the only thing that prevents Michonne from killing the Governor, as she instead withdraws. 
When Michonne returns to Rick's group, they are not pleased to see her because of her absence after rescuing Glenn and Maggie, but she counters that they need her due to the loss of Daryl. Rick continues to show distrust toward her, and tells her that she will be sent away when she is fully recovered. Michonne is angered, as is Glenn, when Merle is revealed to have been rescued alongside Daryl.
Michonne is in the common room as Glenn discusses his strategy to organize a sneak attack on Woodbury so that he can kill the Governor. Glenn asks for her to accompany him. During the Woodbury invasion on the prison, Michonne and Glenn rescue Hershel, who has walkers approaching him; the walkers were dropped off by a Woodbury soldier who drove a delivery van through the prison gates.
Development.
Danai Gurira was officially announced, during an episode of "Talking Dead", to have been cast as Michonne. During an interview with "The Hollywood Reporter", Kirkman was quoted saying "there's a lot to that role, and Danai, more than any other actress, showed us that she could exhibit that strength and show what an intense character she could be and, at the same time, have that emotional core and be able to show a vulnerability to a certain extent that we don't see much of but is definitely there." He added, "She really was the whole package, and I think she's going to do a really good job". Danai later commented on implementing her comic counterpart's traits:</ref>
Reception.
Michonne was voted #86 on IGN's Top 100 Comic Book Heroes. Regarding the television portrayal of the character, her scowling expression and reserved nature have been much-discussed by reviewers and online forum posters, and Pajiba.com has created a visual collage that parodies the character's limited facial expressions, titled "Michonne"s Variety of Emotions".
