Gangs of New York is a 2002 American fictional historical drama set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of Lower Manhattan. The film was directed by Martin Scorsese and written by Jay Cocks, Steven Zaillian, and Kenneth Lonergan, inspired by Herbert Asbury's 1928 non-fiction book, "The Gangs of New York". It was made in Cinecittà, Rome, distributed by Miramax Films and nominated for numerous awards, including the Academy Award for Best Picture. 
The film begins in 1846 but quickly jumps to 1862. The two principal issues of the era in New York were Irish immigration to the city and the Federal government's execution of the ongoing Civil War. The story follows Bill "The Butcher" Cutting (Daniel Day-Lewis) in his roles as crime boss and political kingmaker under the helm of "Boss" Tweed (Jim Broadbent). The film culminates in a violent confrontation between Cutting and his mob with the protagonist Amsterdam Vallon (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his allies, which coincides with the New York Draft Riots of 1863.
Plot.
In 1846, in Lower Manhattan's Five Points, a territorial war between the "Natives" (those born in the United States) and recently arrived Irish Catholic immigrants, is coming to a head in Paradise Square. The Natives are led by Bill "the Butcher" Cutting (Day-Lewis), a Protestant nativist. The leader of the Irish gang, the Dead Rabbits, is known as "Priest" Vallon (Liam Neeson). The gangs meet in a bloody battle, concluding when Bill kills Vallon, which Vallon's son Amsterdam (Cian McCormack) witnesses. Cutting declares the Dead Rabbits outlawed and orders Vallon's body be buried with honor. Amsterdam seizes the knife used to kill his father, races off, and buries it. He is found and taken to the orphanage at Hellgate.
In September 1862, Amsterdam (DiCaprio) returns to New York. Arriving in Five Points, he reunites with an old friend, Johnny Sirocco (Thomas), who introduces Amsterdam to Bill the Butcher. Amsterdam finds many of his father's old loyalists are now under Bill's control, including Happy Jack Mulraney (Reilly), a corrupt city constable, and McGloin (Lewis), now one of Bill's lieutenants. Amsterdam works his way into Bill's inner circle, and learns that each year, on the anniversary of the Five Points battle (February 16), Bill leads the city in saluting the victory over the Dead Rabbits. He makes plans to kill Bill during this ceremony, in order to exact public revenge. Amsterdam meets Jenny Everdeane (Diaz), a very successful and discreet pickpocket and grifter, to whom he is attracted. His interest is dampened when he discovers she was once Bill's ward and still enjoys Bill's affections. Amsterdam becomes involved in the semi-criminal empire of Boss Tweed (Broadbent), the leader of Tammany Hall.
During a performance of "Uncle Tom's Cabin", Amsterdam thwarts an assassination attempt that leaves Bill wounded. Amsterdam realizes he acted more out of honest devotion to Bill than from his own plan of revenge. Both retire to a brothel, where Jenny nurses Bill. Amsterdam confronts Jenny over Bill, and they have an argument that dissolves into lovemaking. Late that night, Amsterdam wakes to find Bill sitting by his bed in a rocking chair, draped in a tattered American flag. Bill says "Priest" Vallon was the last enemy he ever fought who was worthy of real respect, and "Priest" once beat Bill soundly and then let him live in shame rather than kill him. Bill credits the incident with giving him strength of will and character to return and fight for his own authority. Bill admits he has come to look upon Amsterdam as the son he never had.
The evening of the ceremony arrives. Johnny reveals Amsterdam's identity and his plot to kill Bill. During a knife-throwing act involving Jenny, Bill baits Amsterdam when he throws the knife to leave a superficial cut on her throat. Amsterdam throws a knife at Bill, which Bill deflects, and counters with a knife throw of his own, hitting Amsterdam in the abdomen. Bill then repeatedly beats him as the crowd cheers. Bill proclaims he will let Amsterdam live as " freak, worthy of Barnum's museum of wonders".
Afterwards, in hiding, Jenny nurses Amsterdam back to health, and implores him to leave New York. They are visited by "Monk" McGinn (Gleeson), who was a mercenary for Vallon in the battle of the Five Points. He gives Amsterdam a straight razor that belonged to Vallon. Amsterdam places a dead rabbit on a fence in Paradise Square. The rabbit finds its way to Bill, who sends Happy Jack to find out who sent the message. Amsterdam ambushes Jack in the catacombs, strangles him, and hangs his body in Paradise Square. In retaliation, Bill has Johnny beaten nearly to death and run through with an iron pike. When McGloin goes to pray at a Catholic church, and sees Amsterdam's friend, Jimmy Spoils (Gilliard), he objects to letting a "nigger" in the church. Amsterdam and his friends respond by beating McGloin. The Nativists march to the Catholic Church, where the Irish stand on the steps in defense. Bill promises to return when they are ready. "Boss" Tweed approaches Amsterdam with a plan to defeat Bill: Tweed will back the candidacy of "Monk" McGinn for sheriff in return for the Irish vote. On election day, Bill and Amsterdam force people to the polls, some of them several times, with the result that "Monk" wins with more votes than there are voters. Bill confronts "Monk", who does not respond to Bill's challenge, suggesting they discuss the matter democratically. Bill then throws a meat cleaver into "Monk's" back and kills him with his own shillelagh. During "Monk's" funeral, Amsterdam issues a traditional challenge to fight, which Bill accepts.
The New York City draft riots break out, and many upper-class citizens and black people are attacked by the rioters. Union soldiers enter the city to put down the riots. As the gangs meet, they are hit by shells from naval ships in the harbor firing directly into Paradise Square. Many are killed, and an enormous cloud of dust and debris covers the area. Union soldiers then fire into the square, killing numerous people, including McGloin. Amsterdam and Bill exchange blows in the haze, then are thrown to the ground by another shell blast. When the smoke clears, Bill discovers he has been hit by a piece of shrapnel. He declares, "Thank God, I die a true American.". Amsterdam stabs him, and Bill dies with his hand locked in Amsterdam's.
Bill is buried in Brooklyn, in view of the smoke-filled Manhattan skyline, next to the grave of "Priest" Vallon. Amsterdam narrates New York would be rebuilt, but they are no longer remembered, as if "we were never here". The scene then shifts, as modern New York City is built, from the Brooklyn Bridge to the Empire State Building to the World Trade Center, and the graves of Bill and "Priest" gradually deteriorate.
Production.
Filmmaker Martin Scorsese grew up in New York's "Little Italy" in the 1950s. At the time, he had noticed there were parts of his neighborhood that were much older than the rest, including tombstones from the 1810s in Old St. Patrick's Cathedral, cobblestone streets and small basements located under more recent large buildings. He became curious about the area's history:"I gradually realized that the Italian-Americans weren't the first ones there, that other people had been there before us. As I began to understand this, it fascinated me. I kept wondering, how did New York look? What were the people like? How did they walk, eat, work, dress?"
In 1970, Scorsese came across Herbert Asbury's "The Gangs of New York: An Informal History of the Underworld" (1928), about the city's nineteenth-century criminal underworld, and found it to be a revelation. Scorsese saw the potential for an American epic about the battle for the modern American democracy. At the time, Scorsese was a young director without money or clout; by the end of the decade, with the success of crime films such as "Mean Streets" (1973), about his old neighborhood, and "Taxi Driver" (1976), he was a rising star. 
In 1979, he acquired screen rights to Asbury's book, but it took twenty years to get the production moving forward. Difficulties arose with reproducing the monumental city scape of 19th-century New York with the style and detail Scorsese wanted; almost nothing in New York City looked as it did in that time, and filming elsewhere was not an option. Eventually, in 1999, Scorsese was able to find a partnership with Harvey Weinstein, noted producer and co-chairman of Miramax Films. The production was filmed at the large Cinecittà Studio in Rome, Italy, where sets were produced to create 19th-century New York. Production designer Dante Ferretti recreated over a mile of mid-nineteenth century buildings, consisting of a five-block area of Lower Manhattan, including the Five Points slum, a section of the East River waterfront and two full-sized sailing ships, a thirty-building stretch of lower Broadway, a patrician mansion, and replicas of Tammany Hall, a church, a saloon, a Chinese theater, and a gambling casino. For the Five Points, Ferretti recreated George Catlin's painting of the area.
Particular attention was also paid to the speech of characters, as loyalties were often revealed by their accents. The film's voice coach, Tim Monich, resisted using a generic Irish brogue and instead focused on distinctive dialects of Ireland and Great Britain. As DiCaprio's character was born in Ireland but raised in the United States, his accent was designed to be a blend of accents typical of the half-Americanized. To develop the unique, long-lost accents of the Yankee "Nativists", such as Day-Lewis's character, Monich studied old poems, ballads, newspaper articles (which sometimes imitated spoken dialect as a form of humor), and the "Rogue's Lexicon", a book of underworld idioms compiled by New York’s police commissioner, so that his men would be able to tell what criminals were talking about. An important piece was an 1892 wax cylinder recording of Walt Whitman reciting four lines of a poem in which he pronounced the word "world" as "woild", and the "a" of "an" nasal and flat, like "ayan". Monich concluded that native nineteenth century New Yorkers probably sounded something like the proverbial Brooklyn cabbie of the mid-twentieth.
Due to the strong personalities and clashing visions of director and producer, the three year production became a story in and of itself. Scorsese strongly defended his artistic vision on issues of taste and length, while Weinstein fought for a streamlined, more commercial version. During the delays, noted actors such as Robert De Niro and Willem Dafoe had to leave the production due to conflicts with their other productions. Costs overshot the original budget by 25 percent, bringing the total cost over $100 million. The increased budget made the film's success vital to Miramax. After post-production was nearly completed in 2001, the film was delayed for over a year. The official justification was, after the September 11, 2001 attacks certain elements of the picture may have made audiences uncomfortable; the film's closing shot is a view of modern-day New York City, complete with the World Trade Center Towers, despite their having been leveled by the attacks over a year before the film's release. However this explanation was refuted in Scorsese's own contemporary statements, where he noted that the production was still filming pick-ups even into October 2002.
Weinstein kept demanding cuts to the film's length, and some of those cuts were eventually made. In December 2001, Jeffrey Wells (then of Kevin Smith's website) reviewed a purported workprint of the film as it existed in the fall of 2001. Wells reported the work print lacked narration, was about 20 minutes longer, and although it was "different than the version... scene after scene after scene play[s exactly the same in both." Despite the similarities, Wells found the work print to be richer and more satisfying than the theatrical version. While Scorsese has stated the theatrical version is his final cut, he reportedly "passed along three-hour-plus [work print version of "Gangs" on tape friends and confided, 'Putting aside my contractual obligation to deliver a shorter, two-hour-and-forty-minute version to Miramax, this is the version I'm happiest with,' or words to that effect."
In an interview with Roger Ebert, Scorsese clarified the real issues in the cutting of the film. Ebert notes,
Soundtrack.
Robbie Robertson, supervised the soundtrack's collection of eclectic pop, folk, and neo-classical tracks.
Historical accuracy.
Scorsese received both praise and criticism for historical depictions in the film. In a PBS interview for the History News Network, George Washington University professor Tyler Anbinder discussed the historical aspects of the film.
Asbury's book described the Bowery Boys, Plug Uglies, Shirt Tails, and the Dead Rabbits. The last were so named after their battle standard, a dead rabbit on a pike. The book described William Poole, the inspiration for William "Bill the Butcher" Cutting, a member of the Bowery Boys, a bare-knuckle boxer, and a leader of the Know Nothing political movement. Poole did not come from the Five Points and was murdered nearly a decade before the Draft Riots. Both the fictional Bill and the real one had butcher shops, but Poole is not known to have killed anyone. The book described other famous gangsters from the era such as Red Rocks Farrell, Slobbery Jim and Hell-Cat Maggie, who filed her front teeth to points and wore artificial brass fingernails and was played by Cara Seymour in the film.
Anbinder opined that Scorsese's recreation of the visual environment of mid-19th century New York City and the Five Points "couldn't have been much better". All the sets were built completely on the exterior stages of Cinecittà Studios in Rome. By 1860, New York City had 200,000 Irish, in a population of 800,000. The riot which opens the film, though fictional, was "reasonably true to history" for fights of this type, except for the amount of carnage depicted in the gang fights and city riots.
According to author and journalist Pete Hamill:</ref> 
According to Paul S. Boyer, a U.S. cultural and intellectual historian:Paul S. Boyer (1992). ""Urban Masses and Moral Order in America, 1820–1920"". Harvard University Press. ISBN 0-674-93110-6</ref>
As early as 1839, Mayor Philip Hone said:[http://www.nytimes.com/1990/09/20/opinion/gangs-crime-smut-violence.html Gangs, Crime, Smut, Violence. "The New York Times." September 20, 1990.</ref>
The large gang fight depicted in the film as occurring in 1846 is fictional, though one between the Bowery Boys and the Dead Rabbits in the Five Points on July 4, 1857, is not included in the film. Vincent DiGirolamo concludes:(RE)VIEWS: Vincent DiGirolamo "Such, Such Were the B'hoys..."  – "Radical History Review", Fall 2004 2004(90): 123–141; Gangs of New York, directed by Martin Scorsese. Miramax Films, 2002.</ref> 
The Draft Riots are depicted mostly as acts of property destruction; however, mobs physically attacked blacks, lynching several, and there were more than one hundred deaths, most of which were African-Americans. Irish gangs targeted blacks because of competition for work. In the film, Chinese Americans were portrayed as having their own community and public venues, but significant Chinese emigration to New York City did not begin until 1869 (although the Chinese emigrated to America as early as the 1840s), the time when the First Transcontinental Railroad was completed. The Chinese theater on Pell Street was not completed until the 1890s. The Old Brewery, the overcrowded tenement shown in the movie in both 1846 and 1862–63, was demolished in 1852.
Release.
The original target release date was December 21, 2001, in time for the 2001 Academy Awards, however the production overshot that goal as Scorsese was still filming. A twenty minute clip, billed as an "extended preview", debuted at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival, and was shown at a star-studded event at the Palais des Festivals et des Congrès with Scorsese, DiCaprio, Diaz and Weinstein in attendance.
Harvey Weinstein then wanted the film to open on December 25, 2002, but a potential conflict with another film starring Leonardo DiCaprio, "Catch Me If You Can" produced by DreamWorks, caused him to move the opening day to an earlier position. After negotiations between several parties, including the interests of DiCaprio, Weinstein and DreamWorks' Jeffrey Katzenberg, the decision was made on economic grounds: DiCaprio did not want to face a conflict of promoting two movies opening against each other; Katzenberg was able to convince Weinstein that the violence and adult material in "Gangs of New York" would not necessarily attract families on Christmas Day. Of main concern to all involved was attempting to maximize the film's opening day, an important part of film industry economics.
After three years in production, the film was released on December 20, 2002; a year after its original planned release date. While the film has been released on DVD and Blu-ray, there are no plans to revisit the theatrical cut or prepare a "director's cut" for home video release. "Marty doesn't believe in that", editor Thelma Schoonmaker stated. "He believes in showing only the finished film."
Reception.
Box office.
The film made $77,812,000 in Canada and the United States. It took in $23,763,699 in Japan and $16,358,580 in the United Kingdom. Worldwide the film grossed a total of $193,772,504.
Critical reception.
Reviews of the eventual release in 2002 were generally positive, with Daniel Day-Lewis' performance receiving the most praise by critics —the review aggregating website Rotten Tomatoes reporting 75% of the 202 reviews that they tallied were favorable. The RT Critical Consensus reads, "Though flawed, the sprawling, messy "Gangs of New York" is redeemed by impressive production design and Day-Lewis's electrifying performance."
The review aggregate website Metacritic awarded "Gangs of New York" a Metascore of 72, indicating generally favorable reviews.
Roger Ebert praised the film but believed it fell short of Scorsese's best work, while his "At the Movies" co-star Richard Roeper called it a "masterpiece" and declared it a leading contender for Best Picture. Paul Clinton of CNN called the film "a grand American epic." 
In "Variety", Todd McCarthy wrote that the film "falls somewhat short of great film status, but is still a richly impressive and densely realized work that bracingly opens the eye and mind to untaught aspects of American history." McCarthy singled out what he considered the meticulous attention to historical detail and production design for particular praise.
Some critics, however, were disappointed with the film, complaining it fell well short of the hyperbole surrounding it, that it tried to tackle too many themes without saying anything unique about them, and that the overall story was weak.
