Windows 7, a major release of the Microsoft Windows operating system, is available in six different editions (Starter, Home Basic, Home Premium, Professional, Enterprise and Ultimate). Only Home Premium, Professional, and Ultimate are widely available at retailers. The other editions focus on other markets, such as the developing world or enterprise use. All editions support 32-bit IA-32 CPUs and all editions except Starter support 64-bit x64 CPUs. (64-bit installation media is not included in Home-Basic edition packages, but can be obtained separately from Microsoft).
According to Microsoft, the features for all editions of Windows 7 are stored on the machine, regardless of which edition is in use. Users who wish to upgrade to an edition of Windows 7 with more features can then use Windows Anytime Upgrade to purchase the upgrade and to unlock the features of those editions. Microsoft announced Windows 7 pricing information for some editions on June 25, 2009, and Windows Anytime Upgrade and Family Pack pricing on July 31, 2009.
Main editions.
All editions will receive Mainstream Support (new features and bug fixes) until January 2015 and Extended Support (security updates) until January 2020.
Upgrade editions.
Windows Vista Service Pack 1 can be upgraded to Windows 7 with an in-place upgrade if the processor architecture, comparable edition, and language version are the same. Earlier versions than Windows Vista Service Pack 1 can only be upgraded to Windows 7 via a clean install. However, in some countries, Microsoft has recommended a clean install regardless of whether going from XP or Vista, with reasoning that has not been made clear.
Standard upgrade editions.
Upgrading from an applicable version of XP and Vista to an applicable version of Windows 7 is supported, using upgrade editions; however, there is no direct way to upgrade earlier than Windows Vista Service Pack 1. Users can upgrade to Vista first then to Windows 7 or use Windows Easy Transfer to collect data and settings from installed programs, install Windows 7 then install their program data and settings from Windows Easy Transfer, then re-install all their programs. Not all programs will install if they don't support Windows 7. The latter method does a fresh install of Windows 7 so all software needs to be re-installed. If the original hardware is kept, suitable drivers will need to be found. The options mean that users can update freely from any previous version to any of the new three retail editions of Windows 7: Home Premium, Professional, or Ultimate (plus in Europe, and possibly South Korea, these Upgrade Editions also come in optional N versions). Discounted upgrade pricing is only available to current users of genuine copies XP or Vista.
Family Pack.
Windows 7 is available as a Family Pack upgrade edition in certain markets, to upgrade to Windows 7 Home Premium only. It gives licenses to upgrade three machines from Vista or Windows XP to the Windows 7 Home Premium edition. These are not full versions, so each machine to be upgraded must have one of these qualifying previous versions of Windows for them to work. In the United States, this offer was discontinued in early December 2009. Microsoft has since announced it will resume availability of Windows 7 Home Premium Family Pack which was available starting October 3, 2010 for a limited time while supplies lasted.
Upgrade compatibility.
The table below lists which upgrade paths allow for an in-place install. Note that in-place upgrades can only be performed when the previous version of Windows is of the same architecture. If upgrading from a 32-bit installation to a 64-bit installation or vice versa, a clean install is mandatory regardless of the editions being used.
Anytime Upgrade editions.
Windows 7 also supports in-place upgrades from a lower edition of Windows 7 to a higher one using the Windows Anytime Upgrade tool. There are currently three retail options available (though it is currently unclear whether they can be used with previous installations of the N versions). Currently, there are no plans for family pack versions of the Anytime Upgrade editions.
It is possible to use the Product Key from a Standard upgrade edition to accomplish an in-place upgrade (e.g. Home Premium to Ultimate).
1Available in retail, and at the Microsoft Store
