The Nexus 7 ( ) is a tablet computer designed and developed by Google in conjunction with Asus. It is the first tablet in the Google Nexus series, a line of consumer devices implementing the Android operating system and built by an original equipment manufacturer (OEM) partner. The Nexus 7 features a display, an Nvidia Tegra 3 quad-core chip, 1 GB of RAM, and 8, 16 or 32 GB of internal storage. Incorporating built-in Wi-Fi and near field communication (NFC) connectivity, it is marketed as an entertainment device with integration with Google Play, serving as a platform for multimedia consumption of e-books, television programs, films, games, and music. The tablet was the first device to ship with Android version 4.1, nicknamed "Jelly Bean".
Design work on the Nexus 7 began in January 2012 after a meeting between executives of Google and Asus at International CES. The device's design was based on Asus' Eee Pad MeMO ME370T tablet that had been showcased at the conference. Following a rapid four-month development period in which the device was modified to reach a US$199 price point, mass production of the Nexus 7 started in May 2012. It was unveiled at Google I/O, Google's annual developer conference, on June 27, 2012, and became available for pre-order through Google Play on the same day. Shipping commenced in mid-July to Australia, Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom, and releases in France, Germany, and Spain followed in August. Google expanded the Nexus 7 lineup in October 2012 with the introduction of 32 GB versions, available in Wi-Fi–only and HSPA+ cellular-ready varieties.
The Nexus 7 received positive reviews from technology critics, particularly for its competitive pricing, premium-quality build, and powerful hardware. Common criticisms included the absence of cellular connectivity from initial models and no expandable storage. The Nexus 7 has been commercially successful, selling approximately 3 million units, according to estimates by Forrester Research in October 2012. The device was a double-winner at the 2012 "T3" magazine awards, receiving honors for "Gadget of the Year" and "Tablet of the Year." The Nexus 7 competes with similar devices such as Amazon's Kindle Fire, Barnes & Noble's Nook Tablet and Nook HD, and Apple's iPad Mini.
History.
Development phase.
In an interview in December 2011, Google executive chairman Eric Schmidt confirmed that a Google-designed tablet would arrive in six months. During the interview for Italian newspaper "Corriere della Sera", Schmidt stated that Google would have stronger competition against Apple Inc., the designer of the popular iPad tablet. While he did not refer to it as such, it was inferred to be a Nexus device.
According to Benjamin Yeh, Asus' head of UK and Nordic markets, the idea for the Nexus 7 was conceived at International CES in Las Vegas in January 2012 in a meeting between executives from Asus and Google. Asus, the device's original equipment manufacturer, was tasked with building a device that could sell for US$200 and would be "fast, cheap, and good"; according to the concept of the project management triangle, only two of these qualities can be achieved. Asus chairman Jonney Shih said that Google "ask a lot" and that "our engineers told me it is like torture". 
To proceed with the project, which Asus code-named "Project A-Team", the company sent a design team to Googleplex, Google's headquarters in Mountain View, California, while Google sent seven engineers to Asus' headquarters. Having employees working near Google's offices allowed the engineering team to have a 24-hour development cycle, but Shih needed to later add 40 people to the project to meet Google's requests. The design for the Nexus 7 was based on a tablet that Asus had showcased at International CES that year, the Eee Pad MeMO ME370T. An Asus representative explained, "While the base design and setup was completed in the 370T to meet a certain price point and option list, the efforts required to get that design to $199 meant going back to the drawing board and starting over on just about every aspect of the unit." Among the component modifications were a new motherboard, revised system on a chip (SoC), laminated display, and rear casing with a grippier material. The Nexus 7's design was completed after a relatively rapid four-month development period; mass production began in May 2012.
In an analysis of its components, IHS's "iSuppli" estimated that the production cost of the 16 GB model of the Nexus 7 is US$159.25 per unit, US$19 more per unit than the Kindle Fire. The Nexus 7's higher production costs were attributed to its use of a higher-quality display, a quad-core processor (instead of the Fire's dual-core), and its inclusion of a camera and near field communications (NFC) functionality. The firm's senior analyst Andrew Rassweiler suggested that the success of the HP TouchPad's fire sale helped increase the commercial viability of low-cost tablets from major brands, and the failures of other high-end tablets helped reduce the cost of parts, making tablets like the Kindle Fire and Nexus 7 possible. However, he also noted that both tablets were being sold at thin profit margins, primarily due to their respective ties to content services.
Unveiling and release.
One month before its unveiling, the tablet appeared on benchmark site Rightware, which revealed that it would be an Asus-produced device known as the "Nexus 7" with a screen, a Tegra 3 system on a chip, and version 4.1 of the Android operating system. On June 25, 2012, gadget website Gizmodo Australia claimed it had access to the tablet's specifications, which were correct, including storage options, screen resolution, and recommended retail prices.
The Nexus 7 was revealed on June 27, 2012, at Google I/O, an annual developer conference at Moscone Center in San Francisco, and it became available for pre-order on the same day. In addition, Android version 4.1, nicknamed "Jelly Bean", was revealed during the keynote address by Hugo Barra, Director of Product Management for Android. The following day, a special white edition of the Nexus 7 was given to Google I/O attendees, along with the Galaxy Nexus with Jelly Bean pre-installed, the Nexus Q, and a Chromebox. Barra announced the tablet would retail for US$199 for the 8 GB version, and customers of the Nexus 7 would receive a US$25 credit (available until September 30) to spend in Google Play, Android's digital multimedia distribution service, a copy of the film "" (2011), a copy of the e-book "The Bourne Dominion", and free magazines on their tablet. The announcement of the Nexus 7 was interpreted by technology commentators as Google's response to the inability of Android tablets to challenge the iPad's dominance of the tablet market. The stock market reacted positively to the announcement, as shares of Google increased by 0.8 percent to US$569.37 that afternoon.
At the launch event, Barra announced that the tablet would initially be shipped to Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Google commenced shipping of the Nexus 7 to customers who had pre-ordered the tablet in Australia and the US on July 13, 2012. The company released the Nexus 7 to Canada and the UK four days later on July 17. The tablet was released in France, Germany, and Spain on August 27, 2012, and in Japan on September 25, 2012. Two days later the tablet was released in South Korea. It was released in India on November 7, 2012.
Features.
Software.
As a Google Nexus device, the Nexus 7 offers a "pure Android" experience, as it features the stock Android operating system, free of manufacturer or wireless carrier modifications like custom graphical user interfaces (or "skins", such as TouchWiz and HTC Sense) that exist in other Android devices. Nexus devices have an unlockable bootloader, allowing users from the outset to further develop the OS and "root" the device, or gain legitimate privileged control in Android's subsystem. Software-development community Xda-Developers was among the first to release a custom ROM and kernel for the tablet.
Nexus devices are considered the "flagship" Android devices and are the first to receive updates to the operating system. As such, the Nexus 7 is the first device to have been shipped with Google's Android version 4.1 ("Jelly Bean"). Jelly Bean is an incremental upgrade from version 4.0 ("Ice Cream Sandwich"), incorporating software improvements to the pull-down notifications bar and camera, and changes to the homescreen. With Jelly Bean, Google significantly reduced latency (lag), one negative aspect of Android compared to Apple's iOS operating system, by employing "vsync timing" and triple buffering, improving touch responsiveness, and programming the display to run at 60 frames per second; this initiative was called "Project Butter". The Nexus 7 is the first device to incorporate Google Chrome as the standard web browser; all other iterations of the Android OS have used an unnamed stock browser.
One of the most highly touted features of Jelly Bean was Google Now, an intelligent personal assistant similar to Apple's Siri. According to Google, Google Now displays information in the form of cards that it predicts they will want based on their search habits, such as traffic conditions, sports results, and weather. Google Now can translate a selected number of written languages and provide information on nearby places of interest. "Popular Science" named Google Now the "Innovation of the Year" for 2012.
The Nexus 7 comes with many applications by default, including Gmail, YouTube, Google Maps, Google Calendar, Google+, Google Wallet and Google Currents. According to Barra, Google has emphasized the integration of Google Play with the device: "Google Play is Nexus 7 and Nexus 7 is Google Play. So which one is it that you are selling?...Well, it's really both." According to Andy Rubin, co-founder and former CEO of Android Inc., the emphasis of Google Play arose after Google learned that customers buy into an application "ecosystem" when purchasing tablets, unlike phones where hardware is the primary determining factor. The Nexus 7 is intended to take advantage of the different media formats available through the application store, including e-books, films, music, games, magazines, and television programs. An update to Android 4.2 was released in November 2012.
Hardware and design.
The Nexus 7 has a plastic chassis that is long, wide, and thick, and weighs . The device comes with a Nvidia Tegra 3 SoC consisting of a 1.3 GHz Cortex-A9 quad-core central processing unit (CPU) and a twelve-core 416 MHz Nvidia GeForce ULP graphics processing unit (GPU). In conjunction with an accelerometer and gyroscope, the powerful GPU enables graphically demanding gameplay. The Tegra 3 processor, besides the four primary cores, features "Variable Symmetric Multiprocessing" that uses a fifth "stealth" core designed to take over during periods of low processor demand, helping to preserve battery life. Other features include a microphone, GPS, a magnetometer, and 1.2 megapixel front-facing camera. The rear of the Nexus 7 features a dimpled plastic surface with a rubbery, leathery texture intended to improve grip and comfort holding the device.
Google and Asus omitted cellular connectivity on initial models of the device, instead employing Wi-Fi 802.11 b/g/n as the only means for the tablet to connect to the Internet. A mobile-capable version of the device utilizing HSPA+ cellular technology with 32 GB of storage was later introduced in October 2012 for US$299. Unlike most tablets, the Nexus 7 has NFC connectivity built in, which allows users to share files quickly with Android Beam and perform non-touch payments at sites that employ NFC cash registers.
The Nexus 7 is powered by a 4,325 mAh lithium-ion polymer battery that typically lasts 9.5 hours and can be charged via microUSB. In order to maximize the device's battery life, Asus engineers spent one month attempting to reduce electrical leakage by measuring heat and voltage at every point on the printed circuit board (PCB). The tablet includes a highly efficient power management integrated circuit designed by Maxim Integrated Products. Google claims the Nexus 7's battery life allows 9 hours of HD video playback, 10 hours of web browsing or e-reading, and 300 hours on standby.
The device's LCD display has a display resolution of 1280×800 pixels, giving it a pixel density of 216 pixels per inch (PPI). Its IPS display enables a wide viewing angle (178°) without significant color distortion, and enhances color reproduction. The tablet's thin, lightweight form factor was achieved without sacrificing computer power through a special LCD display design called Asus TruVivid. The LCD panel uses a "one-glass" solution and a non-traditional lamination technique. Tablet touchscreens typically comprise four pieces of glass—two that sandwich the liquid crystal, a touch sensor glass, and a protective glass—whereas the Asus TruVivid design fuses the protective and sensor glass, with the sensor attached as a film. The conventional lamination technique for touchscreens involves air bonding, in which the glass layers are glued around the edges, leaving air in between; Asus used a "full lamination" technique, in which the glass layers are fused by adhesive with no air between. This yielded thinner display panels, but made production more difficult, as there was less tolerance for imprecision without affecting the quality of the screen. The tablet's display is protected by a layer of Corning Fit Glass.
Contrasting with the company's usual method for designing motherboards, the first component that Asus placed on the device's PCB was the speakers. This was done to ensure the other components did not force speaker placement towards one side, which would negatively impact sound quality. Asus changed the device's design: two microphones were implemented to ensure the user's hand placement on the device would not muffle sound during videoconferencing; the headphone jack was moved to the bottom of the device, preventing the headphone wire from draping across the screen.
Two models of the Nexus 7 were available at launch, one with 8 GB of storage, priced at US$199 or £159, and one with 16 GB of storage, priced at US$249 or £199. In October 2012, the Nexus 7 lineup was revised: the 8 GB model was discontinued, the price of the 16 GB version was reduced to US$199, and a 32 GB variant was introduced at the US$249 price point. The low cost of the Nexus 7 puts it in competition with the Kindle Fire, with which it shares the same retail price. The low price of the Nexus 7 compared to higher-end tablets such as the iPad was noted by critics; Nvidia's Mike Rayfield felt that no one had ever produced a "truly amazing" device of its kind at such a price until the Nexus 7.
Reception.
Critical reaction.
Conversely, reviewers noted a lack of support for expandable storage, the initial absence of cellular connectivity, and the display's lower-than-expected contrast level, as well as an absence of a rear-facing camera. For the latter, in an explanation from Asus, the company claimed that it decided to omit such a camera so as to not compromise the user experience and competitive pricing. Consumers reported instances when the screen would not register inputs while the tablet performed data-intensive operations, while others complained about the build-quality of the screen.
Critics in particular praised the combination of competitive retail pricing and quality of the Nexus 7. Tim Stevens of Engadget observed, "The Nexus 7 is an amazing package ... feels like something that could sell for much more." This sentiment was similarly voiced by Melissa Perenson of "PCWorld", who wrote, "Nexus 7 ... isn't like other inexpensive tablets. Its construction has a high-quality look and feel", and "The Verge" columnist Joshua Topolsky, who declared, "Google's Nexus 7 isn't just an excellent tablet for $200. It's an excellent tablet, period."
Commercial.
During the week following the Google I/O unveiling, Google noticed an "immense demand" for the Nexus 7, resulting in many retailers having to stop accepting pre-orders for the tablet. Following release on July 13, 2012, GameStop, Sam's Club, Adorama, Staples, B&H Photo Video, and Kmart announced that they had run out of stock for the tablet. Google was "surprised" by the demand for its 16 GB model, forcing it to stop accepting orders for the model on Google Play. In response to the Nexus 7, in mid-August 2012, Barnes & Noble lowered the retail prices of its Nook Tablets; the prices of the Nook Color and 8 GB Nook Tablet were cut by US$20 to US$149 and US$179, respectively, while the 16 GB model of the Nook Tablet received a US$50 price reduction from its previous retail price of US$249.
According to gadget site Tom's Hardware, 3–4 million units were expected to sell in 2012, which would account for most of the six million tablets Asus was expecting to sell for the year. Other sources estimated that 6–8 million units of the tablet would be shipped before the year's end. Google initially expected to sell 3 million units of the Nexus 7 by the end of 2012, but Forrester Research estimates that Google met this sales target in mid-October 2012. Asus CFO David Chang said that by October, sales of the Nexus 7 had approached 1 million units per month. Taiwanese companies involved in the tablet's supply chain expected 5 million units to ship by the end of 2012. According to Carphone Warehouse, the Nexus 7 is the UK retailer's highest-selling Android tablet. In light of Google not releasing official sales figures, a mobile industry analyst estimated that the device most likely sold between 4.5–4.6 million units in 2012.
Following the 2012 holiday season, analytics company Localytics reported that the Nexus 7 owned 8% of the global Android tablet market share, based on estimates of app installations. This places it fourth among Android tablets, trailing the Kindle Fire (33%), Nook (10%), and Samsung Galaxy (9%) lines. A survey conducted by market research firm BCN in December 2012 found that the Nexus 7 had the largest tablet market share in Japan at 44.4% versus the iPads' combined market share of 40.1%. The survey cited factors such as price and consumer savvy.
Accolades.
In 2012, the Nexus 7 won "T3"s "Gadget of the Year" award, beating rival Apple's iPhone 4S, Sony's PlayStation Vita, OnLive, and others. It also won "Tablet of the Year" in the same awards ceremony, beating Apple's new iPad, Sony's Tablet S, Samsung's Galaxy Tab 8.9, and others. CNET named the Nexus 7 the third-best tech product and the fourth-most influential tech product of 2012.
