Amy Schumer (born June 1, 1981) is an American stand-up comedienne, actress, and writer. She placed fourth on the fifth season of NBC's "Last Comic Standing", and she placed second on Comedy Central's "Reality Bites Back". In 2012, she held a recurring role on the Adult Swim series "Delocated".
Early life.
Schumer was born to a family in Manhattan and grew up on Long Island, New York. She attended South Side High School and was voted both "Class Clown" and "Teacher's Worst Nightmare" upon graduation in 1999. Schumer graduated from Towson University in 2003 with a degree in theater. She moved to New York City after college, where she studied at the William Esper Studio for two years and worked as a bartender and a waitress. Through her father, she is the niece of Chuck Schumer, U.S. Senator from New York.
Career.
Schumer portrayed a young woman diagnosed with breast cancer in the off-Broadway black comedy "Keeping Abreast". She started doing stand-up comedy on June 1, 2004, when she first performed at Gotham Comedy Club. She recorded a special for Comedy Central before appearing on "Last Comic Standing"; she said in August 2012 that she thought of the special as her "big break".
After not passing an audition for an earlier season, she advanced to the finals of the fifth season of the NBC reality television talent show "Last Comic Standing" and placed fourth. Schumer said in April 2011, ""Last Comic" was totally fun. I had a great time because there was no pressure on me; I had been doing stand-up around two years. I wasn't supposed to do well. So every time I advanced it was a happy surprise. I kept it honest on the show and it served me well."
She co-starred in the Comedy Central reality show "Reality Bites Back" in 2008. In 2009, she appeared in an advertising campaign for Butterfinger.
Schumer has been a frequent guest on the "Howard Stern Show" since 2010. She is also a recurring guest on Fox News late-night program "Red Eye w/ Greg Gutfeld". Her first Comedy Central Presents special aired on April 2, 2010. She served as a co-host of "A Different Spin with Mark Hoppus" (later titled "Hoppus on Music") in 2011. She has also written for "Cosmopolitan".
She has appeared in roles on the NBC comedy series "30 Rock", "Live at Gotham", the Adult Swim mockumentary series "Delocated", and the HBO comedy series "Curb Your Enthusiasm". She acted in three films in 2012: the independent comedy "Price Check", the comedy-drama "Seeking a Friend for the End of the World", and the independent comedy "Sleepwalk with Me".
Schumer also appeared on "The Comedy Central Roast of Charlie Sheen" in September 2011, and "The Comedy Central Roast of Roseanne Barr" in August 2012.
Her debut standup comedy album "Cutting" was released on April 25, 2011. Her standup comedy special "Mostly Sex Stuff" premiered on Comedy Central on August 18, 2012.
In 2012, Schumer began developing a sketch comedy series for Comedy Central. The show will feature single-camera vignettes of Schumer playing "heightened versions" of herself. The vignettes will be linked together with footage of Schumer's stand-up. The show titled "Inside Amy Schumer" is currently in production and slated to premiere on Comedy Central in spring of 2013.
Schumer said in February 2012, "I don't like the observational stuff. I like tackling the stuff nobody else talks about, like the darkest, most serious thing about yourself. I talk about life and sex and personal stories and stuff everybody can relate to, and some can't."
Personal life.
Schumer has dated professional wrestler Dolph Ziggler and is in an on and off relationship with comedian Anthony Jeselnik.
