"Hotel California" is the title song from the Eagles' album of the same name and was released as a single in February 1977. It is one of the best-known songs of the album-oriented rock era. Writing credits for the song are shared by Don Felder, Don Henley and Glenn Frey. The Eagles' original recording of the song features Henley singing the lead vocals and concludes with an extended section of electric guitar interplay between Felder and Joe Walsh. The song has been given several interpretations by fans and critics alike, but the Eagles have described it as their "interpretation of the high life in Los Angeles".
History and recognition.
"Hotel California" topped the "Billboard" Hot 100 singles chart for one week in May 1977. Three months after its release, the single was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), representing 1 million copies shipped. The Eagles also won the 1977 Grammy Award for Record of the Year for "Hotel California" at the 20th Grammy Awards in 1978.
In 2009, the song "Hotel California" was certified Platinum (Digital Sales Award) by the RIAA for sales of 1 million digital downloads.
The song is rated highly in many rock music lists and polls, though it was not met with critical acclaim right away. "Rolling Stone" magazine, for example, originally spoke poorly of "Hotel California" in the very same issue in which it featured The Eagles on the cover. The magazine later ranked it number 49 on its list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time". It is also one of The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs that Shaped Rock and Roll. The song's guitar solo is ranked 8th on "Guitar Magazine"s Top 100 Guitar Solos and was voted the best solo of all time by readers of "Guitarist" magazine. 
As one of the group's most popular and well-known songs, "Hotel California" has been a concert staple for the band since its release. Performances of the song appear on the Eagles' 1980 live album, simply called "Live", and in an acoustic version on the 1994 "Hell Freezes Over" reunion concert CD and video release. The "Hell Freezes Over" version is performed using eight guitars and has a decidedly Spanish feel to it with Don Felder's flamenco-inspired intro. During the band's Farewell 1 Tour-Live from Melbourne, the song was performed in a manner closer to the original album version, but with a trumpet interlude in the beginning.
Crowe, Cameron. "Conversations with Don Henley and Glenn Frey" "The Very Best of the Eagles" liner notes (2003)</ref>
Interpretation.
</ref>
The abstract nature of the lyrics has led listeners to their own interpretations over the years. In the 1980s, some Christian evangelists alleged that "Hotel California" referred to a San Francisco hotel purchased by Anton LaVey and converted into the Church of Satan. Other rumors suggested that the Hotel California was the Camarillo State Mental Hospital.
The term "colitas" in the first stanza of the song is a Spanish term for "little tails" and in Mexican slang it is a reference to the buds of the cannabis plant.
In a 2009 interview, "Plain Dealer" music critic John Soeder asked Don Henley this about the lyrics:"On "Hotel California," you sing: "So I called up the captain / 'Please bring me my wine' / He said, 'We haven't had that spirit here since 1969.'" I realize I'm probably not the first to bring this to your attention, but wine isn't a spirit. Wine is fermented; spirits are distilled. Do you regret that lyric?"
Henley responded,Soeder, John. "Don Henley gets into the spirit talking about 'Hotel California'" "The Plain Dealer" March 20, 2009: T14</ref>
According to Glenn Frey's liner notes for "The Very Best of Eagles," the use of the word "steely" in the lyric (referring to knives) was a playful nod to band Steely Dan, who had included the lyric "Turn up the Eagles, the neighbors are listening" in their song "Everything You Did".
Harmonic structure.
The intro and verse's chord pattern counts eight measures, each one assigned to a single chord. Seven different chords are used in the eight measures. As the song opens, it is not until the eighth measure that a chord is repeated. The song is initially in the key of B-minor. 
The chords are played as follows: 
The eight measure sequence is repeated in the intro, for each verse and in the outro, providing the harmonic framework for the entire extended dual guitar solo at the end of the song. Although this chord sequence is not a commonly-used progression, it does resemble Jethro Tull's "We Used to Know" from their 1969 album "Stand Up". One explanation of the progression is that it is a common flamenco chord progression called the "Spanish progression" (i-VII-VI-V) that is interspersed with consecutive fifths.
Personnel.
Cover shot for the album was the Beverly Hills Hotel in California.
