Savages is a 2012 American crime thriller film directed by Oliver Stone. It is based on the novel of the same name by Don Winslow. The screenplay was written by Shane Salerno, Winslow and Stone. The film was released on July 6, 2012, and features an ensemble cast including Taylor Kitsch, Blake Lively, Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Demian Bichir, Benicio del Toro, Salma Hayek, John Travolta, and Emile Hirsch.
Plot.
Best friends Chon (Taylor Kitsch) and Ben (Aaron Johnson) are marijuana growers living in Laguna Beach, California. Chon, a former Navy SEAL, smuggled the seeds for the plants out of Afghanistan. These seeds yielded a particularly potent strain of marijuana that soon developed a wide customer base and made Chon and Ben very wealthy. The two are in a polyamorous relationship with O (Blake Lively) as a girlfriend.
While Ben is doing charity work overseas, Chon and O receive a video from cartel enforcer Lado (Benicio del Toro), a man they do not know. The video shows several severed heads and a chainsaw, leading them to worry about Ben, who they fear is one of the victims. However, Ben returns safely the next day, and Chon and Ben go to meet with the Mexican cartel. After refusing the cartel's offer for a partnership, Chon and Ben make plans with O to leave and go to Indonesia for a year, not telling her that they are fleeing from the cartel. 
Chon and Ben speak to corrupt DEA agent Dennis (John Travolta) who urges them to partner with the cartel. O, meanwhile, is kidnapped by Lado and several members of the cartel. Chon and Ben are notified of O's kidnapping via a Skype call from cartel leader Elena (Salma Hayek), who threatens to harm O before again urging the two to partner with the cartel. 
Chon and Ben speak with Dennis about the situation, but the conversation turns sour, with Chon stabbing Dennis in the hand and punching him in the face. After Dennis angrily leaves, Chon and Ben decide to retaliate. With help from Chon's Navy SEAL friends, the duo attacks a cartel truck, killing seven of Elena's men. The duo decides to frame Alex (a high ranking member of the cartel) (Demián Bichir) for the murders. With help from Dennis, they falsify the evidence and give it to Lado, who tortures the man before forcing Ben to immolate him. While being tortured, the man begs for his life "on Magda", revealing to Chon and Ben that Elena's daughter is still alive.
O, during all of this, has been kept in horrible living conditions while asking to speak to someone. Elena, feeling sorry for her, allows her to contact her mother. While in captivity and after drugging her, Lado rapes O while recording it. He later shows her the video of it, causing her to spit on him. Elena later brings her to her estate to have someone to talk to.
Meanwhile, Ben and Chon bribe Dennis for information on Magda (Sandra Echeverria), ultimately paying him $3 million for the information and the name of his snitch in Elena's cartel. After kidnapping Magda, Ben and Chon skype Elena once more, establishing that they are now in control. With Elena at their mercy, the two arrange a meeting, at which point both O and Magda will be released.
The exchange is set to occur in the middle of the desert, with snipers from both sides prepared to fire. Elena requests to know the identity of the man who revealed the location of her daughter, and Chon reveals that it was Lado. Elena attempts to kill Lado, but he shoots her first. An intense firefight erupts, with Chon being shot several times. Lado is shot in the back by Ben, but manages to shoot Ben in the neck before being killed by O. With Ben mortally wounded, Chon injects him, himself, and O with a fatal overdose, so the three can die together.
It is then revealed that this sequence is how O feared the events would transpire. In reality, Lado steals Elena's car and drives off as DEA agents arrive, led by Dennis. Everyone at the meeting is arrested, but since Ben possesses incriminating information on Dennis, Dennis names Ben and Chon as his informants for the past six years, leading to them being released from jail. Ben, Chon and O leave the country together and live "like savages" in Indonesia, and O implies that they are drifting apart into separate interests.
Production.
By August 2011, the film was shooting in the Pacific Palisades neighborhood of Los Angeles. The "Los Angeles Times" reported: "The estate's indoor pool was converted into a massive hydroponic marijuana farm for the film's production, with about 300 high-octane pot plants jamming the covert nursery." Production designer Tomas Voth, said: "I wanted to use real plants and had them all ready to go, but it was some legal thing. Universal told us to use fakes." The sex scenes were filmed during the first three days. The film entered post-production in October 2011.
Casting.
Jennifer Lawrence was originally cast as O, but dropped out due to scheduling conflicts. Other actresses considered for the part included Olivia Wilde, Teresa Palmer, and Abbie Cornish. In April 2011, it was reported that Lively had joined the film. Before casting Taylor Kitsch in the film, Oliver Stone asked director Peter Berg to show him 30 minutes of Kitsch's work in "Battleship" to see how he was as a leading man, and after seeing that footage, he cast him. Trevor Donovan originally auditioned for a role that was cut but after seeing Donovan's tape, Stone specifically wrote him a part that was not in the book. Uma Thurman played O's mother, Paqu, but her scenes were cut due to time constraints.
Reception.
Critical reception.
"Savages" received mixed reviews from critics. Based on 168 reviews collected by aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, the film scored a 51% approval rating, with an average rating of 5.7/10. The site's critical consensus is, "It's undeniably messy, but Savages finds Oliver Stone returning to dark, fearlessly lurid form." Metacritic, another review aggregator which assigns a weighted mean rating in the 0–100 range based on reviews from top mainstream critics, calculated an average score of 59, based on 41 reviews, which indicates "Mixed or average reviews". 
The film was somewhat more well received in Europe. UK film and music journalist Dylan B Jones praised it, claiming director Oliver Stone had found "a magic strain of sultry sex, frantically emotional turmoil and glossily savvy action sequences."
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film three and a half stars (out of four) and praised Oliver Stone's direction, saying, "Much of the fascination of "Savages" comes through Stone's treatment of the negotiations, which involve percentages, sliding scales over three years, an ultimate payout, and other financial details that drugs have in common with big business. It's spellbinding to watch the two sides trying to outthink each other."
"HitFix" film critic Drew McWeeny gave the film an A- and called it "one of the most complete pleasures for me this summer". He was in general positive of the actors' performances; he described Lively's work as "smart and sad precisely because she plays O as such a broken, needy little soul" and praised the bond between Kitsch and Taylor-Johnson which "seems not only credible but lived in and authentic throughout the film." McWeeny noted the evolution in maturity of Taylor-Johnson since "Kick-Ass" while writing that Kitsch was used the right way in this film with an ensemble that pushes him or challenges him in scenes which resulted in him playing hard, playing intense.
In comparison, MovieFix's film critic Connor Jason gave the film 2/5, noting that ""Savages" is a hot mess – beautiful actors and locations mixed with a plot that starts strong but ultimately turns into a snooze-fest. With a lead villain seemingly ripped from the cover of "Cosmo" magazine, Stone's latest flick savagely disappoints." 
The film was nominated at the 2012 ALMA Awards in four categories including "Favorite Movie Actor", "Favorite Movie Actress—Drama/Adventure", "Favorite Movie Actor—Supporting Role", and "Favorite Movie Actress—Supporting Role" for Benicio Del Toro, Salma Hayek, Demián Bichir and Mia Maestro, respectively.
Box office.
On its opening weekend, the film ranked fourth at the box-office, earning $16.2 million. As of November 24, 2012, it has grossed $47,323,100 in North America and $30,805,395 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $78,128,495.
Home media.
"Savages" was released on DVD and Blu-ray on November 13, 2012.
