Sigourney Weaver (born Susan Alexandra Weaver; October 8, 1949) is an American actress. She is known especially for her role of Ellen Ripley in the four "Alien" films: "Alien", "Aliens", "Alien 3", and "Alien Resurrection".
Other notable roles include Dana Barrett in "Ghostbusters" and its sequel "Ghostbusters II", "Gorillas in the Mist: The Story of Dian Fossey", "Working Girl", "The Ice Storm", "Galaxy Quest", "Prayers for Bobby" and Grace Augustine in "Avatar".
Weaver has been nominated for three Academy Awards, three BAFTA Awards (one win), two Emmy Awards, six Saturn Awards (two wins) and seven Golden Globe Awards, winning two in 1988 for "Gorillas in the Mist" and "Working Girl", becoming the first person ever to have won two acting Golden Globe Awards in the same year. She was also nominated for a Drama Desk Award and a Tony Award.
Her 1986 Academy Award nomination for "Aliens" is considered as a landmark in the recognition of science fiction, action, and horror genres, as well as a major step in challenging the gender role in cinema. Weaver progressively received fame for her numerous contributions to the science fiction film history (including minor roles in successful works such as "Futurama", "WALL-E", "Paul" and "The Cabin in the Woods") and gained the nickname of "The Sci-Fi Queen". She played the lead role on USA Network's "Political Animals" miniseries as Elaine Barrish, a divorced former First Lady and Governor of Illinois, as well as the current Secretary of State.
Early life.
Weaver was born Susan Alexandra Weaver in Manhattan, New York City, the daughter of Elizabeth Inglis (née Desiree Mary Lucy Hawkins; 1913–2007), an English actress, and the NBC television executive and television pioneer Sylvester "Pat" Weaver (1908–2002). Her uncle, Doodles Weaver (1911–1983), was a comedian and actor. She began using the name "Sigourney Weaver" in 1963 after a minor character (Sigourney Howard) in F. Scott Fitzgerald's novel "The Great Gatsby".
Weaver attended the Ethel Walker School, a girls' preparatory school in Simsbury, Connecticut. She also attended The Chapin School. Sigourney was reportedly 5′ 10½″ (179 cm) tall by the age of 14, although she only grew another inch during her teens to her adult height of 5′ 11½″ (182 cm). In 1967, at the age of 18, Weaver visited Israel and volunteered on a kibbutz for several months.
Weaver attended Sarah Lawrence College as well as Stanford University where she first began her involvement in acting, by living in Stanford's co-ed Beta Chi Community for the Performing Arts. Weaver earned her Master of Fine Arts degree at the Yale University School of Drama in 1974, where one of her appearances was in the chorus in a production of Stephen Sondheim's musical version of "The Frogs", and another was as one of a mob of Roman soldiers alongside Meryl Streep in another production. Weaver later acted in original plays by her friend and classmate Christopher Durang. She later appeared in an "Off-Broadway" production of Durang's comedy "Beyond Therapy" in 1981, which was directed by the up-and-coming director Jerry Zaks.
Film career.
Weaver's first role is often said to be in Woody Allen's 1977 comedy "Annie Hall" playing a minor role opposite Allen, whereas she appeared at least in Sidney Lumet's "Serpico" three years before (she meets Al Pacino at a party). Weaver appeared two years later as Warrant Officer/Lieutenant Ripley in Ridley Scott's blockbuster 1979 film "Alien". She reprised the role in the three sequels of the "Alien" movie franchise, "Aliens", "Alien 3", and "Alien Resurrection". Ty Burr of "The Boston Globe" states, "One of the real pleasures of ""Alien"" is to watch the emergence of both Ellen Ripley as a character and Sigourney Weaver as a star." In the sequel "Aliens" directed by James Cameron critic Roger Ebert writes, "Weaver, who is onscreen almost all the time, comes through with a very strong, sympathetic performance: She's the thread that holds everything together." Weaver followed the success of "Alien" appearing opposite Mel Gibson in "The Year of Living Dangerously" released to critical acclaim and as Dana Barrett in "Ghostbusters" and "Ghostbusters II".
By the end of the decade Weaver appeared in two of her most memorable and critically acclaimed performances in 1988 as Dian Fossey in "". The same year she appeared opposite Harrison Ford in a supporting role as Katharine Parker in the film "Working Girl". Weaver won Golden Globe awards for Best Actress and Best Supporting Actress for her two roles that year. She received two Academy Award nominations in 1988, for Best Supporting Actress for her role in "Working Girl" and Best Actress for "Gorillas in the Mist", making her one of the few actors nominated for two acting awards in the same year. By the early 1990s Weaver appeared in several films including Ang Lee's "The Ice Storm", earning her another Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actress and winning a BAFTA Award, followed by "Dave" opposite Kevin Kline and Frank Langella. She played the role of agoraphobic criminal psychologist Helen Hudson in the 1995 movie "Copycat". Weaver also concentrated on smaller and supporting roles throughout the decade such as "Jeffrey" (1994), "Galaxy Quest" (1999), and "A Map of the World" (1999) earning her another Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress.
In 2001, she appeared in the comedy "Heartbreakers" playing the lead role of a con artist alongside Jennifer Love Hewitt, Ray Liotta, Gene Hackman and Anne Bancroft. She appeared in several films throughout the decade including "Holes" (2003), the M. Night Shyamalan horror film "The Village" (2004), "Vantage Point" (2008), and "Baby Mama" (2008). Weaver also returned to Rwanda for the BBC special "Gorillas Revisited". She was voted 20th in Channel 4's countdown of the 100 Greatest Movie Stars of All Time, being one of only two women in the Top 20 (the other was Audrey Hepburn).
In 2009, Weaver starred as Mary Griffith in her first made-for-TV movie, "Prayers for Bobby", for which she was nominated for an Emmy Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award. She also guest starred in the TV show "Eli Stone" in the fall of 2008. She reunited with "Aliens" director James Cameron for his 2009 film "Avatar", with Weaver playing a major part as Dr. Grace Augustine, leader of the AVTR (avatar) program on the film's fictional moon Pandora.
Weaver has done voice work in television and film. She had a guest role in the "Futurama" episode "Love and Rocket" in February 2002, playing the female Planet Express Ship. In 2006, she was the narrator for the American version of the Emmy Award-winning series "Planet Earth". Also in 2006, Weaver narrated "A Matter of Degrees", a short film that plays daily at The Natural History Museum of the Adirondacks (The Wild Center) in Tupper Lake, New York. In 2008, Weaver was featured as the voice of the ship's computer in the Pixar and Disney release, "WALL•E". She also voiced a narrating role in another computer-animated film, 2008's "The Tale of Despereaux", based on the novel by Kate DiCamillo. Weaver has also expressed interest in starring in a fifth Alien film.
Weaver has hosted two episodes of the long-running NBC sketch show "Saturday Night Live": once on the 12th season premiere in 1986, and again, on a season 35 episode in January 2010. In March 2010, she was cast for the lead role as Queen of the Vampires in Amy Heckerling's "Vamps". She was honored at the 2010 Scream Awards earning The Heroine Award which honored her work in science fiction, horror and fantasy films. In May 2010, there were reports that Weaver had been cast for the lead role Margaret Matheson in the Spanish thriller film "Red Lights".
In September 2011, it was confirmed that Weaver will be returning to "Avatar 2", with James Cameron stating that "no one ever dies in science fiction."
Personal life.
Weaver was engaged to reporter Aaron Latham in 1967. She has been married to the filmmaker Jim Simpson since October 1, 1984. They are the parents of one daughter, Charlotte Simpson, who was born on April 13, 1990.
After making "Gorillas in the Mist: The Story of Dian Fossey", she became a supporter of The Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund and is now the DFGFI's honorary chairwoman. She was honored by the Explorers Club for this work. Weaver is an environmentalist. In October 2006, she drew international attention through a news conference at the start of a United Nations General Assembly policy deliberation. She outlined the widespread threat to ocean habitats posed by deep-sea trawling, an industrial method for harvesting fish.
On April 8, 2008, she hosted the annual gala of the Trickle Up Program, a non-profit organization focusing on those in extreme poverty, mainly women and the disabled, in the Rainbow Room.
Awards and nominations.
Weaver has been nominated three times for an Academy Award, three BAFTAs (one win) and seven Golden Globes (two wins). She has also earned Tony and Drama Desk nominations for her work on the stage.
