Pescetarianism () (also spelled pescatarianism) is the practice of a diet that includes seafood but not the flesh of other animals. A pescetarian diet shares many of its components with a vegetarian diet and includes vegetables, fruit, nuts, grains, beans, eggs, and dairy, but unlike a vegetarian diet also includes fish and shellfish. The Merriam-Webster dictionary dates the origin of the term "pescetarian" to 1993 and defines it to mean: "one whose diet includes fish but no other meat". 
Etymology.
"Pescetarian" is probably a neologism formed as a portmanteau of the Italian word "pesce" ("fish") and the English word "vegetarian". The Italian word is pronounced , while the English neologism is commonly , with a sound, thus differing from pronunciations of similar terms in English and Italian.
"Pesce" in turn derives from the Latin "piscis", which has the form "pisci-" when it serves as a prefix, as it often does in scholarly terms (e.g. "pisciculture" or "piscivore" ). Note that a "piscivore", as a type of carnivore, eats a diet primarily of fish, whereas the neologism "pescetarian" refers to persons who consume plant derivatives as well as fish.
Rationale.
Health considerations.
One of the most commonly cited reasons is that of health, based on findings that red meat is detrimental to health in many cases due to non-lean red meats containing high amounts of saturated fats. Eating certain kinds of fish raises HDL levels, and some fish are a convenient source of omega-3 fatty acids, and have numerous health benefits in one food variety. A 1999 meta-study of five studies comparing vegetarian and non-vegetarian mortality rates in Western countries found that in comparison with regular meat eaters, mortality from ischemic heart disease was 34% lower in pescetarians, 34% lower in ovo-lacto vegetarians, 26% lower in vegans and 20% lower in occasional meat eaters.
On the other hand, there have been concerns cited about consuming large quantities of some fish varieties due to their containing toxins such as mercury and PCBs, though it is possible to select fish that contain little or no mercury and moderate the consumption of mercury-containing fish.
Comparisons to other diets.
Pescetarianism is similar to many traditional diets emphasizing fish as well as fruits, vegetables and grains. Many coastal regions tend to eat this way and these features characterize the traditional Mediterranean diet and the diets of many countries in Asia, Northern Europe and the Caribbean. These other traditional diets tend to also include meat, although it is peripheral.
Pescetarians are sometimes described as vegetarian or pesco-vegetarian, and often people unfamiliar with vegetarianism believe the pescetarian diet to be vegetarian. In common with vegetarians, pescetarians often eat eggs and dairy products, in addition to fruits, vegetables and grains. The Vegetarian Society, which initiated popular use of the term "vegetarian" as early as 1847, does not consider pescetarianism a vegetarian diet. The definitions of "vegetarian" in mainstream dictionaries vary.
List of pescetarians.
This is a list of notable people who are or were pescetarians.
