The Avengers is a team of superheroes, appearing in comic books published by Marvel Comics. The team made its debut in "The Avengers" #1 (Sept. 1963), created by writer-editor Stan Lee and artist/co-plotter Jack Kirby, following the trend of super-hero teams after the success of DC Comics' "Justice League of America".
Labeled "Earth's Mightiest Heroes", the Avengers originally consisted of Iron Man (Tony Stark), Ant-Man (Dr. Henry Pym), Wasp (Janet Van Dyne), Thor, and Hulk (Bruce Banner). The original Captain America was discovered, trapped in ice (issue #4), and joined the group after they revived him. A rotating roster became a hallmark, although one theme remained consistent: the Avengers fight "the foes no single superhero can withstand." The team, famous for its battle cry of "Avengers Assemble!", has featured humans, mutants, robots, aliens, supernatural beings, and even former villains.
"The Avengers" live-action film was released on May 4, 2012; directed by Joss Whedon, it set numerous records during its box office run, including the biggest opening debut in North America, with a weekend gross of $207.4 million.
Publication history.
The team debuted in "The Avengers" #1 (Sept. 1963), using characters created primarily by writer-editor Stan Lee with penciller and co-plotter Jack Kirby. This initial series, published bi-monthly through issue #6 (July 1964) and monthly thereafter ran through issue #402 (Sept. 1996), with spinoffs including several annuals, miniseries and a giant-size quarterly sister series that ran briefly in the mid-1970s.
Other spinoff series include "West Coast Avengers", initially published as a four-issue miniseries in 1984, followed by a 102-issue series (Oct. 1985–Jan. 1994), retitled "Avengers West Coast" with #47; and the 40-issue "Solo Avengers" (Dec.1987–Jan. 1991), retitled "Avengers Spotlight" with #21.
Between 1996 and 2004, Marvel relaunched the primary Avengers title three times. In 1996, the "Heroes Reborn" line, in which Marvel contracted outside companies to produce four titles, included a new volume of "The Avengers". It took place in an alternate universe, with a revamped history unrelated to mainstream Marvel continuity. "The Avengers" vol. 2 was written by Rob Liefeld and penciled by Jim Valentino, and ran for 13 issues (Nov. 1996–Nov. 1997). The final issue, which featured a crossover with the other "Heroes Reborn" titles, returned the characters to the main Marvel Universe.
"The Avengers" vol. 3 relaunched and ran for 84 issues in February 1998 to August 2004. To coincide with what would have been, the 500th issue of the original series Marvel changed the numbering, and "The Avengers" #500-503 (Sept.– Dec. 2004), the one-shot "Avengers Finale" (Jan. 2005) became the "Avengers Disassembled" storyline and final issues. In January 2005, a new version of the team appeared in the ongoing title "The New Avengers", followed by "The Mighty Avengers", "", and "Dark Avengers". "Avengers" Vol. 4 debuted in 2010.
Fictional biography.
1960s.
The first adventure featured the Asgardian god Loki seeking revenge against his brother Thor. Using an illusion, Loki tricked Hulk into destroying a railroad track. He then diverted a radio call by Rick Jones for help to Thor, whom Loki hoped would battle Hulk. Unknown to Loki, Ant-Man, Wasp, and Iron Man also answered the radio call. After an initial misunderstanding, the heroes united and defeated Loki after Thor was lured away by an illusion of Hulk and suspected Loki when he realized it was an illusion. Ant-Man stated that the five worked well together and suggested they form a combined team; Wasp named the group "The Avengers" because it sounded "dramatic".
The roster changed almost immediately; at the beginning of the second issue, Ant-Man became Giant-Man and at the end of the issue, Hulk left once he realized how much the others feared his unstable personality. Feeling responsible, the Avengers attempted to locate and contain Hulk, which subsequently led them into combat with Namor the Sub-Mariner. This resulted in the first major milestone in the Avengers' history: the revival and return of Captain America. Captain America joined the team and he was also given "founding member" status in Hulk's place. The Avengers went on to fight foes such as Captain America's wartime enemy Baron Zemo, who formed the Masters of Evil, Kang the Conqueror, Wonder Man, and Count Nefaria.
The next milestone came when every member but Captain America resigned; they were replaced by three former villains: Hawkeye, Scarlet Witch, and Quicksilver. Although they lacked the raw power of the original team, they proved their worth and fought and defeated Swordsman; the original Power Man; and Doctor Doom. Henry Pym (who changed his name to Goliath) rejoined the Avengers and Wasp, along with Hercules, Black Knight, and Black Widow, the last two didn't obtain official membership status until years later.
When writer Roy Thomas commenced, there was a greater focus on characterization. Black Panther joined the team, followed by Vision. 
The Avengers headquarters was in a New York City building called Avengers Mansion, courtesy of Tony Stark (Iron Man's real identity), who also funded the Avengers through the Maria Stark Foundation, a non-profit organization. The mansion was serviced by Edwin Jarvis, the Avengers' faithful butler, and also furnished with state-of-the-art technology and defense systems, and included the Avengers' primary mode of transport: the five-engine Quinjet.
1970s.
The adventures increased in scope as the team crossed into an alternate dimension and battled the Squadron Supreme and fought in the Kree-Skrull War, an epic battle between the alien Kree and Skrull races and guest-starred the Kree hero, Captain Marvel. The Avengers briefly disband when Skrulls impersonating Captain America, Thor, and Iron Man used their authority as founders of the team and disbanded it. The true founding Avengers, minus Wasp, reformed the team in response after complaints from Jarvis.
Vision and Scarlet Witch fell in love, although their relationship was tinged with sadness because Vision believed himself to be inhuman and unworthy of her. Writer Steve Englehart introduced Mantis, who joined the team along with the reformed Swordsman. Englehart linked her origins to the very beginnings of the Kree-Skrull conflict in a time-spanning adventure involving Kang the Conqueror and Immortus, who were past and future versions of each other. Mantis was revealed to be the Celestial Madonna, who was destined to give birth to a being that would save the universe. It was revealed that Vision's body had only been appropriated, and not created by Ultron, and that it originally belonged to the 1940s Human Torch. With his origins clear to him, Vision proposed to Scarlet Witch. The Celestial Madonna saga ended with their wedding, presided over by Immortus. Englehart's tenure also coincided with the debut of George Pérez as artist.
After Englehart departed (and a seven-issue stint by Gerry Conway) Jim Shooter began as writer, generating several classic adventures, including "Bride of Ultron", the "Nefaria Trilogy", and "The Korvac Saga", which featured nearly every Avenger who joined the team up to that point. New members added during that time included Beast, a resurrected Wonder Man, Captain America's former partner Falcon, and Ms. Marvel.
Shooter also introduced the character of Henry Peter Gyrich, the Avengers' liaison to the United States National Security Council. Gyrich was prejudiced against superhumans and acted in a heavy-handed, obstructive manner, and insisted that the Avengers followed government rules and regulations or else lose their priority status with the government. Among Gyrich's demands was that the active roster be trimmed down to only seven members, and that Falcon, an African American, be admitted to the team to comply with affirmative action laws. This last act was resented by Hawkeye, who because of the seven-member limit lost his membership slot to Falcon. Falcon, in turn, was unhappy to be the beneficiary of what he perceived to be tokenism, and decided to resign from the team, after which Wonder Man rejoined.
1980s.
The first major development was the breakdown of Henry Pym, with his frequent changes of costume and name being symptomatic of an identity problem and an inferiority complex. After he abused his wife, failed to win back the confidence of the Avengers with a ruse and was duped by the villain Egghead, Pym was jailed. Writer Roger Stern resolved this by having Pym outwit Egghead and defeated the latest incarnation of the Masters of Evil single-handedly, and proved his innocence. Pym reconciled with Wasp, but they decided to remain apart. Pym retired from super-heroics, but returned years later.
Stern developed several major storylines, such as "Ultimate Vision" in which Vision took over the world's computer systems in a misguided attempt to create world peace; the formation of the West Coast Avengers; and "Avengers Under Siege" which involved the second Baron Zemo and the Masters of Evil taking over the mansion and severely injured Jarvis and Hercules, "War on Olympus" where Hercules' father, Zeus, blamed the Avengers for his son's injuries and brought them to Olympus for trial and "Heavy Metal" where the Super Adaptoid organized several robotic villains for an assault on the team. New members during the 1980s included an African American Captain Marvel named Monica Rambeau (who became the team's new leader); She-Hulk; Tigra, Namor, Starfox and Hawkeye's wife, Mockingbird, while Henry Pym emerged from retirement to join the West Coast Avengers. Stern also created the villain, Nebula, who falsely claimed to be the granddaughter of Thanos. The team relocated for a period to a floating island off the coast of New York called Hydrobase. The Avengers moved their base of operations to Hydrobase after the "Under Siege" storyline was completed in "The Avengers" #277 (March 1987) where Avengers Mansion was severely damaged. The move to Hydrobase was undertaken in "The Avengers" #278 (April 1987). Hydrobase was later sunk during the "Acts of Vengeance" crossover in issue #311 (Dec. 1989).
1990s.
John Byrne eventually took over writing both titles and revamped the comics to allow members to be active when available and reserved when not available and merged the two separate Avengers teams into one team with two bases. Byrne's contributions included a revamping of Vision, and the discovery that the children of Scarlet Witch and Vision were actually illusions. The loss of Scarlet Witch's children and Vision, who was disassembled by government agents in retaliation for the "Ultimate Vision" storyline, drove her insane, although she eventually recovered and rejoined the team. This story also revealed that Scarlet Witch's powers included wide-range reality manipulation and she was what the time-traveling Immortus refers to as a "nexus being" setting the stage for 2004's eventual "Chaos" and "Avengers Disassembled" storylines. This played out in the "Darker than Scarlet" storyline which ran in "Avengers West Coast" from issues #51–62 (Nov. 1989–Sept. 1990).
The Avengers titles were then embroiled in the major crossover event "Acts of Vengeance" where Loki assembled many of Marvel's arch-villains, his inner circle consisted of Doctor Doom, Magneto, Kingpin, Mandarin, Wizard, and Red Skull, in a plot to destroy the team. Loki orchestrated a mass breakout of villains from prison facility, the Vault, as part of his "Acts of Vengeance" scheme, but he ultimately failed in his goal to destroy the Avengers.
This decade coincided with a speculators' boom, followed by an industry-wide slump and Marvel filed for bankruptcy in 1997. During this period the U.S. government revoked the Avengers' New York State charter in a treaty with the Soviet Union. The Avengers then received a charter from the United Nations and the Avengers split into two teams with a substitute reserve team backing up the main teams.
Bob Harras and Steve Epting took over the title in the summer of 1991 and introduced a stable lineup with ongoing story lines and character development focused on Black Knight, Sersi, Crystal, Hercules, Vision, and Black Widow. Their primary antagonists in this run were the mysterious Proctor and his team of other-dimensional Avengers known as Gatherers. During this period, the Avengers found themselves facing increasingly murderous enemies and were forced to question their rule against killing.
This culminated in "", a 19-part storyline that ran through all Avengers-related titles and showcased a conflict between the Kree and the Shi'ar Empire. The team split when Iron Man and several dissidents executed the Supreme Intelligence against the wishes of Captain America. After a vote disbanded the West Coast Avengers, Iron Man formed a proactive and aggressive team called Force Works. During the team's first mission, Wonder Man was killed again, though his atoms were temporarily scattered. Force Works later disbanded after it was revealed that Iron Man became a murderer via the manipulations of the villain Kang.
Heroes Reborn.
Together with the Fantastic Four and others, many of the Avengers died trying to stop the psychic entity Onslaught, although it was revealed that Franklin Richards preserved those heroes in a pocket universe. Believed the main team to be gone, Black Widow disbanded the Avengers, and only butler Jarvis remained to tend to the Mansion.
Marvel contracted out "The Avengers" and three related titles — "Captain America", "Fantastic Four", and "Iron Man" to former Marvel artists Jim Lee and Rob Liefeld, two of the founding creators of Image Comics. The previous continuity of the Marvel Universe was set aside as the heroes were "reborn" in the pocket universe. While "The Avengers" was relaunched as a new series, the "Heroes Reborn" line ended after a year as planned and the license reverted to Marvel.
Heroes Return.
Writer Kurt Busiek and penciler George Pérez launched a new volume of the series with "The Avengers" vol. 3, #1 (Feb. 1998). Busiek also concurrently wrote the limited series "Avengers Forever", a time-travel story that explored the history of the Avengers and resolved many outstanding questions. New members during this run included the revived Wonder Man, Justice, Firestar, Silverclaw, and Triathlon. Busiek's run included many of the Avengers' traditional villains such as the Grim Reaper, Ultron, Count Nefaria, and Kang the Conqueror.
2000s.
Avengers Disassembled.
Successor writer Geoff Johns dealt with the aftermath of Busiek's Kang arc, as the Avengers were granted international authority by the United Nations. Members joined during that period included Jack of Hearts and the second Ant-Man. Chuck Austen followed as writer, and added a new Captain Britain to the team. Writer Brian Michael Bendis then rebooted the title with the "Avengers Disassembled" storyline. Titled "Chaos", the story featured the deaths of some members and a loss of credibility for the team. The culprit is revealed to be Scarlet Witch, who had gone insane after agonizing over the memory of her lost children and who subsequently lost control of her reality-altering powers. With the team in disarray and Avengers Mansion ruined, the surviving members agreed to disband.
New Avengers.
A new Avengers team briefly formed following the events of House of M, coming together as the result of a massive jailbreak at The Raft prison facility. This "New Avengers" lineup was composed of Iron Man, Captain America, Luke Cage, Wolverine, Ronin, Spider-Man, Spider-Woman, and Sentry.
In the company-wide "Marvel Civil War" story arc, Marvel superheroes were split over compliance with the U.S. government's new Superhuman Registration Act which required all super-powered persons to register their true identities with the federal government and become agents of same. The New Avengers disbanded, with a rebel underground opposed to the act formed in a series retaining "The New Avengers" in its trademarked cover logo and "New Avengers" in its copy written indicia. Luke Cage led this underground Avengers team in that series. The team consisted of himself, Echo, Ronin, Spider-Man, Spider-Woman, Wolverine, Iron Fist, and Doctor Strange. During the long-term Secret Invasion by the shape-shifting alien race the Skrulls, Jessica had been abducted and replaced by the Skrull queen Veranke. After the Skrulls' defeat, Jessica, among other abducted and replaced heroes, was rescued. During the company-wide story arc "Dark Reign", Echo and Iron Fist left the team and the Avengers gained Ms. Marvel, Bucky as Captain America, and Mockingbird.
At the start of the "Heroic Age" storyline, the New Avengers became an officially recognized team given independence from Stark's more traditional Avengers by Captain Steve Rogers, primarily due to Cage's distrust of a government backed superhero group. Captain America left the team to solely serve the main Avengers, Iron Fist rejoined the team, and Power Woman and Thing were also added to the roster. Steve Rogers had an occasional presence and Victoria Hand was added with his backing, which caused controversy among the other members due to her previous ties to Norman Osborn.
Mighty Avengers.
In response to the Civil War, Iron Man reformed the official team under the aegis of the government's Fifty State Initiative program, and took up residency in New York City with Ares, Black Widow, Iron Man, Sentry, Wasp, Wonder Man, and leader Carol Danvers as Ms. Marvel .
All but Ares and Sentry left this team (except for Wasp, who died in the Secret Invasion) as it was taken over by Norman Osborn and the team migrated to the "Dark Avengers" book. In the pages of "The Mighty Avengers", Hank Pym, assumed Wasp's identity of his fallen ex-wife, led a new team of Avengers, and claimed the name for his team as he was the only founding Avenger on any of the three active Avengers rosters. His team operated under a multi-national umbrella group called the Global Reaction Agency for Mysterious Paranormal Activity (GRAMPA). This team featured the roster of Hercules, Amadeus Cho, Stature, Vision, Jocasta, U.S. Agent, Quicksilver, and Hank Pym. Scarlet Witch (Loki in disguise) was a recurring character. Iron Man and Hulk were briefly with them during their battle with Chthon.
Dark Avengers.
After the events of "Secret Invasion", Norman Osborn assumed control of the formerly S.H.I.E.L.D.-sponsored Avengers, now under the auspices of his own agency, H.A.M.M.E.R. He retained Ares and Sentry from the previous team, and recruited Marvel Boy to pose as Captain Marvel and Daken to pose as his father, Wolverine, and brought Moonstone, Bullseye, and Venom from his previous Thunderbolts team to impersonate Ms. Marvel, Hawkeye, and Spider-Man, respectively.
2010s.
Heroic Age.
After the conclusion of the "Siege" story arc, which ended the "Dark Reign" storyline, all four of the then-current Avengers series ("The Mighty Avengers", "New Avengers", "Dark Avengers", and "") were canceled, and a new ongoing series titled "Avengers" was launched in May 2010. Brian Michael Bendis and John Romita, Jr., serve as regular writer and artist respectively. The full Avengers roster was revealed in issue #1 as: Thor, Hawkeye, Spider-Man, Wolverine, Captain America, Spider-Woman, Iron Man, and team leader Maria Hill. At the Avengers' first team meeting, Steve Rogers commented on an unidentified hero who was missing from the meeting.
The launch marked the beginning of what Marvel calls the ""Heroic Age"", after seven years of grim story lines, including a superhero Civil War that pitted Iron Man against Captain America and Spider-Man, and the death of Captain America. According to Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Joe Quesada, 
A second title called "Secret Avengers" was released in May 2010, written by Ed Brubaker with Mike Deodato as the regular artist. The second volume of the "New Avengers" series was relaunched in June 2010, written by Bendis and drawn by Stuart Immonen. A fourth title called "Avengers Academy" was also launched in June 2010, it replaced "Avengers: The Initiative". Christos Gage served as writer, with Mike McKone as artist.
During an international meeting between Steve Rogers and MI-13, Captain Britain was offered a job with the Avengers. Captain Britain accepted despite mixed reactions from his MI-13 teammates.
Noh-Varr was asked to help the Avengers by building a time machine to save the future. After that crisis was over, Noh-Varr was officially invited to join the Avengers.
Bruce Banner made arrangements with Steve Rogers for Red Hulk to join the Avengers, just in time for him to assist the team in tracking down the Hood as he begun to search for the Infinity Gems to serve as a new 'power source'. However, the combined strength of the Avengers, New Avengers, and Secret Avengers was enough to repel the Hood..
Shattered Heroes.
After the events of "Fear Itself", the "Shattered Heroes" storyline led to several changes in the main Avengers team lineup, with Quake and Storm being recruited, and Vision re-joining the team after being rebuilt by Iron Man. Also, Wolverine and Spider-Man leave the main team, and become more involved in their membership with the New Avengers.
Avengers vs. X-Men.
During the events of the Avengers war against the X-Men, Storm quits the team to side with her fellow mutants as a member of the X-Men. After seeing how insane that Cyclops and the other Phoenix-powered X-Men were becoming, she later switches sides to the Avengers but never officially rejoins the main team. Additionally, Noh-Varr betrays the team and sets out to capture the Phoenix Force due to his loyalty to the Kree Empire. However, upon learning of the Kree's plan for the Phoenix Force, he comes to his senses. Despite this, the Avengers felt betrayed and subsequently abandon him.
Marvel NOW!
Following the "Avengers vs. X-Men" limited series, a new team called "Uncanny Avengers" will debut in the flagship title of "Marvel NOW!". The title will be written by Rick Remender with art by John Cassaday, and the team will contain members of both the Avengers and the X-Men.
A new bi-weekly "Avengers" title was announced to be written by Jonathan Hickman, with different artists switching on different story arcs. Hickman will also be writing "New Avengers", featuring two dozen characters between the two titles. The first story-arc dealt with Captain America leading the Avengers to Mars to counter a powerful being called Ex Nihilo, who intended to destroy and remake life in the universe.
Other versions.
1950s Avengers.
A short-lived team of superheroes in the 1950s called themselves the "Avengers". Consisted of Marvel Boy, Venus, 3-D Man, Gorilla-Man, M-11, Jimmy Woo, Namora and Jann of the Jungle, the team existed in an alternate timeline that was erased by the time-manipulating Immortus. Agents of Atlas, a version of the group, without 3-D Man and Jann existed in mainstream continuity, and eventually reformed in the present day.
1959 Avengers.
The "New Avengers" vol. 2, #10 revealed another 1950s Avengers team, formed by Nick Fury to hunt the last remnants of the Third Reich and consisted of Fury himself, Dominic Fortune, Dum Dum Dugan, Namora, Silver Sable, Sabretooth, Kraven the Hunter, and Ulysses Bloodstone. A follow-up miniseries penned by Howard Chaykin showed this group assisted by Blonde Phantom, Eric Koenig and a brand new character British wizard and spy, Powell McTeague. That time they fought against a cult based on the Nazi party which employed several agents, including Baron Blood and Brain Drain.
Avengers Next.
In the alternate future timeline known as MC2, the Avengers disbanded and Avengers Mansion was a museum. An emergency forced Edwin Jarvis to sound an alert, and a new generation of heroes formed a new team of Avengers. Most of the new Avengers were children of established Marvel superheroes.
Ultimate Marvel.
In the Ultimate Marvel Universe, the Avengers are named The Ultimates, and were formed by Nick Fury to protect America against superhuman threats. They first appeared in "The Ultimates" by Mark Millar and Bryan Hitch. After the events of "The Ultimates 2", the team left S.H.I.E.L.D. employment to become independent and financed by Tony Stark.
A Black Ops team called the "Avengers" debuted sometime after the "Ultimatum" storyline. This version was a project headed up by Nick Fury and Tony Stark's brother Gregory Stark in order to bring Captain America back. Its known members consisted of War Machine, Hawkeye, Black Widow II (Monica Chang), Spider (a Spider-Man clone created by Gregory Stark from the DNA of Spider-Man and Professor X), Tyrone Cash (who was the original Hulk before Bruce Banner), Red Wasp, and Nerd Hulk (an intelligent clone of Hulk who lacks the Hulk's rage). Additional members included Punisher, who joined the Avengers against a Ghost Rider manhunt, and the half vampire, Blade against a vampire invasion.
Runaways.
In an alternate future depicted in "Runaways", Gertrude Yorkes's future self traveled back in time. In that future, she was the leader of the Avengers under the name Heroine. That lineup of the Avengers featured an Iron Woman, Scorpion, the "Fantastic Fourteen", and "Captain Americas".
Marvel Zombies Return.
The Avengers existed as a team prior to a zombie contagion's arrival in the original Marvel Zombies universe, and resembled their pre-disassembled roster. When several of their members were infected, they set about eating humanity and sent out a bogus "Avengers Assemble" call to draw super-humans to the Avengers Mansion, infected more heroes and thus spread the virus. The team fell apart and many of its members were killed as time passed.
A second team of zombie Avengers appeared in "Marvel Zombies Return". That team was a replacement group brought together to find food and kill any resistance (zombie or uninfected) and was led by Sentry. Also on the team were the zombies Moon Knight, Namor, Quasar, Quicksilver, Thundra, and Super-Skrull. They were also joined by zombie Giant-Man of the original Zombiverse, who was trying to power a dimensional teleporter, but were all killed by Spider-Man's New Avengers. The team was composed of himself along with Iron Man, Sandman, and zombie Hulk and Wolverine.
House of M: Avengers.
In the alternate reality created by Scarlet Witch, Luke Cage formed a team of superpowered humans to fight for human rights.
Age of Apocalypse.
A humanized version of the Avengers banded together during the Age of Apocalypse.
In other media.
Two animated series have been made, ', loosely based on the West Coast Avengers, ran from 1999 to 2000. And ', based on the early adventures of the team, premiered on October 20, 2010. 
Marvel Animation has made three Avengers films, "Ultimate Avengers", "Ultimate Avengers 2" and "Next Avengers". 
The live-action film "The Avengers" was released on May 4, 2012, where Nick Fury recruited Iron Man, Captain America, Hulk, Thor, Black Widow and Hawkeye to form the Avengers to fight Loki and his attack against Earth. It set the record for the biggest opening debut in North America, with a weekend gross of $207.4 million.
