Margaret Denise Quigley (born May 22, 1979), professionally known as Maggie Q, is an American actress and former fashion model. As of 2010, she stars in the title role on The CW's action-thriller series "Nikita".
Early life.
Quigley was born and raised in Hawaii. Her father is of Irish and Polish descent and her mother is a Vietnamese immigrant. Her parents met while her father was stationed in Vietnam during the war. Q grew up with four siblings.
Q attended Mililani Waena Elementary School and Wheeler Intermediate School. She then attended Mililani High School, where she was on the cross country, track and field, and swim teams. She won the title of "Best Body" senior year, and graduated from Mililani High School in 1997.
Career.
At the suggestion of a friend, Q began modeling in Tokyo at the age of 17, before making an unsuccessful move to Taipei, and finally trying in Hong Kong. She has said it was not easy for her: "I had twenty bucks in my pocket. I mean, I literally did the same thing that my mother did when she left Vietnam... didn't speak the language... had no money." But, it was in Hong Kong that she was selected by Jackie Chan, because he saw a potential action star. His intensive training taught her the importance of professionalism and always doing her own stunts. Q later said, "I had never done a day of martial arts in my life when I started in the business. I couldn’t even touch my toes."
In 1998, she started her acting career in the TV drama "House of the Dragon", which was a huge hit in Asia. In 2000, Q made her film debut as Anna in the horror film "Model from Hell", and went on to star as an FBI agent Jane Quigley in the action thriller "Gen-Y Cops" the same year. Her appearance in "Gen-Y Cops" impressed Jackie Chan so much that she was cast in "Manhattan Midnight" and "Rush Hour 2".
In 2002, she starred as martial artist assassin Charlene Ching in the action film "Naked Weapon". In 2005, Q played Harmony in the German-Singaporean TV mini-series "House of Harmony", opposite Fann Wong. The same year she also co-produced the animal treatment documentary "Earthlings" narrated by Joaquin Phoenix.
In 2006, she starred alongside Tom Cruise in "". She played Zhen, the only female member of the IMF team. In 2007, she appeared as Mai Linh in the Bruce Willis movie "Live Free or Die Hard", the fourth film in the "Die Hard" series, and as Maggie in "Balls of Fury".
In 2008, Q played fictional Cao Ying, a granddaughter of the warlord CAO CAO in "", her first ancient Chinese costume performance. That same year, she also appeared in the drama/thriller movie "Deception" starring Ewan McGregor and Hugh Jackman, as Tina, an investment banker who introduced Jackman's character to an exclusive anonymous sex club list.
Q also stars in the video game "" as the seductive lead character, federal agent Chase Linh, who is the player's only contact to the Tri-City Police.
In 2010, she became the lead character, an assassin gone rogue, on the new CW series, "Nikita", a revamp of the movie/TV title.
Personal life.
Maggie Q is outspoken on the subject of animal rights and has taken part in PETA Asia's campaigns promoting vegetarianism. In a PETA ad, she posed nearly nude in a bed of crimson chili peppers to spread the word that going vegetarian is the best way to "spice up your life" as well as help animals, your health, and the environment. A second ad for PETA Asia features her wearing a bikini made entirely of strategically placed lettuce leaves next to the tagline "Turn Over a New Leaf – Try Vegetarian!"
A vegetarian for many years, she once said that giving up meat is one of the most rewarding decisions she has ever made. "I feel better, I have more energy on and off the set, and I have the satisfaction of knowing that I'm doing something to help stop animal suffering."In 2008, Maggie Q was named PETA Asia-Pacific's "Person of the Year." The same year, the organization also listed Q as one of the "Best-Dressed Celebrities" of 2008.
She was also responsible for the removal of all real fur from the wardrobe on the set of "". 
Q previously dated Hong Kong actor Daniel Wu who also was a costar of "Naked Weapon". She has three tattoos: one on each arm and one of a phoenix on her left hip, which she has had to conceal for most of her roles except "Nikita". Q also suffered temporary hearing loss in her right ear, when her eardrum was blown out in an explosive stunt. 
She lives in Los Angeles, California, with her three (at one point, eight) rescued dogs.
Maggie dated Hollywood stuntman David Leitch from 2009-2010.
