The first season of the television drama series "Game of Thrones" premiered on HBO on April 17, 2011, and concluded on June 19, 2011, airing on Sunday at 9:00 pm in the United States. It consisted of 10 episodes, each running approximately 55 minutes in length. "Game of Thrones" is based on the novel "A Game of Thrones", the first entry in "A Song of Ice and Fire" series by George R. R. Martin. The story takes place in a fictional world, primarily upon a continent called Westeros (and on another continent to the east known as Essos), where the noble House Stark, led by Lord Eddard Stark (Sean Bean) is drawn into schemes against King Robert Baratheon when Jon Arryn, his chief advisor, known as the Hand of the King, dies mysteriously.
Synopsis.
Plot.
The cable television series closely follows the multiple story lines of the "A Song of Ice and Fire" novel series, whose author said that the show's pilot script was very faithful to his work. The series begins with Ned Stark (Sean Bean) being asked to be the chief advisor (known as the Hand of the King) to King Robert Baratheon (Mark Addy). Ned and his wife Catelyn (Michelle Fairley) receive a letter from Catelyn's sister, Lysa (Kate Dickie) that gives them reason to believe that rival House Lannister - who the King's wife Cersei belongs to - was the cause of the previous Hand's death. Ned must travel south to help the king and find out who killed the Hand of the King, Jon Arryn (John Standing), while trying to protect his family from the Lannisters. As he tries to uncover the reasons behind Jon Arryn's death he uncovers the dark secrets about the Lannisters that Arryn himself died trying to expose. 
Meanwhile, across the Narrow Sea in the continent of Essos, the exiled, arrogant Viserys Targaryen (Harry Lloyd), son of the former king whose throne was usurped, believes he still has the rightful claim to the throne. He marries off his younger sister, Daenerys Targaryen (Emilia Clarke), whom he has psychologically and physically abused for years, to the leader of the Dothraki warrior tribe, Khal Drogo (Jason Momoa), in an exchange for an army to return to Westeros and take the throne. However, Daenerys' growing love for Drogo and newfound mental strength as the Khaleesi of the tribe means Viserys' plans go unexpectedly and powerfully awry. 
And beyond the wall, Ned's bastard son Jon Snow joins the Night's Watch, an ancient brotherhood sworn to watch over the massive Wall that separates the Seven Kingdoms from the dangerous unknown beyond. But an ancient force, long believed dead, threatens the land.
Production.
David Benioff and D. B. Weiss serve as main writers and show runners for the first season. They contributed seven out of ten episodes and co-wrote one episode with Jane Espenson. The remaining two episodes were written by Bryan Cogman and "A Song of Ice and Fire" author George R. R. Martin.
Tom McCarthy directed the original pilot, but much of this was later re-shot by Tim Van Patten, who also directed the second episode. However, McCarthy is still credited as a consulting producer for the pilot. Brian Kirk and Daniel Minahan directed three episodes each, and Alan Taylor directed the final two.
Casting.
On May 5, 2009, it was announced that Peter Dinklage had been signed on to star as Tyrion Lannister in the pilot, and that Tom McCarthy was set to direct. On July 19, 2009, a number of further casting decisions were announced, including Sean Bean being given the role of Ned Stark, thus confirming a rumour first reported a couple of days before. Other actors signed on for the pilot were Kit Harington in the role of Jon Snow, Jack Gleeson as Joffrey Baratheon, Harry Lloyd as Viserys Targaryen, and Mark Addy as Robert Baratheon.
In the beginning of August 2009, it was revealed that Catelyn Stark would be portrayed by Jennifer Ehle. On August 20, more casting announcements were made, including Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as Jaime Lannister and Tamzin Merchant as Daenerys Targaryen, as well as Richard Madden in the role of Robb Stark, Iain Glen as Ser Jorah Mormont, Alfie Allen as Theon Greyjoy, and Sophie Turner as Sansa Stark and Maisie Williams as Arya Stark. On September 1 Lena Headey was announced as Cersei Lannister. On September 23, Martin confirmed that Rory McCann had been cast as Sandor Clegane. Isaac Hempstead-Wright was confirmed as Bran Stark on October 14, followed by an announcement of Jason Momoa as Khal Drogo three days later.
After the pilot was shot and the series picked up, it was announced that the role of Catelyn had been recast, with Michelle Fairley replacing Ehle. Later, it was also confirmed that Emilia Clarke would replace Tamzin Merchant as Daenerys. The rest of the cast was filled out in the second half of the year, and included Charles Dance as Tywin Lannister, Aidan Gillen as Petyr 'Littlefinger' Baelish, and Conleth Hill as Varys.
Filming.
Most scenes were shot in Northern Ireland. Principal photography was scheduled to begin on July 26, 2010, with the primary locations being the Paint Hall Studio in the Titanic Quarter of Belfast, Northern Ireland, Among other exterior locations, Castle Ward and Doune Castle in central Scotland served as the backdrop for Winterfell. For the initial shooting of the pilot in 2009, additional filming locations included Cairncastle, Shane's Castle, Castle Ward, Magheramorne Quarry, and Tollymore Forest Park, all in Northern Ireland. The show's presence in Northern Ireland and use of Paint Hall created hundreds of jobs for residents, and made the area "a hub for film and television production".
The "King's Landing" exterior scenes were shot at various locations in Malta, including the city of Mdina and the island of Gozo. The filming in Malta resulted in controversy when a protected ecosystem was damaged by a subcontractor.
Broadcast.
"Game of Thrones" premiered on HBO in the United States and Canada on April 17, 2011, and on Sky Atlantic in the United Kingdom and Ireland on April 18, 2011.
The series premiered in Australia on Showcase on July 17, 2011. It premiered in Brazil on May 8, 2011, on the local HBO channel.
DVD and Blu-ray release.
The ten episodes of the first season of "Game of Thrones" was released on DVD and Blu-ray Disc on March 6, 2012. The set includes extra background and behind-the-scenes material, but no deleted scenes, because almost all footage shot for the first season was used in the show.
The specifications for the Blu-ray box set to be released in Europe are: 
HBO released a "Collector's Edition" DVD/Blu-ray combo pack of the first season, which includes a resin-carved Dragon Egg Paperweight. The set was released in the United States and Canada on November 20, 2012.
Music.
The first season's soundtrack by Ramin Djawadi, written within about ten weeks of the show's premiere, was released in June 2011.
Reception.
Critical response.
Anticipation for the series was described by various media outlets was very high, with a dedicated fan base closely following the show's development. By April 2011, multiple entertainment news outlets had put it at the top of their lists of television events to look forward to in 2011.
The majority of reviews for the first season were very positive, with critics noting the high production values, the well-realized world, compelling characters, and giving particular note to the strength of the child actors. Tim Goodman's review for "The Hollywood Reporter" stated, "a few minutes into HBO's epic Game of Thrones series, it's clear that the hype was right and the wait was worth it". Mary McNamara from the "Los Angeles Times" called it "...a great and thundering series of political and psychological intrigue bristling with vivid characters, cross-hatched with tantalizing plotlines and seasoned with a splash of fantasy". "New York Post"'s Linda Stasi gave "Thrones" 3.5/4 stars stating, "The art direction, acting and incredible sets are as breathtaking as the massive scope of the series". Many critics praised Peter Dinklage for his portrayal of Tyrion Lannister, with Ken Tucker from "Entertainment Weekly" stating, "...if Dinklage doesn't get an Emmy for his clever, rude Tyrion Lannister, I'll be gobsmacked" and Mary McNamara from the "Los Angeles Times" stating, "If the man doesn't win an Emmy, heads should certainly roll".
The first season of "Game of Thrones" has a Metacritic average of 79 out of 100 based on 28 critic reviews, categorized as "generally favorable".
Ratings.
The first episode attracted 2.2 million viewers its initial airing on April 17 in the U.S., and totaled 5.4 million viewers across multiple Sunday and Monday night airings. It averaged 743,000 and reached a peak 823,000 in UK and Ireland on its April 18 premiere. HBO announced that they would be commissioning a second season on the strength of the reception of the premiere episode. By the final episode of the season, which aired June 20, the ratings had climbed to over 3 million.
Awards and nominations.
The first season of "Game of Thrones" was nominated for thirteen Emmy Awards, including Outstanding Drama Series, Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series (Tim Van Patten for "Winter Is Coming"), and Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series (David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for "Baelor"). It won two, Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series (Peter Dinklage) and Outstanding Main Title Design. Dinklage, who plays Tyrion, was also named best supporting actor by the Golden Globes, the Scream Awards and the Satellite Awards.
Cast.
Guest cast.
The guest cast is listed in order of rank or social importance by the region of Westeros in which they appear.
Episodes.
<onlyinclude></onlyinclude>
