Lisinopril ( ) is a drug of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor class primarily used in treatment of hypertension, congestive heart failure, and heart attacks, and also in preventing renal and retinal complications of diabetes. Its indications, contraindications and side effects are as those for all ACE inhibitors.
Historically, lisinopril was the third ACE inhibitor (after captopril and enalapril) and was introduced into therapy in the early 1990s. A number of properties distinguish it from other ACE inhibitors: It is hydrophilic, has a long half-life and tissue penetration, and is not metabolized by the liver.
Medical uses.
Lisinopril is typically used for the treatment of hypertension, congestive heart failure, acute myocardial infarction, and diabetic nephropathy.
In special populations.
The dose needs to be adjusted in those with poor kidney function.
Adverse effects.
Lisinopril causes the kidneys to retain potassium, which may lead to hyperkalemia. From a study of more than 1,000 patients who have hyperkalemia when using it, the condition may happen more in older male users.
A rare but severe allergic reaction can occur that affects the bowel wall and secondarily causes abdominal pain. This "anaphylactic" reaction is very rare and must be given immediate medical attention.
Pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Lisinopril has been assigned to pregnancy category D by the FDA for use during the second and third trimesters and to category C during the first trimester. Animal and human data have revealed evidence of embryolethality and teratogenicity associated with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. There are no controlled data in human pregnancy. Congenital malformations have been reported with the use of ACE inhibitors during the first trimester of pregnancy, while fetal and neonatal toxicity, death, and congenital anomalies have been reported with their use during the second and third trimesters of pregnancy. If the patient becomes pregnant, lisinopril should be discontinued as soon as possible; it is considered contraindicated during pregnancy.
There are no data on the excretion of lisinopril into human milk. The manufacturer recommends, due to the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants, a decision should be made to discontinue nursing or discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.
Pharmacology.
Lisinopril is the lysine-analog of enalapril. Unlike other ACE inhibitors, it is not a prodrug and is excreted unchanged in the urine. In cases of overdosage, it can be removed from circulation by dialysis.
Pharmacokinetics and metabolism.
For adult patients, following oral administration of lisinopril, peak serum concentrations occur within about seven hours, although there was a trend to a small delay in time taken to reach peak serum concentrations in acute myocardial infarction patients. Declining serum concentrations exhibit a prolonged terminal phase which does not contribute to drug accumulation. This terminal phase probably represents saturable binding to ACE and is not proportional to dose. Lisinopril does not appear to be bound to other serum proteins.
Lisinopril does not undergo metabolism and is excreted unchanged entirely in the urine. Based on urinary recovery, the mean extent of its absorption is approximately 25%, with large intersubject variability (6–60%) at all doses tested (5–80 mg). Lisinopril absorption is not influenced by the presence of food in the gastrointestinal tract. Its absolute bioavailability is reduced to about 16% in patients with stable NYHA Class II-IV congestive heart failure, and the volume of distribution appears to be slightly smaller than that in normal subjects.
The oral bioavailability of lisinopril in patients with acute myocardial infarction is similar to that in healthy volunteers. Upon multiple dosing, it exhibits an effective half-life of accumulation of 12 hours.
Impaired renal function decreases elimination of lisinopril, which is excreted principally through the kidneys, but this decrease becomes clinically important only when the glomerular filtration rate is below 30 ml/min. Above this rate, the elimination half-life is little changed. With greater impairment, however, peak and trough levels increase, time to peak concentration increases, and time to attain steady state is prolonged. Older patients, on average, have (approximately doubled) higher blood levels and area under the plasma concentration time curve (AUC) than younger patients.
Brand names.
Lisinopril was developed by Merck & Co., and is marketed worldwide as Prinivil or Tensopril, and by AstraZeneca as Zestril. In India, it is marketed by Micro Labs as Hipril. In the United States, a generic version is available. Like other ACE inhibitors, it is a synthetic functional and structural analog of a peptide derived from the venom of the jararaca, a Brazilian pit viper ("Bothrops jararaca"). Lisinopril can also be used in conjunction with the diuretic hydrochlorothiazide and drugs which combine these two medications are available under the brand names Prinzide and Zestoretic.
