Gravity Falls is an American animated television series created by Alex Hirsch, former writer for "The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack" and "Fish Hooks". The first episode aired as a preview on June 15, 2012 and the series officially debuted on June 29, 2012. The series is rated TV-Y7.
Plot.
The show follows the adventures of 12-year old twin brother and sister Dipper and Mabel Pines, whose parents send them off to their Great-Uncle Stan in the town of Gravity Falls, Oregon. "Grunkle" Stan lives in and runs The Mystery Shack, a tourist trap which charges visitors for a glimpse at the world's most bizarre museum; but little do Dipper and Mabel know that there really is something very strange going on and they must rely on one another to find their way in this unfamiliar town.
Reception.
Ratings.
A special preview of the series following the Disney Channel Original Movie "Let It Shine" was watched by 3.4 million viewers. The series garnered high views on its fifth episode, which aired on July 13, 2012, and attracted 3.6 million viewers. On August 10, 2012, the episode "Double Dipper" was watched by 4.18 million viewers and recorded Disney Channel’s best ratings with regular programming in more than 6 months in Total Viewers, Kids 2-11 and Kids 6-11, and in more than 7 months in children and teens 9-14 – since 2/3/12 and 1/6/12, respectively. Gravity Falls became the highest-rated program in the ‘Night of Premieres’ lineup that night, finishing with a higher rating than "Jessie", "A.N.T. Farm", "My Babysitter's a Vampire", and "". The episode 'Little Dipper' is the least watched episode in the series with only 2.6 million viewers.
Critical reception.
The series has received nearly universal acclaim. It currently holds a 8.8 rating on TV.com, and 8.6 rating from over 1,500 users on IMDb.com. From critics, the show has received generally positive reviews. Brian Lowry of "Variety" stated, "The show has a breezy quality that should play to kids, and tickle some twinges of nostalgia among their parents." While the "Los Angeles Times" Robert Lloyd referred to the program as "..gently twisted, with some Disneyfied action and heart-warming folded in". In his review, David Hinckley of "New York Daily News" called "Gravity Falls", "quirky and endearing", and offered praise for the character of Mabel Pines. Matt Blum, writing for "Wired", favorably compared the show to Cartoon Network's animated program "Regular Show" and Disney Channel's animated program "Phineas and Ferb", hailing "Gravity Falls" as "clever, strange, and somewhat poignant".
