Catherine Louise "Katey" Sagal (born January 19, 1954) is an American actress and singer-songwriter. She first achieved widespread fame as Peggy Bundy on the long-running Fox comedy series "Married... with Children", for which she was nominated for four Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Comedy Television Series and two American Comedy Awards during the show's run.
Sagal is also well-known for voicing the character Leela on the animated science fiction series "Futurama" and its related direct-to-DVD movies since 1999, as well as for starring on the show "8 Simple Rules" in the role of Cate Hennessy. In the latter role, she worked with John Ritter until his death, leading to Sagal 's taking over as the series' lead for the remainder of the show's run. 
Since 2008, she has portrayed the role of Gemma Teller Morrow in the FX drama series "Sons of Anarchy", for which she won a Golden Globe in 2011. She has been married to "Sons of Anarchy" creator, Kurt Sutter, since 2004.
Early life.
Sagal was born in California to a show business family of five children, including younger twin sisters Jean and Liz Sagal, and brother Joe Sagal all three of whom are actors. Her mother, Sara Zwilling, was a writer and producer who died of heart disease; her father, Boris Sagal, was a director, born in the Ukraine, who died in an accident on the set of the television movie "World War III" when he accidentally walked into a helicopter's spinning tail rotor. Sagal and her siblings grew up in Brentwood, Los Angeles.
Acting career.
Sagal graduated from California Institute of the Arts, and began her acting career in Hollywood, appearing in several made for TV movies between 1971 and 1975, including a small role as a receptionist in the "Columbo" installment "Candidate for Crime" (directed by her father). Sagal's first major role was as a newspaper columnist in the series "Mary" starring Mary Tyler Moore. This led to her being cast as Peggy Bundy on the sitcom "Married... with Children" (1987–1997). She portrayed the lower-class, sex-starved wife of shoe salesman Al Bundy. Sagal brought her own red bouffant wig to audition for the role, and with the producers' approval, the look transitioned into the show. As Peg, she wore the wig, capri-length leggings with a large belt, and high slip-on heels, which were all fashion styles from the 1960s. The series ran for eleven years.
After the end of "Married With Children", several more television films followed; she also contributed to the children's cartoon "Recess" as the voice of Spinelli's mother. In 1999, Matt Groening cast her as the purple-haired, cyclopian spaceship captain, Leela, in his science fiction animated comedy "Futurama". The show developed a cult following but was cancelled after four seasons. However, airings in syndication on Adult Swim and Comedy Central increased the show's popularity and led Comedy Central to commission a series of "Futurama" direct-to-DVD films, which the network later rebroadcast as 16 episodes, season five. She
reprised her role as Leela in these films, and in the new season that began airing June 24, 2010.
Sagal guest starred as Edna Hyde, Steven Hyde's mother, in three episodes of "That '70s Show". She starred in the short-lived NBC sitcom "Tucker" the following year. 
She was cast as the wife of John Ritter in the sitcom "8 Simple Rules for Dating My Teenage Daughter" in 2002. Ritter had completed only three episodes of the second season before his death, and the show was cancelled in 2005 after its third season.
In 2005, she made two appearances on "Lost" as Helen Norwood. In 2007, she had a role in the season finale of "The Winner" as Glen Abbot's former, and Josh's current, teacher, with whom Glen has his first sexual experience. The following year, she appeared in four episodes of the short-lived series "Eli Stone". 
In January 2009, Sagal reunited with her TV son David Faustino (Bud Bundy from "Married with Children") for an episode of Faustino's show "Star-ving". In 2010, she appeared twice more on "Lost". In 2009, she starred in the film "House Broken" with Danny DeVito. In 2010, she returned to the stage in Randy Newman's musical "Harps & Angels".
She currently stars as Gemma Teller Morrow on the TV show "Sons of Anarchy", created by her husband, Kurt Sutter.
Musical career.
Sagal started her career in show business as a singer and songwriter. In 1973, she worked as a backing vocalist for various singers, including Bob Dylan and Tanya Tucker. In 1976, while a member of The Group With No Name, she contributed to the album "Moon over Brooklyn". She was a member of Bette Midler's backup group The Harlettes in 1978, and again from 1982–83. She performed backing vocals on the self-titled Gene Simmons solo album, the Molly Hatchet album" Take No Prisoners" and on Olivia Newton-John's 1985 single "Soul Kiss". Sagal also provided the vocals for "Loose Cannons", the theme song for the movie featuring Gene Hackman and Dan Aykroyd in 1990. The song featured her singing most of the song, while Aykroyd sang the chorus and had some background impersonations from the movie. 
On April 19, 1994, she released her first solo album, "Well..." On June 1, 2004, she released her second album, "Room". She has also contributed to the "Sons of Anarchy" soundtrack.
Personal life.
Sagal was married to German American musician Freddie Beckmeier (1978–1981). In 1991, Sagal learned she was pregnant. This was unexpected by the directors of "Married... with Children", so the pregnancy was written into the storyline of the show. However, in October 1991, she had to have an emergency Caesarean section in her seventh month of pregnancy, ending in the stillbirth of a daughter. The pregnancy on the show was then regarded as a "dream", which was mentioned only briefly at the end of the episode "Al Bundy, Shoe Dick". She also had an early miscarriage around this time. She and White eventually had two children - a daughter, Sarah and a son, Jackson. The writers of "Married... with Children" deliberately didn't write Sagal's two later pregnancies into the show due to the earlier stillbirth, opting instead to shoot her in instances where her midsection was obscured, such as in a taxicab or at a craps table in Las Vegas.
Sagal married writer-producer Kurt Sutter in a private ceremony on October 2, 2004, at their home in Los Feliz, California. They have a daughter, Esme, who was born through a surrogate mother.
