The Fourier transform, named after Joseph Fourier, is a mathematical transform with many applications in physics and engineering. Very commonly it transforms a mathematical function of time, "f"("t"), into a new function, sometimes denoted by formula_1 or "F", whose argument is frequency with units of cycles or radians per second. The new function is then known as the Fourier transform and/or the frequency spectrum of the function "f". The Fourier transform is also a reversible operation. Thus, given the function formula_2 one can determine the original function, "f". (See Fourier inversion theorem.) "f" and formula_3 are also respectively known as "time domain" and "frequency domain" representations of the same "event". Most often perhaps, "f" is a real-valued function, and formula_1 is complex valued, where a complex number describes both the amplitude and phase of a corresponding frequency component. In general, "f" is also complex, such as the analytic representation of a real-valued function. The term "Fourier transform" refers to both the transform operation and to the complex-valued function it produces.
In the case of a periodic function (for example, a continuous but not necessarily sinusoidal musical sound), the Fourier transform can be simplified to the calculation of a discrete set of complex amplitudes, called Fourier series coefficients. Also, when a time-domain function is sampled to facilitate storage or computer-processing, it is still possible to recreate a version of the original Fourier transform according to the Poisson summation formula, also known as discrete-time Fourier transform. These topics are addressed in separate articles. For an overview of those and other related operations, refer to Fourier analysis or List of Fourier-related transforms.
Definition.
The statement that "f" can be reconstructed from ƒ̂ is known as the Fourier inversion theorem, and was first introduced in Fourier's "Analytical Theory of Heat" , , although what would be considered a proof by modern standards was not given until much later . The functions "f" and ƒ̂ often are referred to as a "Fourier integral pair" or "Fourier transform pair" .
For other common conventions and notations, including using the angular frequency ω instead of the frequency ξ, see Other conventions and Other notations below. The Fourier transform on Euclidean space is treated separately, in which the variable "x" often represents position and ξ momentum.
Introduction.
The motivation for the Fourier transform comes from the study of Fourier series. In the study of Fourier series, complicated but periodic functions are written as the sum of simple waves mathematically represented by sines and cosines. The Fourier transform is an extension of the Fourier series that results when the period of the represented function is lengthened and allowed to approach infinity.
Due to the properties of sine and cosine, it is possible to recover the amplitude of each wave in a Fourier series using an integral. In many cases it is desirable to use Euler's formula, which states that "e"2π"i"θ= cos(2πθ) + "i"sin(2πθ), to write Fourier series in terms of the basic waves "e"2"πiθ". This has the advantage of simplifying many of the formulas involved, and provides a formulation for Fourier series that more closely resembles the definition followed in this article. Re-writing sines and cosines as complex exponentials makes it necessary for the Fourier coefficients to be complex valued. The usual interpretation of this complex number is that it gives both the amplitude (or size) of the wave present in the function and the phase (or the initial angle) of the wave. These complex exponentials sometimes contain negative "frequencies". If θ is measured in seconds, then the waves "e"2"πiθ" and "e"−2"πiθ" both complete one cycle per second, but they represent different frequencies in the Fourier transform. Hence, frequency no longer measures the number of cycles per unit time, but is still closely related.
Comparing this to the definition of the Fourier transform, it follows that "cn" = ƒ̂("n"/"T") since "f"("x") is zero outside [−"T"/2,"T"/2]. Thus the Fourier coefficients are just the values of the Fourier transform sampled on a grid of width 1/"T". As "T" increases the Fourier coefficients more closely represent the Fourier transform of the function.
where the last sum is simply the first sum rewritten using the definitions ξ"n" = "n"/"T", and Δξ = ("n" + 1)/"T" − "n"/"T" = 1/"T".
This second sum is a Riemann sum, and so by letting "T" → ∞ it will converge to the integral for the inverse Fourier transform given in the definition section. Under suitable conditions this argument may be made precise .
In the study of Fourier series the numbers "cn" could be thought of as the "amount" of the wave present in the Fourier series of "f". Similarly, as seen above, the Fourier transform can be thought of as a function that measures how much of each individual frequency is present in our function "f", and we can recombine these waves by using an integral (or "continuous sum") to reproduce the original function.
Example.
The following images provide a visual illustration of how the Fourier transform measures whether a frequency is present in a particular function. The function depicted "f"("t") = cos(6π"t") e2 oscillates at 3 hertz (if "t" measures seconds) and tends quickly to 0. (The second factor in this equation is an envelope function that shapes the continuous sinusoid into a short pulse. Its general form is a Gaussian function). This function was specially chosen to have a real Fourier transform which can easily be plotted. The first image contains its graph. In order to calculate ƒ̂(3) we must integrate e−2"πi"(3"t")"f"("t"). The second image shows the plot of the real and imaginary parts of this function. The real part of the integrand is almost always positive, because when "f"("t") is negative, the real part of e−2"πi"(3"t") is negative as well. Because they oscillate at the same rate, when "f"("t") is positive, so is the real part of e−2"πi"(3"t"). The result is that when you integrate the real part of the integrand you get a relatively large number (in this case 0.5). On the other hand, when you try to measure a frequency that is not present, as in the case when we look at ƒ̂(5), the integrand oscillates enough so that the integral is very small. The general situation may be a bit more complicated than this, but this in spirit is how the Fourier transform measures how much of an individual frequency is present in a function "f"("t").
Properties of the Fourier transform.
We denote the Fourier transforms of these functions by formula_10 , formula_11  and  formula_12 respectively.
Basic properties.
The Fourier transform has the following basic properties: .
Invertibility and periodicity.
Under suitable conditions on the function "f," it can be recovered from its Fourier transform formula_24 Indeed, denoting the Fourier transform operator by formula_25 so formula_26 then for suitable functions, applying the Fourier transform twice simply flips the function: formula_27 which can be interpreted as "reversing time". Since reversing time is two-periodic, applying this twice yields formula_28 so the Fourier transform operator is four-periodic, and similarly the inverse Fourier transform can be obtained by applying the Fourier transform three times: formula_29 In particular the Fourier transform is invertible (under suitable conditions).
These equalities of operators require careful definition of the space of functions in question, defining equality of functions (equality at every point? equality almost everywhere?) and defining equality of operators – that is, defining the topology on the function space and operator space in question. These are not true for all functions, but are true under various conditions, which are the content of the various forms of the Fourier inversion theorem.
This four-fold periodicity of the Fourier transform is similar to a rotation of the plane by 90°, particularly as the two-fold iteration yields a reversal, and in fact this analogy can be made precise. While the Fourier transform can simply be interpreted as switching the time domain and the frequency domain, with the inverse Fourier transform switching them back, more geometrically it can be interpreted as a rotation by 90° in the time–frequency domain (considering time as the "x"-axis and frequency as the "y"-axis), and the Fourier transform can be generalized to the fractional Fourier transform, which involves rotations by other angles. This can be further generalized to linear canonical transformations, which can be visualized as the action of the special linear group SL2(R) on the time–frequency plane, with the preserved symplectic form corresponding to the uncertainty principle, below. This approach is particularly studied in signal processing, under time–frequency analysis.
Uniform continuity and the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma.
The Fourier transform may be defined in some cases for non-integrable functions, but the Fourier transforms of integrable functions have several strong properties. 
The Fourier transform, ƒ̂, of any integrable function "f" is uniformly continuous and formula_34 . By the "Riemann–Lebesgue lemma" ,
However, ƒ̂ need not be integrable. For example, the Fourier transform of the rectangular function, which is integrable, is the sinc function, which is not Lebesgue integrable, because its improper integrals behave analogously to the alternating harmonic series, in converging to a sum without being absolutely convergent.
It is not generally possible to write the "inverse transform" as a Lebesgue integral. However, when both "f" and ƒ̂ are integrable, the inverse equality
holds almost everywhere. That is, the Fourier transform is injective on "L"1(R). (But if "f" is continuous, then equality holds for every "x".)
Plancherel theorem and Parseval's theorem.
where the bar denotes complex conjugation.
The Plancherel theorem makes it possible to extend the Fourier transform, by a continuity argument, to a unitary operator on "L"2(R). On "L"1(R)∩"L"2(R), this extension agrees with original Fourier transform defined on "L"1(R), thus enlarging the domain of the Fourier transform to "L"1(R) + "L"2(R) (and consequently to "L"p(R) for 1 ≤ p ≤ 2). The Plancherel theorem has the interpretation in the sciences that the Fourier transform preserves the energy of the original quantity. Depending on the author either of these theorems might be referred to as the Plancherel theorem or as Parseval's theorem.
See Pontryagin duality for a general formulation of this concept in the context of locally compact abelian groups.
Convolution theorem.
The Fourier transform translates between convolution and multiplication of functions. If "f"("x") and "g"("x") are integrable functions with Fourier transforms formula_10 and formula_11 respectively, then the Fourier transform of the convolution is given by the product of the Fourier transforms formula_10 and formula_11 (under other conventions for the definition of the Fourier transform a constant factor may appear).
In linear time invariant (LTI) system theory, it is common to interpret "g"("x") as the impulse response of an LTI system with input "f"("x") and output "h"("x"), since substituting the unit impulse for "f"("x") yields "h"("x") = "g"("x"). In this case, formula_11 represents the frequency response of the system.
Conversely, if "f"("x") can be decomposed as the product of two square integrable functions "p"("x") and "q"("x"), then the Fourier transform of "f"("x") is given by the convolution of the respective Fourier transforms formula_47 and formula_48.
Cross-correlation theorem.
for which
Eigenfunctions.
One important choice of an orthonormal basis for "L"2(R) is given by the Hermite functions
where He"n"("x") are the "probabilist's" Hermite polynomials, defined by 
Under this convention for the Fourier transform, we have that
In other words, the Hermite functions form a complete orthonormal system of eigenfunctions for the Fourier transform on "L"2(R) . However, this choice of eigenfunctions is not unique. There are only four different eigenvalues of the Fourier transform (±1 and ±"i") and any linear combination of eigenfunctions with the same eigenvalue gives another eigenfunction. As a consequence of this, it is possible to decompose "L"2(R) as a direct sum of four spaces "H"0, "H"1, "H"2, and "H"3 where the Fourier transform acts on "He""k" simply by multiplication by "i""k". 
Since the complete set of Hermite functions provides a resolution of the identity, the Fourier transform can be represented by such a sum of terms weighted by the above eigenvalues,
and these sums can be explicitly summed. This approach to define the Fourier transform is due to N. Wiener . Among other properties, Hermite functions decrease exponentially fast in both frequency and time domains, and they are thus used to define a generalization of the Fourier transform, namely the fractional Fourier transform used in time-frequency analysis . In physics, it was introduced by Condon .
Fourier transform on Euclidean space.
where "x" and ξ are "n"-dimensional vectors, and is the dot product of the vectors. The dot product is sometimes written as formula_57.
All of the basic properties listed above hold for the "n"-dimensional Fourier transform, as do Plancherel's and Parseval's theorem. When the function is integrable, the Fourier transform is still uniformly continuous and the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma holds. 
Uncertainty principle.
Generally speaking, the more concentrated "f"("x") is, the more spread out its Fourier transform ƒ̂(ξ) must be. In particular, the scaling property of the Fourier transform may be seen as saying: if we "squeeze" a function in "x", its Fourier transform "stretches out" in ξ. It is not possible to arbitrarily concentrate both a function and its Fourier transform.
The trade-off between the compaction of a function and its Fourier transform can be formalized in the form of an uncertainty principle by viewing a function and its Fourier transform as conjugate variables with respect to the symplectic form on the time–frequency domain: from the point of view of the linear canonical transformation, the Fourier transform is rotation by 90° in the time–frequency domain, and preserves the symplectic form.
It follows from the Plancherel theorem that ƒ̂(ξ) is also normalized.
The spread around "x" = 0 may be measured by the "dispersion about zero" defined by
In probability terms, this is the second moment of |"f"("x")|2 about zero.
The Uncertainty principle states that, if "f"("x") is absolutely continuous and the functions "x"·"f"("x") and "f"′("x") are square integrable, then
The equality is attained only in the case formula_61 (hence formula_62) where σ > 0 is arbitrary and "C"1 is such that "f" is "L"2–normalized . In other words, where "f" is a (normalized) Gaussian function with variance σ2, centered at zero, and its Fourier transform is a Gaussian function with variance σ−2.
for any "x"0, ξ0 ∈ R  .
In quantum mechanics, the momentum and position wave functions are Fourier transform pairs, to within a factor of Planck's constant. With this constant properly taken into account, the inequality above becomes the statement of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle .
where the logarithms may be in any base which is consistent. The equality is attained for a Gaussian, as in the previous case.
Spherical harmonics.
Let the set of homogeneous harmonic polynomials of degree "k" on R"n" be denoted by A"k". The set A"k" consists of the solid spherical harmonics of degree "k". The solid spherical harmonics play a similar role in higher dimensions to the Hermite polynomials in dimension one. Specifically, if "f"("x") = "e"2"P"("x") for some "P"("x") in A"k", then formula_66. Let the set H"k" be the closure in "L"2(R"n") of linear combinations of functions of the form "f"(|"x"|)"P"("x") where "P"("x") is in A"k". The space "L"2(R"n") is then a direct sum of the spaces H"k" and the Fourier transform maps each space H"k" to itself and is possible to characterize the action of the Fourier transform on each space H"k" . Let "f"("x") = "f"0(|"x"|)"P"("x") (with "P"("x") in A"k"), then formula_67 where
Here "J"("n" + 2"k" − 2)/2 denotes the Bessel function of the first kind with order ("n" + 2"k" − 2)/2. When "k" = 0 this gives a useful formula for the Fourier transform of a radial function .
Restriction problems.
In higher dimensions it becomes interesting to study "restriction problems" for the Fourier transform. The Fourier transform of an integrable function is continuous and the restriction of this function to any set is defined. But for a square-integrable function the Fourier transform could be a general "class" of square integrable functions. As such, the restriction of the Fourier transform of an "L"2(R"n") function cannot be defined on sets of measure 0. It is still an active area of study to understand restriction problems in "L""p" for 1 < "p" < 2. Surprisingly, it is possible in some cases to define the restriction of a Fourier transform to a set "S", provided "S" has non-zero curvature. The case when "S" is the unit sphere in R"n" is of particular interest. In this case the Tomas-Stein restriction theorem states that the restriction of the Fourier transform to the unit sphere in R"n" is a bounded operator on "Lp" provided 1 ≤ "p" ≤ .
Suppose in addition that "f" ∈ "Lp"(R"n"). For "n" = 1 and , if one takes "ER" = (−"R", "R"), then "fR" converges to "f" in "Lp" as "R" tends to infinity, by the boundedness of the Hilbert transform. Naively one may hope the same holds true for "n" > 1. In the case that "ER" is taken to be a cube with side length "R", then convergence still holds. Another natural candidate is the Euclidean ball "E""R" = {ξ : |ξ| < "R"}. In order for this partial sum operator to converge, it is necessary that the multiplier for the unit ball be bounded in "Lp"(R"n"). For "n" ≥ 2 it is a celebrated theorem of Charles Fefferman that the multiplier for the unit ball is never bounded unless "p" = 2 . In fact, when , this shows that not only may "fR" fail to converge to "f" in "Lp", but for some functions "f" ∈ "Lp"(R"n"), "fR" is not even an element of "Lp".
Fourier transform on function spaces.
On "L""p" spaces.
The definition of the Fourier transform by the integral formula
is valid for Lebesgue integrable functions "f"; that is, "f" ∈ "L"1(R). 
The Fourier transform formula_71: "L"1(R) → "L"∞(R) is a bounded operator. This follows from the observation that 
which shows that its operator norm is bounded by 1. Indeed it equals 1, which can be seen, for example, from the transform of the rect function. The image of "L"1 is a subset of the space "C"0(R) of continuous functions that tend to zero at infinity (the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma), although it is not the entire space. Indeed, there is no simple characterization of the image. 
Since compactly supported smooth functions are integrable and dense in "L"2(R), the Plancherel theorem allows us to extend the definition of the Fourier transform to general functions in "L"2(R) by continuity arguments. The Fourier transform in "L"2(R) is no longer given by an ordinary Lebesgue integral, although it can be computed by an improper integral, here meaning that for an "L"2 function "f",
where the limit is taken in the "L"2 sense. Many of the properties of the Fourier transform in "L"1 carry over to "L"2, by a suitable limiting argument.
Furthermore formula_71: "L"2(R) → "L"2(R) is a unitary operator . For an operator to be unitary it is sufficient to show that it is bijective and preserves the inner product, so in this case these follow from the Fourier inversion theorem combined with the fact that for any we have
In particular, the image of "L"2(R) is itself under the Fourier transform. 
The definition of the Fourier transform can be extended to functions in "Lp"(R) for 1 ≤ "p" ≤ 2 by decomposing such functions into a fat tail part in "L"2 plus a fat body part in "L"1. In each of these spaces, the Fourier transform of a function in "Lp"(R) is in "Lq"(R), where formula_76 is the Hölder conjugate of "p". by the Hausdorff–Young inequality. However, except for "p" = 2, the image is not easily characterized. Further extensions become more technical. The Fourier transform of functions in "Lp" for the range 2 < "p" < ∞ requires the study of distributions . In fact, it can be shown that there are functions in "Lp" with "p" > 2 so that the Fourier transform is not defined as a function .
Tempered distributions.
One might consider enlarging the domain of the Fourier transform from "L"1+"L"2 by considering generalized functions, or distributions. A distribution on R is a continuous linear functional on the space "C"c(R) of compactly supported smooth functions, equipped with a suitable topology. The strategy is then to consider the action of the Fourier transform on "C"c(R) and pass to distributions by duality. The obstruction to do this is that the Fourier transform does not map "C"c(R) to "C"c(R). In fact the Fourier transform of an element in "C"c(R) can not vanish on an open set; see the above discussion on the uncertainty principle. The right space here is the slightly larger space of Schwartz functions. The Fourier transform is an automorphism on the Schwartz space, as a topological vector space, and thus induces an automorphism on its dual, the space of tempered distributions. The tempered distribution include all the integrable functions mentioned above, as well as well-behaved functions of polynomial growth and distributions of compact support.
For the definition of the Fourier transform of a tempered distribution, let "f" and "g" be integrable functions, and let formula_77 and formula_78 be their Fourier transforms respectively. Then the Fourier transform obeys the following multiplication formula ,
Every integrable function "f" defines (induces) a distribution "Tf" by the relation
So it makes sense to define Fourier transform formula_81 of "Tf" by
for all Schwartz functions φ. Extending this to all tempered distributions "T" gives the general definition of the Fourier transform.
Distributions can be differentiated and the above mentioned compatibility of the Fourier transform with differentiation and convolution remains true for tempered distributions.
Feichtinger's algebra.
Feichtinger's algebra "S"0 is defined as the space of functions whose short-time Fourier transform is absolutely integrable i.e. contained in . The Fourier transform is a homeomorphism on it. The space "S"0 is contained in , but is a larger space than the space of Schwartz functions. It is a Banach algebra under both multiplication and convolution.
Generalizations.
Fourier–Stieltjes transform.
This transform continues to enjoy many of the properties of the Fourier transform of integrable functions. One notable difference is that the Riemann–Lebesgue lemma fails for measures . In the case that dμ = "f"("x")"dx", then the formula above reduces to the usual definition for the Fourier transform of "f". In the case that μ is the probability distribution associated to a random variable "X", the Fourier-Stieltjes transform is closely related to the characteristic function, but the typical conventions in probability theory take "e""ix"·ξ instead of "e"−2π"ix"·ξ . In the case when the distribution has a probability density function this definition reduces to the Fourier transform applied to the probability density function, again with a different choice of constants.
The Fourier transform may be used to give a characterization of measures. Bochner's theorem characterizes which functions may arise as the Fourier–Stieltjes transform of a positive measure on the circle .
Furthermore, the Dirac delta function is not a function but it is a finite Borel measure. Its Fourier transform is a constant function (whose specific value depends upon the form of the Fourier transform used).
Locally compact abelian groups.
The Riemann-Lebesgue lemma holds in this case; formula_10 is a function vanishing at infinity on formula_84.
Gelfand transform.
The Fourier transform is also a special case of Gelfand transform. In this particular context, it is closely related to the Pontryagin duality map defined above.
Given an abelian locally compact Hausdorff topological group "G", as before we consider space "L"1("G"), defined using a Haar measure. With convolution as multiplication, "L"1("G") is an abelian Banach algebra. It also has an involution * given by
Taking the completion with respect to the largest possibly C*-norm gives its enveloping C*-algebra, called the group C*-algebra C*("G") of "G". (Any C*-norm on "L"1("G") is bounded by the "L"1 norm, therefore their supremum exists.)
Given any abelian C*-algebra "A", the Gelfand transform gives an isomorphism between A and "C"0("A"^), where "A"^ is the multiplicative linear functionals, i.e. one-dimensional representations, on "A" with the weak-* topology. The map is simply given by
It turns out that the multiplicative linear functionals of "C*"("G"), after suitable identification, are exactly the characters of "G", and the Gelfand transform, when restricted to the dense subset "L"1("G") is the Fourier-Pontryagin transform.
Non-abelian groups.
The Fourier transform can also be defined for functions on a non-abelian group, provided that the group is compact. Removing the assumption that the underlying group is abelian, irreducible unitary representations need not always be one-dimensional. This means the Fourier transform on a non-abelian group takes values as Hilbert space operators . The Fourier transform on compact groups is a major tool in representation theory and non-commutative harmonic analysis.
Let "G" be a compact Hausdorff topological group. Let Σ denote the collection of all isomorphism classes of finite-dimensional irreducible unitary representations, along with a definite choice of representation "U"(σ) on the Hilbert space "H"σ of finite dimension "d"σ for each σ ∈ Σ. If μ is a finite Borel measure on "G", then the Fourier–Stieltjes transform of μ is the operator on "H"σ defined by
where formula_91 is the complex-conjugate representation of "U"(σ) acting on "H"σ. If μ is absolutely continuous with respect to the left-invariant probability measure λ on "G", represented as
for some "f" ∈ L1(λ), one identifies the Fourier transform of "f" with the Fourier–Stieltjes transform of μ.
The mapping formula_93 defines an isomorphism between the Banach space "M"("G") of finite Borel measures (see rca space) and a closed subspace of the Banach space C∞(Σ) consisting of all sequences "E" = ("E"σ) indexed by Σ of (bounded) linear operators "E"σ: "H"σ → "H"σ for which the norm
is finite. The "convolution theorem" asserts that, furthermore, this isomorphism of Banach spaces is in fact an isometric isomorphism of C* algebras into a subspace of C∞(Σ). Multiplication on "M"("G") is given by convolution of measures and the involution * defined by
and C∞(Σ) has a natural C*-algebra structure as Hilbert space operators.
The Peter-Weyl theorem holds, and a version of the Fourier inversion formula (Plancherel's theorem) follows: if "f" ∈ "L"2("G"), then
where the summation is understood as convergent in the "L"2 sense.
The generalization of the Fourier transform to the noncommutative situation has also in part contributed to the development of noncommutative geometry. In this context, a categorical generalization of the Fourier transform to noncommutative groups is Tannaka-Krein duality, which replaces the group of characters with the category of representations. However, this loses the connection with harmonic functions.
Alternatives.
In signal processing terms, a function (of time) is a representation of a signal with perfect "time resolution," but no frequency information, while the Fourier transform has perfect "frequency resolution," but no time information: the magnitude of the Fourier transform at a point is how much frequency content there is, but location is only given by phase (argument of the Fourier transform at a point), and standing waves are not localized in time – a sine wave continues out to infinity, without decaying. This limits the usefulness of the Fourier transform for analyzing signals that are localized in time, notably transients, or any signal of finite extent.
As alternatives to the Fourier transform, in time-frequency analysis, one uses time-frequency transforms or time-frequency distributions to represent signals in a form that has some time information and some frequency information – by the uncertainty principle, there is a trade-off between these. These can be generalizations of the Fourier transform, such as the short-time Fourier transform or fractional Fourier transform, or other functions to represent signals, as in wavelet transforms and chirplet transforms, with the wavelet analog of the (continuous) Fourier transform being the continuous wavelet transform. .
Applications.
Analysis of differential equations.
Fourier transforms and the closely related Laplace transforms are widely used in solving differential equations. The Fourier transform is compatible with differentiation in the following sense: if "f"("x") is a differentiable function with Fourier transform ƒ̂(ξ), then the Fourier transform of its derivative is given by 2πiξ ƒ̂(ξ). This can be used to transform differential equations into algebraic equations. This technique only applies to problems whose domain is the whole set of real numbers. By extending the Fourier transform to functions of several variables partial differential equations with domain Rn can also be translated into algebraic equations.
Fourier transform spectroscopy.
The Fourier transform is also used in nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and in other kinds of spectroscopy, e.g. infrared (FTIR). In NMR an exponentially shaped free induction decay (FID) signal is acquired in the time domain and Fourier-transformed to a Lorentzian line-shape in the frequency domain. The Fourier transform is also used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and mass spectrometry.
Quantum mechanics and signal processing.
In quantum mechanics, Fourier transforms of solutions to the Schrödinger equation are known as momentum space (or k space) wave functions. They display the amplitudes for momenta. Their absolute square is the probabilities of momenta. This is valid also for classical waves treated in signal processing, such as in swept frequency radar where data is taken in frequency domain and transformed to time domain, yielding range. The absolute square is then the power.
Other notations.
Denoting the Fourier transform by a capital letter corresponding to the letter of function being transformed (such as "f"("x") and "F"(ξ)) is especially common in the sciences and engineering. In electronics, the omega (ω) is often used instead of ξ due to its interpretation as angular frequency, sometimes it is written as "F"("j"ω), where "j" is the imaginary unit, to indicate its relationship with the Laplace transform, and sometimes it is written informally as "F"(2π"f") in order to use ordinary frequency.
The interpretation of the complex function ƒ̂(ξ) may be aided by expressing it in polar coordinate form
is the amplitude and
is the phase (see arg function).
which is a recombination of all the frequency components of "f"("x"). Each component is a complex sinusoid of the form "e"2"πix"ξ  whose amplitude is "A"("ξ") and whose initial phase angle (at "x" = 0) is φ(ξ).
The Fourier transform may be thought of as a mapping on function spaces. This mapping is here denoted formula_71 and formula_103 is used to denote the Fourier transform of the function "f". This mapping is linear, which means that formula_71 can also be seen as a linear transformation on the function space and implies that the standard notation in linear algebra of applying a linear transformation to a vector (here the function "f") can be used to write formula_105 instead of formula_103. Since the result of applying the Fourier transform is again a function, we can be interested in the value of this function evaluated at the value ξ for its variable, and this is denoted either as formula_107 or as formula_108. Notice that in the former case, it is implicitly understood that formula_71 is applied first to "f" and then the resulting function is evaluated at ξ, not the other way around.
In mathematics and various applied sciences it is often necessary to distinguish between a function "f" and the value of "f" when its variable equals "x", denoted "f"("x"). This means that a notation like formula_110 formally can be interpreted as the Fourier transform of the values of "f" at "x". Despite this flaw, the previous notation appears frequently, often when a particular function or a function of a particular variable is to be transformed. 
For example, formula_111 is sometimes used to express that the Fourier transform of a rectangular function is a sinc function, 
or formula_112 is used to express the shift property of the Fourier transform. 
Notice, that the last example is only correct under the assumption that the transformed function is a function of "x", not of "x"0.
Other conventions.
The Fourier transform can also be written in terms of angular frequency: ω = 2πξ whose units are radians per second.
Unlike the convention followed in this article, when the Fourier transform is defined this way, it is no longer a unitary transformation on "L"2(R"n"). There is also less symmetry between the formulas for the Fourier transform and its inverse.
Under this convention, the Fourier transform is again a unitary transformation on "L"2(R"n"). It also restores the symmetry between the Fourier transform and its inverse.
Variations of all three conventions can be created by conjugating the complex-exponential kernel of both the forward and the reverse transform. The signs must be opposites. Other than that, the choice is (again) a matter of convention.
As discussed above, the characteristic function of a random variable is the same as the Fourier–Stieltjes transform of its distribution measure, but in this context it is typical to take a different convention for the constants. Typically characteristic function is defined formula_117. 
As in the case of the "non-unitary angular frequency" convention above, there is no factor of 2π appearing in either of the integral, or in the exponential. Unlike any of the conventions appearing above, this convention takes the opposite sign in the exponential.
Tables of important Fourier transforms.
The following tables record some closed form Fourier transforms. For functions "f"("x"), "g"("x") and "h"("x") denote their Fourier transforms by ƒ̂, formula_78, and formula_119 respectively. Only the three most common conventions are included. It may be useful to notice that entry 105 gives a relationship between the Fourier transform of a function and the original function, which can be seen as relating the Fourier transform and its inverse.
Functional relationships.
The Fourier transforms in this table may be found in or .
Square-integrable functions.
The Fourier transforms in this table may be found in , , or the appendix of .
Distributions.
The Fourier transforms in this table may be found in or the appendix of .
Two-dimensional functions.
"To 400:" The variables "ξx", "ξy", "ωx", "ωy", "νx" and "νy" are real numbers.
The integrals are taken over the entire plane.
"To 401:" Both functions are Gaussians, which may not have unit volume.
"To 402:" The function is defined by circ("r")=1 0≤"r"≤1, and is 0 otherwise. This is the Airy distribution, and is expressed using J1 (the order 1 Bessel function of the first kind). 
Formulas for general "n"-dimensional functions.
The function χ"n"/2 + "δ" is a Bessel function of the first kind, with order "n"/2 + "δ". Taking "n" = 2 and "δ" = 0 produces 402. 
See Riesz potential. The formula also holds for all α ≠ −"n", −"n" − 1, ... by analytic continuation, but then the function and its Fourier transforms need to be understood as suitably regularized tempered distributions. See homogeneous distribution.
