Christopher Anthony John "Chris" Martin (born 2 March 1977) is an English singer-songwriter and multi-instrumentalist, and is the lead vocalist, pianist, rhythm guitarist and one of the founders of the band Coldplay.
Early life.
Chris Martin was born in Whitestone, Exeter, Devon and is the eldest of five children. His father, Anthony Martin, is a retired accountant, and his mother, Alison Martin, is a music teacher. Martin started his education at the pre-preparatory Hylton School and then went on to preparatory Exeter Cathedral School. It was at the prep school that Martin formed his first band, The Rocking Honkies, with Nick Repton and Iwan Gronow. Their debut performance was met with boos from the crowd. After Exeter Cathedral, Martin boarded at Sherborne School, a boys' independent school in Dorset. He also met future Coldplay manager Phil Harvey at the school. Martin continued his studies at University College London, staying at Ramsay Hall where he read Ancient World Studies and graduated with First Class honours in Greek and Latin. It is here he met future Coldplay bandmates Jonny Buckland, Will Champion and Guy Berryman.
Recording career.
Coldplay.
While studying at University College London, Martin met Jonny Buckland, Will Champion and Guy Berryman. In January 1998, they formed the rock band Coldplay, which was originally known as Starfish. The first song played by the band was known as Ode to Deodorant. The band has had internationally recognised fame and success since their debut album, "Parachutes", in 2000. Since then, they have released several further albums/EPs including: "A Rush of Blood to the Head", "Live 2003", "X&Y", "Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends", "Prospekt's March", "LeftRightLeftRightLeft", "Mylo Xyloto" and "Live 2012".
Solo work.
As a solo artist, Martin has written songs for a variety of acts including Embrace ("Gravity") and Jamelia ("See It in a Boy's Eyes", co-written with Coldplay producer Rik Simpson). Martin has also collaborated with Ron Sexsmith, Faultline when he sang on two haunting Faultline tracks: 'Where is My Boy?' and 'Your Love Means Everything Part2.', The Streets, and Ian McCulloch. He also sang a part of the vocals for the Band Aid 20 single, "Do They Know It's Christmas?" at the end of 2004. In 2005, Martin collaborated with Nelly Furtado on the track "All Good Things (Come to an End)", for her 2006 album, "Loose". The two were once rumoured to be a couple, after they both performed at Glastonbury in 2002. Furtado joked about the situation, saying that "Yeah, he's my boyfriend – he just doesn't know it yet".
Martin's fascination with hip hop was shown in mid-2006 when he collaborated with rapper Jay-Z for the rapper's comeback album "Kingdom Come" after the two met earlier in the year. Martin put some chords together for a song known as "Beach Chair" and sent them to Jay-Z who enlisted the help of hip hop producer Dr. Dre to mix it (contrary to popular opinion it was Coldplay producer Rik Simpson and not Dre who conceived and performed the drum beats). The song was performed on 27 September 2006 by the two during Jay-Z's European tour at Royal Albert Hall. In 2007, Martin appeared on a track titled "Part of the Plan" for Swizz Beatz' debut solo album "One Man Band Man". Martin has also worked on a solo collaboration with Kanye West, with whom he shared an impromptu jam session during a 2006 concert at Abbey Road Studios. He performed the chorus of "Homecoming", from West's album "Graduation".
Influences.
Martin's and Coldplay's main influence is the Scottish rock band Travis, with Martin crediting the band for the creation of his own group.
U2 has been another important influence on Martin both musically and politically, on whom he wrote for "Rolling Stone" magazine's "100 Greatest Artists of All Time", in the section on U2, saying: "I don't buy weekend tickets to Ireland and hang out in front of their gates, but U2 are the only band whose entire catalogue I know by heart. The first song on "The Unforgettable Fire", "A Sort of Homecoming", I know backward and forward – it's so rousing, brilliant, and beautiful. It's one of the first songs I played to my unborn baby." Martin also comments on Bono's effect on his own charity and political involvement he is even known to joke with friends referring to himself as "Crono".
Martin is very vocal about his love for Norwegian new wave/Synthpop band a-ha. In 2005 he stated the following in an interview: "I found myself in Amsterdam the other day and I put a-ha's first record on. I just remembered how much I loved it. It's incredible songwriting. Everyone asks what inspired us, what we've been trying to steal from and what we listened to as we were growing up – the first band I ever loved was a-ha." Martin has also performed live together with Magne Furuholmen of a-ha. In November 2011, he stated that "back when we didn't have any hits of our own we used to play a-ha songs."
He is also known to be a fan of artists such as English alternative rock bands Oasis and Muse, Irish pop group Westlife, English band Radiohead, British pop groups Girls Aloud and Take That, and Canadian indie rock band Arcade Fire. Solo artists Martin likes include Leona Lewis, Noel Gallagher, Kylie Minogue, Johnny Cash, Bob Dylan and Hank Williams.
Coldplay performed R.E.M.'s "Nightswimming" with Michael Stipe during their Austin City Limits performance in 2005, as a part of the Twisted Logic Tour. Martin went on to call "Nightswimming" "the greatest song ever written".
Other endeavours.
Martin and Coldplay guitarist Jonny Buckland made cameo appearances in the film "Shaun of the Dead" as supporters of the fictional charity ZombAid. Martin has a second cameo in this film as a Zombie. In 2006 Martin had a cameo role in the second series episode four of the Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant created comedy "Extras". He also appears singing in the closing credits of the 2009 film "Brüno" alongside Bono, Sting, Slash, Snoop Dogg, and Elton John. Martin also played one gig with the "Sid James Experience".
Martin has been particularly outspoken on issues of fair trade and has campaigned for Oxfam's Make Trade Fair campaign. He travelled to Ghana and Haiti to meet farmers and view the effects of unfair trade practices. When performing he usually has variations of "Make Trade Fair", "MTF" or an equal sign written on the back of his left hand and the letters "MTF" can be seen emblazoned on his piano.
He was a vocal critic of President George W. Bush and the war in Iraq. Martin was a strong supporter of Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry, most notably during his acceptance speech for the 2004 Grammy Awards Record of the Year, accepting for "Clocks". Martin also supported the Democratic Party candidate for President in 2008, giving a shout-out to Barack Obama at the end of a performance of "Yellow" on 25 October 2008 episode of "Saturday Night Live".
On 1 April 2006, "The Guardian" reported that Martin was backing the British Conservative Party leader David Cameron and had written a new theme song for the party titled "Talk to David". This was later revealed to be an April Fool's joke.
Whilst touring Australia in March 2009, Martin and the rest of Coldplay were the opening act at the Sound Relief benefit concert at the Sydney Cricket Ground in Sydney, for the bushfires and floods in Victoria and Queensland.
Martin appeared in a video for the "Robin Hood Tax" campaign, which proposes a tax on stock trades in the United States. This tax is aimed at levelling the field between the so-called "1% and 99%".
On 12 December 2012 Martin performed as a part of the "12 12 12 Concert" which was held as a fundraiser for Hurricane Sandy relief. He performed "Viva La Vida", the R.E.M. song "Losing My Religion" (with the former R.E.M. singer Michael Stipe),and "Us Against the World". Other performers in the show included Bruce Springsteen, Roger Waters, Bon Jovi, Eric Clapton, The Rolling Stones, Alicia Keys, The Who, Kanye West, Billy Joel, and Paul McCartney.
Personal life.
Martin is married to Gwyneth Paltrow. The couple married on 5 December 2003. Their daughter, Apple Blythe Alison Martin, was born on 14 May 2004 in London. Their second child, Moses Bruce Anthony Martin, was born on 8 April 2006 in New York City. Simon Pegg and Martin's bandmate Jonny Buckland are Apple's godfathers. Martin is a longtime friend of Pegg, having met him in 2001, and appears in one of Pegg's movies, "Shaun of the Dead", along with Buckland.
Martin does not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol. PETA declared him to be the World's Sexiest Vegetarian in 2005.
Following the interview, he released a text message declaring himself an "all-theist", a word of his invention meaning that he believes in "everything".
Martin often suffers from insomnia and has undergone sleep therapy. He has said in interviews that ideas for songs most often come to him at night, and that he also often has nightmares about performances going wrong.
Martin is a supporter of the Liberal Democrats, a centre-left political party.
In a 2012 interview with the British tabloid "Daily Mail", Martin revealed that he has had tinnitus for the past ten years and he developed it from listening to loud music when he was a teenager. He brings strong awareness to this condition and warns youngsters to avoid the same fate, while also protecting his own children's hearing with headphones.
