Alexa Ellesse Vega (born August 27, 1988) is an American actress and singer. She is best known for her role as Carmen Cortez in the "Spy Kids" film series and Shilo Wallace in the film "Repo! the Genetic Opera". In 2009, she starred as the title character Ruby Gallagher in the ABC Family series "Ruby & The Rockits" which in September 2009 after airing one season was officially canceled by ABC Family.
Early life.
Vega was born in Miami, Florida. Her father, Baruch Vega, is a Colombian fashion model photographer and her mother, Gina Rue, is an American former model. Alexa has six siblings: paternal half-sister Margaux Vega (b. 1981), sister Krizia Vega (b. 1990), sister Makenzie Vega (b. 1994; starred in "Saw" and "Sin City"), maternal half-sister Greylin James (b.2000), maternal half-brother Jet James (b. 2005), and maternal half-brother Cruz Hudson Rue (b. 2009). She moved with her family to California when she was four years old.
Career.
Acting.
In 1996, Vega starred as young Jo Harding in "Twister". She guest-starred in numerous television shows and films, including "ER", "Follow the Stars Home", "Ghost Whisperer", and "The Bernie Mac Show". She became known worldwide in 2001 for her role as Carmen Cortez in "Spy Kids". The first "Spy Kids" movie was a huge success, and subsequently two sequels, ' and ' were filmed. During the shooting of the three films, she performed most of her own stunts. Vega reprised the role in the 2011 sequel, "".
In 2003, she was named one of that year's hottest teen celebrities in the July 2003 issue "Vanity Fair". In 2004, Vega finished filming two films: "Sleepover" and "State's Evidence". Then the following year she starred in the Lifetime television film entitled "Odd Girl Out" as a victim of cyber-bullying. She also filmed for another made-for-TV movie, "Walkout". In June 2006, she finished filming "Remember the Daze", which was released in limited theaters on April 2007. She also finished filming "Repo! the Genetic Opera", which was released in 2008. Vega has also been confirmed as the lead role in "Helix", written and directed by Aram Rappaport, which began filming in Chicago in March 2008. Vega was originally cast in the 2009 Robert Rodriguez film "Shorts", however, due to her being in Australia for the filming of "Broken Hill", she had to be recast. She was replaced by Kat Dennings.
In 2009, she played Ruby Gallagher on the ABC Family television sitcom "Ruby & The Rockits", which also starred Patrick and David Cassidy. The series was not renewed for a second season.
Vega played Wick in the 2012 film "The Devil's Carnival", a film from director Darren Lynn Bousman and screenwriter Terrance Zdunich, who previously worked with Vega in "Repo! The Genetic Opera".
In late 2012, Vega starred in the independent thriller, 2br/1ba, directed by Rob Margolies. Vega co-stars with Spencer Grammer and Kathryn Morris.
Vega plays the young heroine in Aerosmith's music video "Legendary Child".
Music.
She recorded three songs for the soundtracks while playing Carmen Cortez in the "Spy Kids" films. She released her debut single, "Isle of Dreams", to coincide with the release of "". She also released "Game Over", for . Another song, "Heart Drive" featuring Bobby Edner, was also recorded for "Spy Kids 3". She also has recorded songs for the movie "Repo! The Genetic Opera", released in 2008. 
Vega sang the song "Christmas is the Time to Say 'I Love You'" in the ABC Family film "Santa Baby 2: Christmas Maybe". The track appears on the compilation album "Songs to Celebrate 25 Days of Christmas", which was released on November 3, 2009 by Walt Disney Records. The music video for the song premiered during the ABC Family's 25 Days of Christmas programming block in 2009.
Personal life.
Vega enjoys freshwater fishing, can speak Spanish fluently, is an experienced gymnast, and describes herself as a Christian. Vega married film producer Sean Covel on October 10, 2010 in a ceremony held in his hometown of Lead, South Dakota. She wore an Ian Stuart gown and was walked down the aisle by Robert Rodriguez. Vega is close friends with Nikki Reed, and was the maid of honor at Reed's wedding to Paul McDonald on October 16, 2011.
In July 2012, Vega announced on Twitter that she had divorced Covel. Citing irreconcilable differences, Vega and Covel already have a division of property based upon a "written agreement."
