Lily Jane Collins (born 18 March 1989) is an English and American actress, model, and television personality, known for her roles in the films "The Blind Side", "Abduction", and "Mirror Mirror".
Early life.
Collins was born in Guildford, Surrey, England, and is the daughter of English musician Phil Collins, and his second wife, Jill Tavelman. Her mother is American, and is the president of the Beverly Hills' Women's Club. Collins is the half-sister of actress Joely Collins and musician Simon Collins (from her father's first marriage), and also has two half-brothers from her father's third marriage, Nicholas and Matthew Collins. Her maternal grandfather was a Canadian Jewish immigrant who owned a famous clothing store in Los Angeles.
After her parents' divorce, she moved to Los Angeles, California with her mother when she was five years old. She graduated from Harvard-Westlake School and attended the University of Southern California majoring in broadcast journalism.
Career.
Collins started acting at the age of two in the BBC series "Growing Pains".
As a teenager, Collins wrote a column (titled "NY Confidential") for the British magazine "Elle Girl". She has also written for "Seventeen", "Teen Vogue", and the "Los Angeles Times" magazines.
She was chosen by Chanel to wear one of its gowns at the 2007 Bal des Débutantes (a charity ball) at the Hôtel de Crillon in Paris, which was featured on season 3 of the reality TV show The Hills. She was picked by Spain's "Glamour" magazine in 2008 as their "International model of the year" and appeared on the magazine's cover in August 2009.
Collins covered the 2008 US Presidential campaign as a host on the Nickelodeon show "Kids Pick the President". She won a 2008 Young Hollywood Award for "Newest Red Carpet Correspondent". She has appeared in two episodes of the television show "90210", including the 2008–2009 season finale. Collins was one of twenty women named by "Maxim" magazine as one of "The Hottest Daughters of Rock Stars" in 2009.
Collins was in the 2009 film "The Blind Side" as Collins Tuohy, the daughter of Sandra Bullock's character Leigh Anne Tuohy. She played the warrior priest's daughter Lucy in the thriller "Priest", opposite Paul Bettany.
MTV Networks' NextMovie.com named her one of the "Breakout Stars to Watch for in 2011". She co-starred in the 2011 action film "Abduction" with Taylor Lautner. Collins played Snow White in "Mirror Mirror", an adaptation of the "Snow White" fairytale, co-starring Julia Roberts. Robbie Collin from British newspaper "The Telegraph" wrote, "She has an adorable, sensational, almost perfect face for cinema; think Audrey Hepburn with the eyebrows of Liam Gallagher. Her smile is the Platonic ideal of cheeky." She made her singing debut in the film, performing an English re-written cover of "I Believe (in Love)".
Collins was reportedly to be the lead in the "The Evil Dead" remake "Evil Dead" with a release date of April 2013, but dropped out due to a scheduling issue. In March 2012, it was announced that Collins would take the role of Samantha in "Stuck in Love", starring alongside Jennifer Connelly, Logan Lerman, and Greg Kinnear. Collins is set to star in the first film adaptation of the "New York Times" bestselling "The Mortal Instruments" novels by Cassandra Clare, playing Clary Fray.
