Alistair Cees Overeem (, ; born 17 May 1980) is a Dutch-British mixed martial artist and kickboxer currently signed with the Ultimate Fighting Championship. He is a former Strikeforce Heavyweight Champion, Dream Heavyweight Champion, K-1 World Grand Prix Champion, and made history by being the only fighter in combat sports to hold a world title in both MMA and K-1 kickboxing at the same time. Overeem is currently ranked the #6 heavyweight in the world by Sherdog. 
Biography.
Overeem was born on to a Dutch mother and Jamaican father. His parents divorced when he was six years old. His mother, Clair, then moved Alistair and his brother Valentijn to the Netherlands, where he spent the remainder of his childhood.
As a child, Overeem competed in judo, track and field and basketball. When he was fifteen, his brother Valentijn took him to Chris Dolman's gym to teach him how to defend himself. At first he found the training overly violent and aggressive, but after training with Bas Rutten, Joop Kasteel and others, he eventually learned to enjoy it.
Mixed martial arts career.
Overeem had his first MMA professional fight at 19 years old, member of Scouts Royale Brotherhood, defeating Ricardo Fyeet by guillotine choke submission on at "It's Showtime", the first event of the eponymously named promotion.
Early MMA Career.
After posting a 10–3 record in RINGS, M-1, It's Showtime, and 2 Hot 2 Handle, Overeem debuted in Pride Fighting Championships on July 20, 2002, defeating Yusuke Imamura by TKO in just 44 seconds.
Pride FC.
Overeem won two more fights in Pride before entering the 2003 Pride Middleweight Grand Prix at Pride Total Elimination 2003 and losing to future UFC light heavyweight champion Chuck Liddell in the quarterfinal match. Overeem rebounded to defeat Tomohiko Hashimoto at the Inoki Bom-Ba-Ye 2003 in 36 seconds. On October 31, 2004, Overeem fought Hiromitsu Kanehara, defeating him by TKO part-way through the second round at Pride 28. Overeem lost his next fight against Brazilian Top Team fighter Antônio Rogério Nogueira.
In 2005, Overeem entered the Pride Middle Weight Grand Prix at Pride Total Elimination 2005 where he defeated former UFC light heavyweight champion Vitor Belfort, by submission, in the opening round. Overeem would move on to fight Igor Vovchanchyn in the quarterfinals at Pride Critical Countdown 2005 taking under two minutes to win via submission. Overeem lost in the semi-finals to the eventual champion Mauricio Rua.
In February 2006, Overeem fought Russian Top Team favorite Sergei Kharitonov. Overeem won the fight, dislocating Kharitonov's shoulder in the process. With his win over Kharitonov, Overeem secured a spot in the Pride 2006 Open Weight Grand Prix at Pride Total Elimination Absolute. He fought Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu specialist Fabricio Werdum, and lost via kimura in the second round.
Debut in Strikeforce.
After his loss, Overeem traveled to San Jose, California to rematch Vitor Belfort at . Overeem won the fight by decision in the evening's main event.
Return to Pride.
A month later Overeem returned to Pride for a highly anticipated rematch with Antônio Rogério Nogueira. Overeem entered the fight with a heavily taped neck. After controlling the first round and a half with his striking, Overeem was stumbled from a punch, Nogueira followed with a flurry of strikes. Worried Overeem would be more severely injured, his corner threw in the towel.
At Pride Final Conflict Absolute, he lost to Ricardo Arona. Overeem was on the receiving end of a leg kick that caused a non-serious injury to his nerves, causing him to lose feeling in his foot and leg. Unable to mount an offense or defend against Arona, Overeem tapped out to avoid further injury.
He then suffered another KO loss to Mauricio Rua at Pride 33, but returned in June 2007 with a submission win over Michael Knaap at K-1 Grand Prix in Amsterdam (despite K-1 being a kickboxing promotion, the bout was fought under MMA rules).
On September 17, 2007, at Hero's 10: Middleweight Tournament Final Alistair faced Sergei Kharitonov again. Overeem showed solid movement as soon as the first round began, but he suffered a KO loss just before the end of the first round.After not making the cut as a light heavyweight, Overeem realized that he had to stop cutting weight and fight at his natural weightclass.
Return to Strikeforce/Dream/Dynamite.
On November 16, 2007, Overeem defeated Paul Buentello for the vacant Strikeforce heavyweight title by submission due to knee strikes.
On June 15, 2008 Overeem won by KO in the first round against Lee Tae-Hyun at Dream 4. On July 21, 2008, Overeem defeated K-1 World Grand Prix 2001 champion Mark Hunt in the first round by submission at Dream 5.
His next fight was against Mirko Filipović at Dream 6 on September 23, 2008. After almost half of the first round which saw Overeem taking down Filipovic multiple times and effectively striking from the top position, cutting his Croatian foe, the bout was stopped and declared a no contest due to Alistair landing multiple knees to the groin of Filipovic.
Overeem was rumored to make his first title defense against Heavyweight Brett Rogers on June 6 at , however a hand injury scuttled plans for the fight. According to Golden Glory manager Bas Boon, Overeem had suffered a hand infection following a nightclub brawl early May 2009. According to Boon, Alistair and his brother Valentijn – both heavyweights – had been involved in an altercation that left five security staff needing hospital treatment and nearly cost Alistair his hand.
Overeem was scheduled to make his first Strikeforce Heavyweight Championship defense in a rematch against Fabricio Werdum at , but had to pull out due to a hand injury, most likely caused from his nightclub brawl.
Alistair defeated Tony Sylvester at Golden Glory's 10 year anniversary celebration with a standing guillotine choke. He used the same choke only 8 days later to submit James Thompson at Dream 12.
Overeem has stated that he wants a rubber match with Badr Hari, only this time in an MMA bout.
Overeem was set to face Andrei Arlovski at Dynamite!! 2009 but FEG instead opted to have him face, Kazuyuki Fujita to keep with the Dream Vs. Sengoku theme. Overeem quickly overpowered his opponent and recorded a knockout with a knee to the head.
Overeem then faced Brett Rogers on May 15, 2010 at to defend his Strikeforce Heavyweight Championship. He won the fight via TKO (punches) in the first round. In his post-fight interview, Alistair Overeem declared for another time that he wants to fight Fedor Emelianenko, claiming that Fedor's management can no longer ignore his presence. The majority of Alistair Overeem's pre-fight training camp took place at the newly opened Golden Glory Gym in Pattaya, Thailand, where "The Demolition Man" concentrated on the further improvement of his Muay Thai skills.
Overeem faced Todd Duffee on December 31, 2010 at Dynamite!! 2010. Overeem defeated Duffee by way of knockout 19 seconds into the first round to win the Dream Interim Heavyweight Championship. Overeem was later upgraded to Dream Heavyweight Champion.
Strikeforce Heavyweight Grand Prix.
In early 2011, Alistair Overeem was named as one of 8 men that will take part of the Strikeforce Heavyweight GP, alongside rivals Fabricio Werdum, Sergei Kharitonov, Brett Rogers, Josh Barnett, Andrei Arlovski, Antonio Silva and Fedor Emelianenko.
A rematch with Fabricio Werdum took place on June 18, 2011, at as part of an eight-man heavyweight tournament.
Removal from GP/Strikeforce.
On July 17, it was announced Strikeforce heavyweight champion Alistair Overeem was removed from the promotion’s 2011 heavyweight grand prix. Overeem went on to state that he felt the September date was too soon for him to return, and that he needed time to rest and heal after his June 18 quarterfinal decision win over Fabricio Werdum. Overeem swapped out for unbeaten up-and-comer Daniel Cormier. Subsequently, on July 29, it was announced that Overeem had been released from the Strikeforce organization as Zuffa exercised their right to eliminate the one remaining fight on his contract. It was revealed that the reason behind Overeem's release from Strikeforce was not due to his unwillingness to participate in the GP semi finals, but due to Golden Glory's policy requiring that the money fighters made through fights be paid through their management first. 
This disagreement led not only to Overeem's release but also other Golden Glory stars under a Zuffa contract, including former Strikeforce Women's Bantamweight Champion Marloes Coenen, Norwegian UFC heavyweight Jon Olav Einemo, and even brother Valentijn Overeem. Team Golden Glory leader Bas Boon stated he has since changed the policy, and that Alistair Overeem could come to the UFC under an exclusive deal, if the right terms are offered, which he now has.
Ultimate Fighting Championship.
On December 30, 2011, at UFC 141, Overeem made his UFC debut in the main event defeating former heavyweight champion Brock Lesnar by TKO in 2:26 of the first round. The victory earned him a Heavyweight Title shot against champion Junior Dos Santos.
Failed drug test.
Overeem was scheduled to fight UFC Heavyweight champion Junior dos Santos on May 26, 2012 at UFC 146. However, on April 4, 2012, Overeem was revealed to have failed his pre-fight drug test by the Nevada State Athletic Commission (NSAC). Overeem had a 14-to-1 testosterone-to-epitestosterone (T/E) ratio, over the allowed ratio rate of 6-to-1. On Friday April 20, 2012, UFC President Dana White confirmed that Overeem has been removed from his fight with Dos Santos and replaced by Frank Mir. 
One day prior to his meeting with the NSAC, Overeem released a prepared statement to the media in which he claims the positive result of the drug test came as a result of a doctor prescribed "anti-inflammatory medication that was mixed with testosterone." Overeem's lawyer filed a continuation request for additional time to gather support for his recent claim, which was voted on by the NSAC on April 24, 2012. The request was denied and the NSAC voted unanimously to deny Overeem's application status for a period of 9 months, dating back to March 27, the day of his drug test. He may reapply after this time period in December 2012.
Return.
In his first fight post-suspension, Overeem faced Antonio Silva on February 2, 2013 at UFC 156. Leading up to the highly anticipated fight, Overeem was dismissive of Silva's skills, claiming he was better than his opponent in every aspect of MMA. Despite being a heavy betting favorite and having won rounds 1 and 2, Overeem lost to Silva by KO in the third round.
Overeem is expected to face former UFC Heavyweight Champion Junior dos Santos on May 25, 2013 at UFC 160.
Kickboxing career.
Overeem had his first professional kickboxing fight at 17 years old, in a K-1 rules fight on . After that he fought against Paul Hordijk, winning by decision on . Overeem then moved onto K-1, having two K-1 Kickboxing fights in 6 years against Errol Parris and Glaube Feitosa. Overeem was knocked out in both bouts and stayed with MMA from then on. He did not fight in K-1 for 4 more years.
On December 31, 2008, Overeem faced Badr Hari, one of K-1's top contenders, under K-1 rules. He defeated Hari by way of knockout in the first round.
After that, he faced Remy Bonjasky, the defending K-1 champion. Overeem came out aggressive in the first and second rounds, bullying Bonjasky and landing some impressive offense, but in the third was knocked down by a right hook from Bonjasky, who thereby secured a unanimous decision win. All three judges scored the bout 30–28. 
On September 26 at the K-1 World Grand Prix 2009 Final 16, having been selected by fan voting after his impressive performances against Remy Bonjasky and Badr Hari, Overeem shocked the kickboxing world by achieving a huge upset. He defeated K-1's longest serving member, legendary 3-time champion Peter Aerts by unanimous decision.
At the K-1 World Grand Prix 2009 Final, Overeem knocked out Kyokushin Karate Champion, Ewerton Teixeira with a knee strike in the first round, but lost to Badr Hari, via TKO from a head kick in the Semi Finals.
At the K-1 World Grand Prix 2010 in Yokohama, Overeem defeated Dzevad Poturak via KO (right knee) in Round 1 at 2:40. Overeem defeated Ben Edwards by TKO in the first round on October 2, 2010 at K-1 World Grand Prix 2010 Final 16.
On December 11, at the Ariake Coliseum, Overeem fought at and won the K-1 World Grand Prix 2010 Final. In the quarter finals, he beat Tyrone Spong by Unanimous decision. In the semi finals he came face to face with his teammate Gokhan Saki, who he defeated by first round TKO due to injury, breaking Saki's right arm with a hard left kick. Saki's arm was already injured as a result of his previous fight with Daniel Ghita. In the finals, he fought Peter Aerts for the second time. Alistair came out aggressively and finished Peter in the first round.
Personal life.
Overeem has a daughter named Storm. Alistair Overeem won a celebrity sumo tournament in Japan in September 2010. Overeem competed in a celebrity arm-wrestling tournament in Japan in December 2012, losing in the semifinal against Bob Sapp.
Legal issues.
On January 1, 2012 following his match with Brock Lesnar at "UFC 141", Overeem pushed or shoved a woman in the face, "causing her to stagger back," in an incident that occurred at the Wynn Las Vegas at about 3 a.m., according to the Las Vegas Police Department. Not arrested but summoned to court, Overeem was charged with misdemeanor battery and faced a maximum of six months in the Clark County Detention Center and a fine up to $1,000. On March 28, 2012, Overeem was given a suspended 90 day county jail sentence plus 50 hours of community service and anger management with the potential of the battery charge being dropped if the requirements are fulfilled.
