Spring break (also known as March break, spring vacation, Mid-Term Break, pizza break, study week, reading week or the Easter holidays in the United States, and some parts of Canada) is a recess in early spring at universities and schools in various countries around the world.
History and timing.
United States.
In the United States, Spring Break at the college and university level can occur from March to April, depending on term dates and holidays such as Holy Week. Many K–12 institutions in the United States schedule a two-week long break known as "Easter Break" or "Easter Holidays", as they take place in the weeks before and after Easter.
In many regions, the break fulfills the function of making up for snow days in January and February. Because instructors are paid during spring break anyway, school districts do not incur expenses by adding extra days to the school calendar at the end-of-term.
Canada.
Canada gives a week-long break to its elementary school and secondary school students in the month of March, with the time varying from province to province; New Brunswick and Quebec, for example, place their March breaks during the first week of March; Ontario, Nova Scotia and British Columbia schedule theirs during the second or third week; and the break in Alberta and Manitoba usually occurs in the last week of March. 'Pizza break' is a recent term coined by a small group of Dalhousie University students. 
In a 1995 study of Canadian students who had traveled to Florida for spring break, found the key elements of a spring break vacation to include a group holiday with friends traveling and rooming together, a perpetual party atmosphere, high alcohol consumption, sexually suggestive contests and displays, and the perception that casual sex is common. Overall, there was a perception that sexual norms are far more permissive on spring break vacation than at home, providing an atmosphere of greater sexual freedom and the opportunity for engaging in new sexual experiences. Of the 681 students who completed a questionnaire after the break, 15% of males and 13% of females had engaged in casual sex during the break.
Other countries.
In Japan, the spring break starts with the end of the academic year in March and ends on April 1 with the beginning of a new academic year, while in Guatemala it takes place during Easter, schools give students a whole week to rest while the workforce just rest around 3 days. In Mexico it takes place during the Holy Week, and the one after it, and in Brazil, it is commonly known as the "boredom week" and grew around two public holidays, October 12—the feast of Our Lady of Aparecida, patron saint of the country—and October 15, Teacher's Day.
Parties.
Florida.
Fort Lauderdale.
From the end of World War II until the 1980s, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, was a notorious spring break destination in the United States for college students. It was largely made so by the efforts of one man, George Warren "Bob" Gill Jr., who was called "the Father of Fort Lauderdale spring break". Prior to that, a few were coming to the area for a break from winter cold. Fort Lauderdale's reputation as a spring break destination for college students started when the Colgate University men's swimming team went to practice there over break in 1935. Fort Lauderdale became even more popular due to the 1960 film "Where the Boys Are", in which college girls met boys while on spring break there. Residents of the Fort Lauderdale area became so upset at the damage done by vacationers that the local government passed laws restricting parties in 1985. At the same time, the National Minimum Drinking Age Act was enacted in the United States, requiring that Florida raise the minimum drinking age to 21 and inspiring many underage college vacationers to travel outside the United States for spring break. By 1989, the number of college vacationers traveling to Fort Lauderdale fell to 20,000, a far cry from the 350,000 who went four years prior. 
Daytona Beach.
Spring break party goers responded by moving to the more permissive community of Daytona Beach area (over 200,000 students traveled there each spring at its peak), but after Daytona's local government undertook similar measures, the crowds of the mid-1990s and early 2000s had fallen to a point where "a few students still come, but officials don't even estimate their numbers". 
Panama City Beach.
Panama City Beach, Florida remains a popular spring break destination due to its relative proximity to many Southern colleges and driving distances. The locals in Panama City Beach welcome Spring Breakers every year, and Spring Break is a major factor in the city's economy.
Palm Springs, California.
Palm Springs, California became a popular spring break destination in the 1950s. The city was further glamorized as a destination in the 1963 movie "Palm Springs Weekend". In 1991, after fighting, drinking, and drug use increased, the city imposed restrictions and spring break business declined for the local merchants.
Other United States locations.
South Padre Island, Texas, and Fort Myers Beach, Florida, are also popular Spring Break destinations among students from colleges in the south-central and midwestern parts of the country. One of the biggest in the Southwest, popularized by MTV, is Lake Havasu City, Arizona. One of the new up and coming destinations for Spring Break is Las Vegas, Nevada. In March 2011, MTV hosted its annual Spring Break at the Palms Hotel and Casino. Las Vegas is one of the top domestic Spring Break destinations.
Overseas destinations.
Popular destinations outside the United States include Cancún, Cabo San Lucas, Acapulco, Barbados, Mazatlán, Puerto Vallarta, Dominican Republic, Jamaica, the Bahamas, the Turks and Caicos Islands and Varadero, Cuba (for non-US citizens). Tour agencies have cited the lower drinking ages in these places and that even then, they are rarely enforced. Some tour companies put on special chartered flights for Spring break at discounted rates.
Corporate marketing.
It is common for major brands that cater to the youth market, e.g., Coca-Cola, Gillette, MTV, and branches of the United States armed forces, to market at spring break destinations.
Alternatives.
Some colleges offer "alternative spring breaks" in which students volunteer community service and charity work during spring break.
