Eliza Patricia Dushku (; (born December 30, 1980) is an American actress known for her television roles, including recurring appearances as Faith on "Buffy the Vampire Slayer" and its spinoff series "Angel". She starred in two Fox series, "Tru Calling" and "Dollhouse". She is also known for her role in films including "True Lies", "The New Guy", "Bring It On", "Wrong Turn" and "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back", as well as her voice work on video games.
Early life.
Dushku was born in Watertown, Massachusetts, the daughter of Philip R. Dushku, an administrator and teacher in the Boston Public Schools, and Judith "Judy" (née Rasmussen), a political science professor. Dushku's father is an Albanian from the city of Korçë and her mother is of Danish and English descent. Dushku attended Beaver Country Day School in Chestnut Hill, and graduated from Watertown High School.
Career.
Early career.
Dushku came to the attention of casting agents when she was 10. She was chosen in a five month search for the lead role of Alice in the film "That Night". In 1993, Dushku landed a role as Pearl alongside Robert De Niro and Leonardo DiCaprio in "This Boy's Life", a role that she said opened a lot of doors. The following year, she played the teenage daughter of Arnold Schwarzenegger and Jamie Lee Curtis in "True Lies". She had parts as Paul Reiser's daughter in "Bye Bye Love", as Cindy Johnson in "Race the Sun", and roles in a television movie and a short film.
Dushku took time off from acting to finish her junior and senior years of high school. She was accepted to the George Washington University in Washington, D.C. and Suffolk University in Boston, where her mother serves as professor of government and previously served as dean of the campus in Dakar, Senegal.
"Buffy the Vampire Slayer".
</ref>
Subsequent roles.
In 2000, Dushku starred in the hit cheerleader comedy "Bring It On". She followed that up with "Soul Survivors", reuniting her with "Race The Sun" co-star Casey Affleck. In 2001, she appeared in "The New Guy" with DJ Qualls and "City by the Sea" with Robert De Niro and James Franco. The latter film garnered attention from a wider adult audience and several good reviews. The same year, Kevin Smith invited Dushku to be a part of "Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back".
In 2003, Dushku starred in the horror film "Wrong Turn" and "The Kiss", an independent comedy-drama. Starting that same year, she starred in a new Fox TV series, "Tru Calling", where she played the main character, medical student Tru Davies. After having a grant pulled out from under her, Tru is forced to take a job at a local morgue where she discovers her power to "re-live" the previous day over again if one of the deceased asks for her help to change what has happened. Dushku turned down a role in a spin-off of "Buffy The Vampire Slayer" which would have been about Faith. She has had many roles as a "bad girl" in movies and relishes the opportunities. In an interview with "Maxim" in May 2001, Dushku says of her roles, "It's easy to play a bad girl: You just do everything you've been told not to do, and you don't have to deal with the consequences, because it's only acting."
Dushku starred in an Off-Broadway production entitled "Dog Sees God" from December 2005, playing "Van's sister", a character paralleled with Lucy Van Pelt from the "Peanuts" comic strip on which the play production is based. She quit in February 2006 along with other members of the cast amidst rumors of abuse from the producer, which were later dismissed.
She played the lead character on "Nurses", a hospital comedy/drama for Fox. This was the second Fox pilot in which she was cast, but not broadcast. She appeared in the Simple Plan music video, "I'm Just a Kid", as the band's love interest, as well as Nickelback's video for "Rockstar".
Dushku has roles in three video games. She voiced the role of Yumi Sawamura in the English language version of "Yakuza" for the PlayStation 2, which was published and developed by SEGA, and released in September 2006. Dushku also stars as Shaundi, one of the lead characters in "Saints Row 2", which was developed by Volition and published by THQ. It was released in North America on October 14, 2008, for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. She was the voice talent for the role of Rubi Malone, the main character in the game "WET". She appeared at Spike TV's 2008 Video Game Awards in December 2008.
Recent work.
On October 1, 2005, she announced at Wizard World Boston that shooting had begun for "Nobel Son" in which she would star with Alan Rickman, Danny DeVito, Bill Pullman, and Peter Boyle. The movie was released at the 2007 Tribeca Film Festival. Another project is "On Broadway", an independent movie filmed in her native Boston. The movie is receiving great reviews and a few of them highlight Dushku's performance. It is shown in independent film festivals and has won six awards.
"Variety" announced on August 2, 2006 that Dushku would co-star with Macaulay Culkin in "Sex and Breakfast", a dark comedy written and directed by Miles Brandman. A reviewer described Dushku as "charming" and giving the character "an edge." The movie was released in Los Angeles on November 30, 2007 and on DVD on January 22, 2008. She starred in "Open Graves", a 2008 horror-thriller about a satanic game co-starring Mike Vogel. She played the main character in "The Thacker Case" and "The Alphabet Killer", both thrillers based on real-life events, one of them directed by Rob Schmidt with whom she had worked on "Wrong Turn". Both movies were released in 2008. "The Alphabet Killer" contains Dushku's first topless scene. The film earned mixed reviews, but reviewers praised Dushku's performance, commenting "Eliza Dushku commands the screen but cannot reconcile the script's conflicted and increasingly idiotic agendas." She appeared in "Bottle Shock", a drama about Napa valley wine. The film was directed by Randall Miller, who helmed "Nobel Son".
On August 26, 2007, Dushku signed a development deal with Fox Broadcasting and 20th Century Fox. Under the pact, the network and the studio would develop projects tailor-made for the actress. They approached her with existing pitches and scripts.
Consequently, it was announced on October 31 that Dushku had lured Joss Whedon, of "Buffy The Vampire Slayer", back to TV, as they agreed to create a show called "Dollhouse". Dushku produced the show and played the main character, 'Echo', which aired on Fox during the 2008–09 TV Season. 
</ref>
Dushku described Whedon as "my favorite genius ... favorite friend ... big brother ... and the only person out here I've ever wholeheartedly trusted, because he's never let me down." "Dollhouse" was renewed for a second season. The producers cited their confidence in the strength of Joss Whedon's fan base and high DVR numbers as their reasons for keeping the show. FOX cancelled "Dollhouse" on November 11, 2009. The show officially wrapped filming on the second and final season on December 16, 2009.
Dushku was the voice actor for contract killer "Rubi Malone" in the action video game "Wet". She also secured exclusive rights to make "The Perfect Moment", a film based on the life of photographer Robert Mapplethorpe and enlisted the help of Ondi Timoner.
In 2010 Dushku provided her voice for "" and appeared in the film "Locked In". She also guest-starred in an episode of CBS' comedy "The Big Bang Theory"
which aired on November 4, 2010.
In 2011, Dushku featured alongside Jayson Floyd in "One Shot", a short action clip on YouTube directed by and starring Freddie Wong, which was released on May 13, 2011. In August of the same year Dushku visited Albania to film a documentary promoting tourism on her father's country of origin with a crew from the Travel Channel and Lonely Planet entitled Dear Albania.
Dushku has a lead role in an online animated "motion comic" series, titled "Torchwood: Web of Lies", based on the BBC series' "".
In June, 2012, Dushku starred against Katie Cassidy, Gina Gershon, and Michelle Trachtenberg in THE SCRIBBLER directed by John Suits and produced by Gabriel Cowan.
Personal life.
Dushku resides in Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles, California. She visited her father's family in Albania in 2006 after receiving an invitation from Albanian Prime Minister Sali Berisha. She visited Kosovo and got an Albanian Eagle tattoo on the back of her neck. While on her second visit to Albania in 2011, she applied for Albanian citizenship and obtained the Albanian passport and ID Card. She became an honorary citizen of Tirana, and was given the honorary title of Tirana Ambassador of Culture and Tourism in the World by Tirana mayor Lulzim Basha. Additionally, she was given honorary citizen status in her father's home town of Korçë, Albania.
She is the founder and CEO of Boston Diva Productions and serves on the board of directors of the THARCE-Gulu organization (The Trauma Healing and Reflection Center in Gulu), an organization dedicated to helping the survivors of war (including former child soldiers) in Northern Uganda.
Dushku began dating former Los Angeles Lakers basketball player Rick Fox in October 2009, and in August 2010 the couple confirmed that they are living together. 
Dushku announced in December 2011 that she had decided to switch to a vegan diet after watching the documentary "Forks Over Knives".
Awards and nominations.
Her performance in "Tru Calling" garnered Dushku two nomination in 2004: a Teen Choice Award for Choice Breakout Star – Female a Saturn Award nomination for Best Actress in a Television Series. "Maxim" magazine ranked Dushku 6th on the "Hot 100 Women of 2009" list. Dushku was nominated in 2009 for a Scream Award for "Best Science Fiction Actress" for her role of Echo. Dushku was named Ambassador for the 2012 Consumer Electronics Show Entertainment Matters program in October 2011, .
