Plot.
In "Psycho-Pass"s setting, it is possible to instantaneously measure a person's mental state, personality, and the probability that a person will commit crimes, all through a device installed on each citizen's body called a Psycho-Pass. When this probability, measured by the "Crime Coefficient" index, is too high in an individual, they are pursued and apprehended—with lethal force, if necessary. This task is performed by a special team of so called latent criminals (people whose crime coefficient is deemed too high, and without chance of recovery) called Enforcers, who are supervised by police officers known as Inspectors; the Inspectors ensure that Enforcers perform their duties within the constraints of the law. Both Enforcers and Inspectors use magnum-esque "Dominators", special weapons designed to fire only on those with a higher than normal Crime Coefficient. The story follows Unit One of the Public Safety Bureau's Criminal Investigation Division.
Development.
When creating the "Psycho-Pass" anime, chief director Katsuyuki Motohiro wanted the series to counter current anime trends. As a result, the use of "moe" was prohibited within the staff. Motohiro had been wishing to return to making an anime for some time but needed a charismatic script writer to do it. He then proposed Gen Urobuchi to work together during early 2011. Motohiro and his staff were surprised with Urobuchi's contribution to the anime series "Puella Magi Madoka Magica" which was said to exceed the series "Neon Genesis Evangelion". Fascinated with "Madoka Magica" Motohiro then read other works from Urobuchi which convinced him to talk to Urobuchi.
In the making of the series Motohiro allowed the staff several elements even though if they could reduce the viewership from the female demographic. He also acknowledged the series was too violent for a younger demographic, commenting he wouldn't want his son to watch it due to its being psychologically brutal. The psychological themes were based on the time he watched "Lupin III" during his childhood as he thought about adding "today's youth trauma" to the series. Other involved voice actors have also been credited in the making of the series due to how they added traits to the characters.
Media.
Anime.
The anime series produced by Production I.G. began airing on October 11, 2012 in Japan on Fuji TV's Noitamina programming block. The series is directed by Naoyoshi Shiotani with character designs by Akira Amano. Funimation Entertainment has licensed the series in North America and is simulcasting the series as it airs in Japan. Toho started collecting the series in DVD and Blu-ray format on December 21, 2012. For the first eleven episodes, the opening theme is "Abnormalize" by Ling Tosite Sigure whilst the ending theme is by Egoist. For episode 12 onwards, the opening theme is "Out of Control" by Nothing's Carved in Stone whilst the ending theme is "All Alone With You" by Egoist.
Manga.
A manga adaptation illustrated by Hikaru Miyoshi, titled , began serialization in Shueisha's "Jump Square" magazine from November 2, 2012. Its first "tankobon" volume was released by Shueisha on February 4, 2013.
