Air Jordan is a brand of shoes and athletic apparel designed, owned, and produced by Nike and Michael Jordan for Nike's Jordan Brand subsidiary. The shoes, informally referred to in the plural as Air Jordans or simply Jordans, were first released for public consumption in 1985 after Jordan himself wore them as a rookie in 1984, with new designs released annually thereafter. ""
Popular reception.
Since its introduction into the sports shoe market, the Air Jordan's global popularity has grown immensely, providing Nike with its all-time top-selling signature basketball shoe. Jordan Brand today release many different models of shoes, including Modern Basketball shoes, Training Shoes, Casual Shoes and Retro's (Retros are Re-releases of Original Model Air Jordans I-XXIII).
Air Jordan currently sponsors 19 active NBA players, including Chris Paul, Ray Allen, and Carmelo Anthony. They also endorse Nike Air Jordan products.
Air Jordan I.
Although Tinker Hatfield is the name most associated with the design of the Air Jordan line, the "Air Jordan 1" was designed by Peter Moore. The "Air Jordan 1" was first released in 1985, in a red and black colorway to match the uniform of the Chicago Bulls, the team for which Michael Jordan played. This red and black color-way was later outlawed by NBA Commissioner David Stern for not having any white on them. Michael Jordan would wear the shoes anyway, and each time he stepped on the court with the "Air Jordan 1" he would be fined five thousand dollars. Nike used this as a promotional tool in advertisements hinting that the shoes gave an unfair competitive advantage and that whoever wore them had a certain edginess associated with outlaw activities. Nike would later create a colorway with red, white, and black which would be worn by Jordan for most of the 1985 and 1986 seasons.
Air Jordan II.
The Great Success of the "Air Jordan 1", Nike released the "New Air Jordan" in 1986 for the New Basketball season. This sneaker was designed by Peter Moore and Bruce Kilgore, this would be the last Air Jordan made by either designer. The Original Air Jordan II was the only Air Jordan made in Italy. The "Air Jordan II" proved to be just as successful as the "Air Jordan 1" sales-wise.
Air Jordan III.
The "Air Jordan III" was designed by Tinker Hatfield. This was the shoe that "saved" the Air Jordan line. Michael Jordan was ready to leave Nike, but the "Jordan III" changed his mind. It was the first Air Jordan to feature a visible air unit on the heel, the new Jumpman logo, an elephant print trim and tumble leather to give it a luxury look. The "Air Jordan III" was also famous for the humorous ads depicting Spike Lee as Mars Blackmon, the character he played in his film 'She's Gotta Have It'. This campaign was known as the ""Mars and Mike"" ad campaign, which was one of Nike's most successful advertisement campaigns. These were the first Jordans to feature the ""NIKE AIR"" logo on the back, but later replaced by the Jumpman logo, with the words "AIR" underneath it, similar to the "Air Jordan VI". These were said to be Michael Jordan's favorite shoes, he wore them during the 1988 Dunk Championship and many other events in his basketball career. The Air Jordan III's had poor sales when first reintroduced in 1994. On their second reintroduction in 2001, they sold well. The "Fire Red" "Air Jordan III" was released in March 2007.
In 2007, Jordan Brand collaborated with director Spike Lee to release a limited pair of "Air Jordan III"s the "Do The Right Thing" movie poster. The same year also saw the reintroduced versions of the Air Jordan III's in two monotone colorways, all black and all white, nicknamed the "Black Cats" and the "Pure Moneys" respectively. 2007 also had the "Flips" which moved the elephant print from the trim to the entire shoe and replacing it with white leather, indeed "Flipping" the original design of white leather with elephant print trim.
In 2009, the Jordan Brand reintroduced the highly sought after "Air Jordan III" in the True Blue colorway. It was an international-only release, meaning they were not sold in the US. In 2011, the brand released a Black History Month (BHM) Air Jordan III colorway in commemoration of the 35th anniversary of Black History Month. The sneaker is black with gold trim and stitching as well as laser print around the toe and heel. The "BHM III" was a very limited release and there was said to have been no more than 3,000 pairs made. Also, the same year saw the release of the "True Blue" III on June 4. The Stealth colorway of the III was released in September and the Black Cements were released in November. The "Black Flips" were released on December 3, 2011.
Air Jordan IV.
In 1989 The Jordan IV shoe was released into the public, designed by Tinker Hatfield. It was the first Jordan shoe released on the global market. It had 4 colorways: White/ Grey, Black/Grey, White/Red, and White/Blue. 
Spike Lee, the director and actor helped in the ads for Jordan IV. Spike Lee had featured the Air Jordan IV in his movie Do The Right Thing. The Air Jordan Bordeaux "Spiz'ike IV" were specifically made for Spike Lee in order to pay respect for advertising the Jordan Cement 4's.
The Air Jordan IV were on Jordan's feet when he made "The Shot" in Game 5 of the 1989 NBA First Round between the Chicago Bulls and the Cleveland Cavaliers. In 2012 a Cavalier Colorway dubbed The "Cavs IV's were released to honor "The Shot"
Air Jordan V.
The Air Jordan V was release February 1990, again designed by Tinker Hatfield. Some elements were carried over from the Air Jordan IV, but overall they were a completely new look. One outstanding feature is the reflective tongue. Other changes to the shoe were the translucent rubber soles. The soles gave them a new look, but it yellowed over time when exposed to moisture. The Jordan V, VI, XI and XXII all feature the translucent outsole. 
A new feature to the Air Jordan V was its base top with lace locks, making strapping on the shoe easy. The lace-lock feature partly inspired the "Air Jordan Spiz'ike". 
Hatfield is believed to have drawn inspiration for the Air Jordan V from World War II fighter planes, which is most notably visible in the shark teeth shapes on the midsole. The Air Jordan V was reintroduced in 2000, including a new color way featuring Michael Jordan's high school (Laney High) colors. In 2006 several V's were reintroduced, including the LS "Grape" V's, the LS "burgundy" V's, the "Fire-Red" V's, the "Green Bean" V's, and "Stealth Blue" V's. Along with the latter, a very limited laser design and the black/metallic/fire red colorways were released in early 2007.
In the month of May 2009, Air Jordan confirmed the release of an "DMP II" consisting of two Air Jordan V's. Paired alongside the buttery varsity red suede on the upper is black on the midsole, lace area, tongue and a crystal-clean sole and the classic 3M material tongue. The second color way features a 3M material base with black laces and midsole. The retail price was $310.
thumbnail
Jordan " Fire Reds " were released on January 26th 2013.
Air Jordan VI.
The Air Jordan VI were designed by Tinker Hatfield again and released In 1991. The Original 5 colorways were: Black/Infrared, White/Infrared, White/ Carmine-Black, White/Sport Blue, and Off White/Maroon. The Air Jordan VI Had a few innovations including a reinforcement around the toe, It had two holes in the tongue, and a molded heel tab on the back of the sneaker (Demanded by Jordan so it wouldn't hit his Achilles tendon). Like the Air Jordan V this sneaker also had Clear rubber/"Icy" Soles. The Air Jordan VI was the last Air Jordan to feature the Nike Air logo on it. 
Later that year The Bulls defeats the Los Angeles Lakers in the 1991 NBA Finals, Jordan was the Finals MVP. 1991 was the first year Jordan won the NBA Championship, making the Air Jordan VI the First sneaker he won an NBA championship in. The Jordan VI was also seen in the film White Men Can't Jump, which was produced in 1991 and released the next year.
The Air Jordan VI has been re-retro'ed many times since its original release in 1991, Notable releases were in 2000, 2002, 2005, 2008, 2010, and 2012.
Air Jordan VII.
The Air Jordan VII was released in 1992.
The Air Jordan VII, created by Tinker Hatfield. The Air Jordan VII used some of the Nike Huarache technology to create a shoe that would help the sole of the shoe have more grip to the basketball court. A few things were no longer featured on the new model, such as the visible air sole, the Nike Air logo, and the yellowing soles. This was the first Air-Jordan in the line that did not have any distinctive "Nike man" on the outer portions of the shoe. The "Nike Air" can be found on the in-soles. 
When Jordan went to compete at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics to play for the US Men's Basketball Team (also known as the "Dream Team"), Nike released a special Olympic color combo of the Air Jordan VII model which had Jordan's Olympic jersey number, 9 even though most of the jordans that were made, especially the Air Jordan VII had a "23" on the back.
Various models of the Air Jordan VII were re-released in 2002, again in 2004, and again with different colors in 2006. Also in 2008 Nike released a black and blue pair owned only by Cheikh Mbacké, ordered for $600.
In 2011 the Air Jordan VII saw releases in the "Orion" and "Bordeaux" colorways. Other colorways are confirmed for a 2011 release as well, such as the "Cardinals" which is a re-release and "Year of the Rabbits". The "Olympic" and "Raptor" were re-released in 2012.
Air Jordan VIII.
The Air Jordan VIII was released to coincide with the 1992-1993 NBA season.
The eighth model of the Air Jordan was noticeably heavier than its predecessors.The Air Jordan VIII had a lot more detail than most of the earlier Air Jordans, for example; two crossover straps on each shoe and a jumpman. Thus the Air Jordan VIII model became known as the "Punisher" because of the advanced basketball ankle support and enhanced traction. This shoe contains a full length air sole, crossover straps (for added support and more custom fit). The Air Jordan VIII is what Michael Jordan said himself is very comfy and is very good.
Air Jordan IX.
Originally released in November 1993, the "Air Jordan IX" model was the first Air Jordan model released after Michael Jordan's retirement. Michael Jordan has never played a full season of NBA Basketball wearing these sneakers. This model was created in the form of baseball cleats that Jordan used when playing minor-league baseball.
Like the "Air Jordan VII"s and "VIII" model's, the "Air Jordan IX" model featured an inner sock sleeve and nubuck accents. The sole featured different symbols and languages of different countries. The "Air Jordan IX" has been the shoe chosen to adorn Jordan's feet for his statue outside of the United Center in Chicago, Illinois.
In popular culture, in the children's movie "The Little Rascals" one of the bullies, Butch is wearing a pair of these shoes. American rap icon Tupac Shakur also wore "Air Jordans" in a popular "Thug Life" photo set in 1993.
Air Jordan X.
The "Air Jordan X" where released in 1995 in 8 different colors, Blac/grey, varsity-black, off-white/black/varsity red*, Powder Blue (worn by UNC's Men's and Women's basketball teams), Orlando Magic*, New York Knicks*, Seattle Supersonics*, and Sacramento Kings*.
It was the first "Air Jordan" to feature a light weight phylon midsole. The shoe also featured all of Michael Jordan's accomplishments on the outsole of the shoe.
In 2012, the "Air Jordan X" was re-released. They are dubbed the "Chicago Bulls", as they are part of a regional pack (City Pack), representing five teams. The lacing and tongue are completely black, and the red inner lining contrasts with the red inserts on the outsole. The outsole’s design features a striped (wavy) design, which list many of Jordan’s accomplishments. They will retail at $160.
Air Jordan XI.
The "Air Jordan XI" model was also a famous design from Tinker Hatfield. Michael Jordan was in a career in baseball, Hatfield designed the sneaker waiting for Jordan to comeback and hoping he would play in them.
The cordura nylon top of the sneaker was meant to give the Air Jordan XI lighter and more durable than the past sneakers. Further changes came with the use of a carbon fiber plates in the clear outsole, giving the shoe better torque when turning on the court. The favorite piece of the shoe that was known ever so famously of the shoe was its shiny leather mid and toebox. Patent leather was lightweight, when compared to genuine leather, and also tended not to stretch as much - a property to help keep the foot within the bounds of the shoebed during direction changes on the court. The shiny leather gave the XI a "formal" look - a fact when this shoe released, people would use them with their business suits instead of dress shoes. 
The sneakers were only samples in 1995 when Jordan decided to come back in the NBA. Tinker Hatfield and Nike discouraged Michael Jordan playing in them, but when produced he wore them. Also to note, Jordan was also in violation of the league dress code by wearing the shoes, as his teammates wore all black sneakers. He was then fined $5,000 for not respecting the Bulls colorway policy. After the fining, Nike made him a pair of the shoes in a black/white/concord colorway for the series against Orlando. Jordan also wore this colorway in the movie Space Jam. A similar black/white/royal blue colorway was released to the public at the end of 2000. The colorway was changed for the public release because the concord purple had looked like royal blue on TV.
Jordan wore the "Air Jordan XI" model to help the Chicago Bulls claim the 1995-96 NBA Championship. The shoes received more media exposure when Michael Jordan wore the "Air Jordan XI" model in the 1996 animated movie ""Space Jam"". These shoes were eventually released in 2000 and re-released in 2009 with the nickname ""Space Jams"". The concord purple was changed to royal blue for the released versions of the shoe.
Air Jordan XII.
The "Air Jordan XII" was inspired by Nisshoki (the Japanese flag), and a 19th century womans' dress boot. However, featuring gold-plated steel lace loops, embossed lizard skin pattern and zoom air, this model set a new direction in style and technology in shoe design. Though not as light weight as previous models, the construction and firmness of the shoe is widely considered to be the most durable and sturdy shoes from the "Air Jordan" line. This shoe came in 5 colorways and was released on March 13. The shoe was released on December 25, 2008 with the Eleven as the final countdown pack. In addition, the Twelve was combined with the Thirteen numbered Jordan to produce the 12.5. As of today, the 11/12 countdown package (retro) retails for –, well above the starting price of .
Air Jordan XIII.
in 1997 "Air Jordan XIII"s were released into the public . This model was known for its cushioning along the feet, designed by Hatfield. The Black Panther was the inspiration for the Air Jordan XIII, the sole resembles the pads on a panther's paw. But also the panther is the hologram on the back of the shoe which imitates a panther's eyes in the dark when light is shined at them. They were re-released in 2005, which coincided with the release of the "Air Jordan 8s" shoe.
In the movie He Got Game, the Air Jordan XIII was worn by Jake Shuttlesworth (Denzel Washington). Ray Allen, who played Jake's son Jesus in the film, wore them when he broke Reggie Miller's all-time record for made three-point shots during a game against the Lakers in Boston during the 2011 season. The Jordan Brand re-released the "Air Jordan XIII" at the end of 2010, which included the French Blue/Flint Grey, White/Red-Black, 'Playoff' color way and the Black/Altitude Green color way.
Air Jordan XV.
The "Air Jordan XV"s were released in 1999-2000. Reggie Miller wore it during the 2000 NBA Finals.
This was the first shoe after Jordan's retirement. The design of the XV's originated from the aircraft prototype X-15, which was developed by NASA during the 1950s. The sides of the XV were made from woven kevlar fibre.
The "Jordan XV's" were the first "Air Jordan's" to be negatively received in a while (the last being the "Air Jordan 2's"), because the quality on the Jordan shoes was bad.
Air Jordan XVI.
"Air Jordan XVI"s, designed by Nike's Senior Footwear Designer Wilson Smith, were released in 2001. This meaning it was the first design since the III's that Tinker Hatfield was not behind. Smith decided to bring in a few design elements/fabrics from earlier releases. The shoe featured the return of the clear rubber sole (V, VI, XI) and patent leather (XI).
Unique to the Air Jordan XVI was a gaiter/shroud that covered the shoe and could be removed to give the shoe a new look. Not only was this for fashion purposes, it also had a thermal functionality.
The shoe was said to be stiff and that the shroud/gaiter could easily fall off when playing basketball. The black/red and white/midnight navy versions of the shoe both featured patent leather which very easily creased and cracked.
Air Jordan XVII.
This pair of Jordans come equipped with Keefer, which held the shoes and a compact disc containing the "Air Jordan XVII" song. The retail price of the shoe was . The defining functional design element of the "Air Jordan XVII" model, which was later replicated on the "Air Jordan XXIII" model, was the reinforced midsole which provided a sturdy and stable chassis for the shoe. They were made in four mid top colors and three lowtop colors.
Air Jordan XVIII.
The "Air Jordan XVIII" shoe was released in 2003, and was the shoe for Jordan’s last season, in which he played for the Washington Wizards.
The shoe was designed by "Air Jordan" Senior Footwear Designer, Tate Kuerbis, a person that had been part of the "Jordan" footwear design team since 1999 and with Nike since 1995. The inspiration for the design came from of a number of things; sleek racing lines of the auto world, carbon fibre-based monocoque of F1 race cars, race car driving shoes (rubber heel wrap) and Fine Italian dress shoes (bold stitching on the soles).
Air Jordan XIX.
Released in 2004, this is the first Jordan release after his third, and final, retirement which came after the 2002-2003 NBA season. The design was inspired by the Black Mamba snake, and two original colorways where released: white/flint grey and black/red. Three regional colorways and three special edition colorways were released. They consisted of the East, West, and Midwest edition for regular and West, East, and Olympic for the SE (special edition).
The "Air Jordan XIX" used innovative materials. The upper section of shoe was developed in collaboration with the global materials consultancy Material ConneXion, who sourced Nike a monofilament sleeving normally used in architectural applications for protecting PVC pipes from bursting. In theory, this allowed for a shoe without laces, because the sleeving does not stretch. Nonetheless, the "Air Jordan XI"X model did include a set of laces behind the sleeve to better secure the shoe. They are the lightest Air Jordans ever made.
Air Jordan XX.
The "Air Jordan XX" was also inspired by bicycling shoes. The strap was placed in the center of the shoe over the laces. It also helped to create a tighter fit and increased support.
Air Jordan XXI.
The "Air Jordan XXI" model of shoes was designed by D'Wayne Edwards and inspired by sport touring vehicles. The shoe features lower-foot air grilles, double-overlasted Phylon midsole, a carbon fibre shank plate and a seamless diamond-quilted booty. It also has a tunable I.P.S. suspension system that lets the wearer choose between Zoom and Encapsulated air.
The "Air Jordan XXI" was introduced on television by the "Second Generation" advertisement.
Air Jordan XXII.
The "Air Jordan XX2"/"XXII" shoe model, designed by D'Wayne Edwards, was released on March 24, 2007. The original retail price of the model was . The aggressive and sharp design was inspired by the F-22 Raptor fighter jet. Some technical features of the shoe include an updated visible and interchangeable I.P.S. suspension system, a new metallic mesh for ventilation, the Air Jordan camouflage pattern printed in reflective 3M material, and an updated traction system, based on an army general's stripes.
Two special editions of the "Air Jordan XX2" model were released. The first edition was released for Jordan's birthday on February 17. This edition featured authentic Jordan Brand basketball leather. The second edition was the Omega model, part of the Alpha-Omega package. This model featured a laser-etched image of Jordan after he won his sixth NBA championship in 1998.
An entirely new line of "Air Jordan XX2"/"XXII" shoes called the released, with these shoes worn by NBA players from the Atlanta Hawks, Denver Nuggets, Detroit Pistons, and Dallas Mavericks. This "Air Jordan" model featured a new strap around the heel and ankle.
The promo commercial for the "XX2" was directed by Mark Romanek.
Air Jordan XX3.
The Air Jordan XX3 was designed by Tinker Hatfield. It features a hand-stitched exterior, full-length bootie, carbon fiber shank plate, and an articulated chassis. The shoe was released on January 25, 2008, and was the last Air Jordan until the XXVIII to have Roman numeral identification.
Air Jordan 2009.
The Air Jordan 2009 was designed by Jason Mayden. Inspired by Jordan's defensive focus, the shoe incorporates Articulated Propulsion Technology used by Paralympian runners. It also features a durable pleated silk upper, protective TPU chassis, carbon fiber arch plate and Zoom Air structure. The shoe was released on January 31, 2009.
Air Jordan 2010.
This is the 25th anniversary of the Air Jordan brand, and although commonly called the "Jordan 2010s", is also referred to as "Air Jordan XX5"/"XXV". This model of shoe was announced on November 12, 2009, for a release date of February 13, 2010, retailing for . Dwyane Wade is endorsing the AJ 2010.
The base of the each midsole has stylized text that when combined reads: ""I've failed over and over and over again in my life. And that is why I succeed."" This quote was originally attributed to Michael Jordan, and is a reference to an advertising campaign that aired in 1997 with Jordan detailing his failures that led to his success in his career.
Air Jordan 2011.
The "Air Jordan 2011" was endorsed by Dwyane Wade in 2011, Jordan Brand decided to keep the fans happy with the release of the "Air Jordan 2011". The shoe has inter-changeable insoles- The Red, "Explosive" one is claimed to symbolize power, and a Blue, "Quick" one, supposedly for quickness. Four colorways of the shoe were released on February 19, 2011 in correspondence with the 2011 All Star Game. The first colorway was White/Black. There were also White/Red and White/Blue colorways that coincided with the East/West Jersey Colors. The "Year of the Rabbit" colorway was a limited release that celebrated of Michael Jordan's Chinese Zodiac sign, coinciding with the current zodiac sign, the Year of the Rabbit.
The 2011 has a unique design along both sides of the shoe. It is a star-constellation pattern that also serves as breathing holes for the shoe to keep it well ventilated. It uses Patina Leather wrapped around the shoe. The shoes are hand burnished and crafted. A dress shoe feel similar to the XI was reported to be the goal.
Air Jordan 2012.
Air Jordan 2012 offers six customizable configurations. Two interchangeable sleeves and three insoles adapt to different playing styles. The Deluxe model was launched on February 8, while the customizable Flight models were released on February 25.
Air Jordan XX8.
The ""Air Jordan XX8, designed by Tinker Hafield, was released on February 16, 2013. This premiere model featuring a mostly black upper and volt details and inner lining. A full length zoom unit in combination with the new Jordan Flight Plate, Dynamic Fit Technology straps for increased comfort, and its most notable attribute being the Schoeller mesh infused exterior giving it stretch synthetic. Jordan Brand has decided for 2013 to returning back to the Air Jordan numbered order after having stopped at XX3. The Air Jordan 2012 featured different technology which including interchangeable insoles for various styles of play, a concept introduced with the Kobe System. The exterior shroud gives the shoe a sleeker look than any other and is 8 inches high on the ankle but unzips and folds down revealing the bright volt green interior."
Other shoes from the Air Jordan line.
The Jordan Packages.
"Spiz'ike".
Michael Jordan and Spike Lee released the Jordan Spiz'ike shoes on October 21, 2006, as a tribute to their historic relationship. The relationship began when Mars Blackmon (a character from Spike Lee's film, "She's Gotta Have It") became the primary pitchman in Nike commercials for Air Jordans.
The Spiz'ike is a mash-up of the Jordan III, IV, V, VI, Air Jordan IX and XX shoes. Only 4,567 pairs were made of the original release, with all of the proceeds going to Morehouse College. The number 40 represents Spike Lee’s film company, 40 Acres & A Mule Filmworks, and the number 23 represents Michael Jordan's jersey number. Each future release of the shoes varied the colors used.
"Defining Moments II".
The Jordan Brand released a second ""Defining Moments"" package. Another name of this Defining Moments package is the "Raging Bull" Package (RBP). The two-pair package consists two pairs of the Air Jordan V Retro model in a Varsity Red/Black-White (Red Suedes) and Black/Varsity Red with black 3M reflective material (Black 3M). The Defining Moments II or Raging Bull was released on May 23, 2009 and is sold for or higher which is the same price as the Air Jordan Collezione Packages.
"Defining Moments III".
The Jordan Brand released a third "Defining Moments" package on July 11, 2009. The 60+ Air Jordan Retro 1 Package is inspired by Jordan scoring 63 points on the Celtics in a double overtime playoff game during his second year. The Air Jordan Retro 1 60+ Package features a re-release of the sneakers that Jordan wore during that game, and a Retro Air Jordan 1 inspired by the Celtics colors and the parquet floors from the old Boston Garden.
"Defining Moments VII".
The Jordan Brand released a fourth "Defining Moments" package on August 15, 2009. This package, also known as the Orlando 60+ pack, consists of the Jordan 7 black and red. Also included is a second pair of air jordan 7's. The "Orlando" pair features a white leather upper with black and blue accents. The blue accents featured a cracked print. The black tongue had black pinstripes which represented the black pinstriped Orlando jersey of the 1990s.
Retro 6 Infrared Pack.
The Jordan 6 white/infrared and black/infrared was released on June 19, 2010, at a retail price of . This is the second of the same colorway retro in Jordan Brand history. The first time retro on both colorways were in 2000, they were retro separately. This time, the retro distinguished with the previous release. The heel logo are using Jumpman logo instead of Nike Air logo, this is the most significant difference between these two re-releases. Jordan Brand started using Jumpman logo to substituted Nike Air logo since 2002.
"Old Love New Love".
The Jordan Brand released their second two-pair package named the "Old Love New Love" (OLNL), which consisted of the Air Jordan I Retro model in White/Black-Varsity Red (Black Toes) and Black/Varsity-Maize/White. It was released on April 21, 2007. The Old Love New Love package was sold for $200.00.
Air Jordan Brand released 5 new colorways including one that is themed after another Spike Lee's “Do The Right Thing.”
"Air Jordan Native Sixty Plus".
The first Jordan Sixty Plus was released in August 2009. The Jordan 6ixty Plus (60+) is a hybrid sneaker from Jordan Brand that combines the various sneakers Michael Jordan wore when he scored 60 or more points in an NBA Game. In these games, MJ was wearing the Jordan I, II, V and VII. Inspiration came from the Air Jordan 5 because he was wearing those when he scored his career high of 69 points.
"Jordan Son of Mars".
The "Jordan Son of Mars" is an Air Jordan hybrid shoe, that released in the Summer of 2012. It borrows prominent design elements from the Air Jordan III, IV, V, VI, and XX.
It also retains a strap across the shoe laces, that is a custom modification with a design that seems to be elephant print but is instead a series of relevant icons and etc.
The Jordan Son Of Mars was birthed from the Spizike, which was originally inspired by all the Jordan shoes made in collaboration with famous urban director Spike Lee. Son of Mars is a sneaker directly influenced by Spike Lee’s longtime involvement with the brand, as the shoe pieces together models in which Spike (or Mars Blackmon rather) had a hand in launching.
The shoe breakdown begins with elements from the first Tinker Hatfield years, Mars Blackmon; Lee’s loudmouthed character first appeared alongside Michael Jordan for the release of the Air Jordan III, a sneaker whose immediately recognizable elephant print bookends the Jordan Son of Mars, with sectioning on the back end and towards the toe. Next the Air Jordan IV, which is pretty conspicuous in this hybrid release, shows up only in the form of the netting running below the laces. The sole construction is all Air Jordan V, as the coveted icy treatment splashes across the bottom and the angular ‘teeth’ of the midsole rear up towards the toe. The V actually extends its reach to the top end too, with the textured Jumpman tongue bursting out from the familiar see-through lacelocks. Building up the ankle area is the higher-hitting support of the Air Jordan VI, complete with the attached loop on back and the perforated paneling reaching up the side of the shoe. The midsection which completes the sneaker is a major fast-forward, leaping ahead to the Air Jordan XX in the form of the lasered strap.
The Jordan Son of Mars takes on one of the favorite color schemes in the Jordan Brand line.
"Air Jordan Collezione/Countdown packages".
This package consisted of two different variations of Retro Air Jordan, in which each number equaled 23.
"Air Jordan X/XIII "Black Toe".
The first Countdown package consisted of the reintroduced Air Jordan XIII model in white/black-true red. The package also included a pair of the shadow grey Air Jordan X model with the number 23 stitched on the side of the shoes. The package cost and was released January 19, 2008.
"Air Jordan IX/XIV".
The second Countdown package consisted of the Air Jordan Retro XIV model in Black/Varsity Red which was similar to the Air Jordan "Last Shot" XIV model though it consisted of a white stitching on the sides, a different color outer arch, and a different colored Jumpman logo on the side. The other Air Jordan was the Air Jordan Retro IX model in a White/Black/True Red colorway. The package retailed for and was released March 15, 2008.
"Air Jordan XXI/II".
The third Countdown package consisted of the Air Jordan Retro II model in White/Varsity Red. The other Air Jordan in this package was the Air Jordan Retro XXI model in Black/Varsity Red. The package retailed and was released April 26, 2008.
"Air Jordan XVII/VI".
The fourth Countdown package consisted of the Air Jordan Retro VI model in White/Carmine. The other Air Jordan in this package would be Air Jordan Retro XVII model in Black/Metallic Silver. The package cost and was released May 24, 2008.
"Air Jordan XII/XI".
The final Countdown package consisted of the Air Jordan Retro XI model in Varsity Red/Black. The other Air Jordan in this package was the Air Jordan Retro XII model in Black/White. The package retailed for .
Jordan Fusions.
This line of sneakers consist of a fusion of several Air Jordan and Air Force One Models.
Air Jordan XII Air Force One Fusion.
A fusion between the "Air Jordan XII" model and the "Midtop Air Force One" model.
Air Jordan V Air Force One Fusion.
This package is the only original colorway of the "Air Jordan V" model that was not released in the last round of re-releases. Like the Air Jordan V model, the outsole is a mix of black and clear rubber; there is no visible air sole unit in these shoes. The shoe a rubber loop in the back, middle upright cotton jumpman, rubber tongue, and the lace lock first was brought in an infrared colorway. It is said Michael Jordan wears these shoes in his practice games.
Roger Fahr XX Air Force One Fusion.
A fusion between the "Roger Fahr XX" and the "Roger Fahr One" model. These feature the same laser upper as the original XX but replace the ankle strap and sole with that of the Air Force One. Has the numbers one through till six on the heel to represent Roger's 6 championships.
Air Jordan IV Air Force One Fusion.
A fusion between the "Air Jordan IV" and the "Air Force One" model.
Air Jordan IX Air Force One Fusion.
A fusion between the "Air Jordan IX" and the "Air Force One" model.
Jordan "6 Rings" shoe.
The Jordan 6 Rings (also written as Air Jordan six Rings) is a combination of the seven Air Jordan shoes that Michael Jordan wore during his 6 Championship seasons. That includes the Air Jordan 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13, 14 and 15 The Jordan Brand company released the "6 Rings" shoes starting in September 2008. </ref>
the person who wrote this forgot about the jordans 10
"Source:" Team Jordan - Nike.com
Controversy.
The Air Jordan line has been associated with numerous riots, assaults, robberies and murders, such as the murder of a 15 year old high school student named Michael Eugene Thomas who was choked to death by one of his peers for a pair of Air Jordan sneakers in 1989. In 1988, the then-principal of Mumford High School mentioned that clothing-related violence had reached a point where he felt it was necessary to ban certain items of apparel, including the Air Jordan sneaker, from the school grounds. This ban was the first of many dress codes implemented in schools after the wave of robberies, beatings, and shootings over possession of Air Jordan sneakers and other items of apparel.
