Magic Mike is a 2012 comedy-drama film directed by Steven Soderbergh, and starring Channing Tatum, Alex Pettyfer, Matt Bomer, Joe Manganiello and Matthew McConaughey. The plot revolves around Adam, a nineteen-year-old who enters the world of male stripping, guided by Mike Lane, who has been in the business for six years. 
The film is loosely based on the experiences of Tatum, who was an eighteen-year-old stripper in Tampa, Florida. "Magic Mike" was primarily filmed in Los Angeles and in Tampa. It premiered as the closing film for the 2012 Los Angeles Film Festival on June 24, 2012 and was widely released by Warner Bros. on June 29, 2012. The film received positive reviews upon its release and was a box-office success. 
Plot.
Mike Lane (Channing Tatum) has big plans but pays his bills through a series of odd jobs, most notably performing as the star stripper at Xquisite Strip Club. The club is owned by Dallas (Matthew McConaughey), who has dreams of creating an "empire" of strip clubs.
Mike soon meets nineteen-year-old Adam (Alex Pettyfer) who has recently been fired from his construction job. Mike takes Adam under his wing and encourages him to begin stripping at Xquisite. Mike is introduced to Adam's sister Brooke (Cody Horn). Despite his on-and-off relationship with a woman named Joanna (Olivia Munn), Mike finds himself attracted to Brooke and promises to look after Adam.
Adam falls further into the excessive lifestyle of the Xquisite dancers, using drugs and having sexual encounters with many clients. When Dallas announces he has a plan to move their act to Miami, Mike confides in Brooke that he is tiring of the lifestyle and wants to get a small business loan to pursue his dream of opening a custom furniture business. The bank declines his loan application and Mike realizes that he has to stay in the business to continue to pay his bills. Mike later attends a hurricane party at Dallas' house, where Adam becomes part of a scheme created by Tobias (Gabriel Iglesias), Xquisite's DJ, to sell drugs to Xquisite's clients, and is eventually given a package of ecstasy. Adam begins using drugs regularly, and Mike notices more of Adam's reckless behavior, to the chagrin of Brooke who is relying on Mike to protect him. 
A few days later, Mike and Adam perform for a private party at a sorority house, and Adam brings the package of drugs with him. At the party Adam gives a young woman an ecstasy pill, causing a brawl between Adam and the woman's boyfriend. Mike and Adam are forced to flee the scene. Later, at Xquisite, Dallas is infuriated to learn Mike didn't collect payment for the private show before the fight occurred. Also, Tobias becomes dismayed when he discovers that Adam had left the package of drugs, worth $10,000 in all, at the sorority.
After that night's show at the club is finished, Mike and Adam take drugs and go to a club. Adam winds up vomiting and passing out, with Brooke finding him on the floor the next morning. Brooke angrily confronts Mike and accuses him of failing to protect her brother (as he had promised) and ends her friendship with him. Later on, Tobias' suppliers break into Mike's house looking for Adam. Realizing Adam lied to him about the drugs' worth, Mike gives them $10,000 (most of his life savings) to pay Adam's debt, unbeknownst to Brooke.
Later, during the dancers' final performance at Xquisite, Mike decides he's had enough, knowing that Dallas has no loyalty to any of them and is driven by greed. Pretending he needs to use the restroom, he leaves through the club's exit and drives away to end up at Brooke's apartment, where he tells her he is through with stripping. 
After realizing Magic Mike isn't coming back, Dallas invites Adam to replace Mike as the frontman of the dancers. Brooke then tells Mike that after he left her apartment earlier, Adam called her to tell her that Mike had paid off the drug dealers for him. They forgive each other, admit their mutual attraction, and decide to begin their relationship anew.
Production.
Development.
"Magic Mike" is directed by Steven Soderbergh based on a screenplay by Reid Carolin, who is also one of the film's producers. The screenplay is in part inspired by Channing Tatum's experiences as a stripper in Tampa, Florida, when he was 18 years old. Tatum told that he wanted to capture the atmosphere and energy of his past as a stripper, but that the film is fictional, which allowed them to create their own scenarios. The project, announced in April 2011 was co-financed by Soderbergh and Tatum. In 2010, Tatum told an Australian newspaper that he would like to make a movie about his experiences as a stripper, saying, "I've already got the director picked out. I'd like Nicolas Refn, who did the film "Bronson", to do it because he's insane for it." Refn initially agreed on doing the film because Tatum and he were going to do another movie together. However, since that project did not get off the ground and due to his busy schedule, Tatum who was then working with Soderbergh on "Haywire" brought him the idea. After Soderbergh cast Tatum and Pettyfer in the lead roles, Carolin spent time revising the screenplay. He wrote the first draft in a month. Soderbergh suggested showing two points of view in the film: seeing through the eyes of young Adam and of his mentor Mike. 
The dance numbers were choreographed by Alison Faulk, while Christopher Peterson was in charge of the costumes design and Frankie Pine supervised the music. Over the film, several dance numbers were performed. Music producer Jack Rayner created a special dubstep version of the song "It's Raining Men" sung by Countré Black for the dance sequence that features the ensemble for the first time together without The Kid. For that sequence, Peterson chose to use spray glitter on the umbrellas and raincoats to give them a wet effect. The Kid's first strip did not purposely have any choreography and it was Pettyfer's idea to show his bottom. Before doing his moves, Pettyfer did not know the song that was going to be played which ended up being Madonna's "Like a Virgin". The five-stripper group performed the song "Sound Off (The Duckworth Chant)" with lyric changes on the military-themed number. The scene during which Mike and Adam arrive at a sorority house dressed as cops was not in the original script but was Peterson's idea. Music supervisor Pine initially planned to use Kid Rock's "Cowboy" for the cowboy-themed number featuring The Kid. When it was not possible, she chose Big & Rich's "Save a Horse (Ride a Cowboy)" instead. Knowing Tatum's dance skills, Faulk gave him the permission to freestyle for Mike's last solo dance on the dubstep song "Calypso" by Excision and Datsik. McConaughey who had no stripping scene in the original script requested to have one which became the last dance number during which he first sings "Ladies of Tampa" and then strips. The song was written in three hours by music supervisor Frankie Pine, Matthew McConaughey and Martin Blasick, McConaughey's guitar coach. The thongs were made by company Pistol Pete.
Casting and filming.
The cast visited a strip club to see what this world was like and the dance routines and to get information on the backstage life. To prepare for the role, McConaughey went in a Los Angeles strip mall to get used to regular waxing. Matt Bomer had to put on about 15 pounds for his part. Adam Rodriguez went through a cardio and weights training. Principal photography commenced in Playa del Rey, Los Angeles in September 2011 and concluded in Tampa, Florida by late October. The scenes that took place in the fictional club Xquisite were filmed in Studio City, Los Angeles. Locations in Florida included the Fort Desoto Bridge, the Dunedin coast, the Gulf of Mexico, Tampa Bay, Ybor City, St. Petersburg, Tarpon Springs, and Tierra Verde. Soderbergh chose to shoot the entirety of the film with double straw camera filter, except the interior of the club.
Music.
The soundtrack was released on June 28, 2012, through WaterTower Music. Other songs featured in the film include Cobra Starship's "#1Nite", Sean Paul's "Got 2 Luv U", and Ginuwine's "Pony". 
Release.
Warner Bros. Pictures acquired US distribution rights to the independently produced film on October 27, 2011. "Magic Mike" was first screened at the Los Angeles Film Festival as the closing film on June 24, 2012 and was widely released on June 29, 2012 in the United States.
Marketing.
The first full-length trailer for "Magic Mike" was released on iTunes on , 2012 with a poster indicating the film's name. The first poster featuring the cast was released on June 1, 2012 along with a new trailer. A second poster followed on June 4, 2012 and a fourth trailer was released on June 13, 2012. To promote the film, Channing Tatum, Matthew McConaughey, Joe Manganiello, and Matt Bomer participated in a photo shoot for "Entertainment Weekly" that came out in the May 25, 2012 issue. Tatum, McConaughey, and Manganiello attended the MTV Movie Awards where they presented the award for the best on-screen transformation. During the presentation, Manganiello arrived dressed as a fireman stripper. 
The promotional campaign, which originally centered on women, also targeted the gay community after it had been made clear that there was a strong interest among them. Warner Bros. enlisted entertainment marketing agency the Kartel Group to market the film to gay men. Website AfterElton.com noted that gay men could not connect with the first trailer as the film "was marketed as a romantic comedy" through Tatum and Horn's relationship, but that it changed when the camapaign also focused on "the male form part of it film" through a red-band trailer (the fourth one). In June 2012, a "Magic Mike" float was included in the West Hollywood gay pride parade and in other gay pride events such as in New York and in San Francisco.
Box office.
"Magic Mike" proved to be a box office hit, grossing $113,721,571 and $45,183,670 outside North America with a total gross of $158,905,241 worldwide from a modest $7 million budget; it is the highest top-grossing movie under the Dance genre. On its opening day (June 29, 2012), the film performed better than expected, earning about $19 million including a $2 million midnight run. It finished the weekend at the second spot behind "Ted" with a total of $39,127,170. It was the first time two R-rated films grossed more than $21 million each during a weekend. CinemaScore reported that audiences gave a "B" average grade.
On its opening weekend, "Magic Mike" attracted an audience of 73% females, including 43% of women over the age of 35. Dan Fellman, Warner Bros. Pictures President of Domestic Distribution, said this phenomenon could be compared to "Sex and the City", which had also appealed to large groups of women.
Reception.
"Magic Mike" has received positive reviews. Based on 186 reviews collected by aggregate site Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a 80% approval rating, with an average score of 6.9/10. Among the site's notable critics, 92% gave the film a positive write-up, based on a sample of 37. The site's critical consensus is, ""Magic Mike" sensitive direction, smart screenplay, and strong performances allows audiences to have their beefcake and eat it too." By comparison, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating in the 0–100 range based reviews from top mainstream critics, calculated an average score of 72, indicating "generally positive reviews", based on 38 reviews. The movie also launched Academy Award buzz for Matthew McConaughey as Dallas. He, however, was not selected for inclusion among the nominees, which was described as a "snub" by many. 
Home media.
"Magic Mike" was released on DVD and Blu-ray on October 23, 2012. 698,497 DVD units were sold within its first week, generating revenue of $10,449,515. As of December 23, 2012, DVD sales totaled over 1.9 million units with $26,362,047 in revenue.
Sequel.
In a Twitter Q&A in July 2012, Tatum confirmed work on a sequel. The actor responded: "Yes, yes and yes! We're working on the concept now. We want to flip the script and make it bigger." No word on whether Soderbergh would return to direct the second film although Tatum and writer Reid Carolin have been in talks to co-direct the sequel, which has been planned as a road movie.
