Elimination Chamber (called No Way Out from 2010-12, and No Escape starting in 2013, all in Germany) is a professional wrestling pay-per-view event, produced every February by WWE, a professional wrestling promotion based in Connecticut. The event was created in 2010, with its inaugural event taking place on February 21, 2010, replacing No Way Out. Elimination Chamber is a pay-per-view (PPV) event consisting of a main event and undercard that features championship matches and other various matches. The concept of the show is that the two main event matches (usually one from the Raw brand and one from the SmackDown brand) are contested inside the Elimination Chamber; one of these matches typically features the WWE Championship being defended, while the other is usually contested for the World Heavyweight Championship The first Elimination Chamber event took place on February 21, 2010 and aired live on PPV. The event's name was selected after WWE allowed fans to provide input via a survey on their official website and was chosen over Heavy Metal, Battle Chamber, Chamber of Conflict, and the original No Way Out name. Since its origin, each event has been held in an indoor arena, with all three taking place in the United States.
Because of German rules regarding Nazi imagery, and the name "Elimination Chamber" having a reference similar to concentration camps, the pay-per-view has carried a different name in Germany.
Concept.
The Elimination Chamber match is contested by six participants, with two beginning the bout in the ring, while the other four are held within each inner chamber. Every five minutes, one of the four participants within a chamber is released into the ongoing match. This continues until all four have been released, and so an Elimination Chamber match typically lasts over twenty minutes. The objective of the match is to eliminate each opponent from the match by executing a pinfall or a submission, which can occur in the ring or on the chamber's elevated floor (starting in the 2012 event, however, all pinfalls and submissions must take place in the ring). Disqualifications do not apply in the process of elimination. The winner of the match is the last remaining participant after all others have been eliminated.
