David is a 2013 Indian Hindi action-thriller film directed by Bejoy Nambiar, starring Vikram, Neil Nitin Mukesh and Vinay Virmani in the titular roles, alongside Tabu, Lara Dutta, Monica Dogra and Isha Sharvani. An altered version with the same title "David" featuring a slightly different cast was simultaneously shot in Tamil. The plot revolves around the lives of three different men named David, who are about to take a step which is going to change their lives forever. 
Production.
Development.
Bejoy Nambiar announced in December 2011 that he would make a Hindi film titled "David", a gangster-comedy, and signed on Vikram to play a protagonist in the film. The pair had previously worked together in Mani Ratnam's "Raavan" and "Raavanan", in which Nambiar had been an assistant director. It was revealed that the film would simultaneously show tracks of three people named David: Vikram’s story takes place in Goa, while the two other stories happen in Mumbai and London and that they occur at different periods. Three cinematographer, R. Rathnavelu, P. S. Vinod and Sanu Varghese were recruited to shoot the respective segments. Sanjeev Lamba of Reliance, the film's producer, noted that the film had undergone changes and would be made a bilingual in Hindi and Tamil, with a third dubbed version in Telugu. Reports during the time also hinted that Shahrukh Khan would be roped in for a character but this proved to be untrue.
Vivek Oberoi was also roped into play a titular character in the film. However Oberoi opted out of the project after finding out that the film would be a bilingual, and the team considered Farhan Akhtar before replacing him with Neil Nitin Mukesh. Neil Nitin Mukesh was asked to sport a complete retro-gangster look, and grow a hefty moustache for his role in the film. Neil's portions in the film would be shot in London. Canadian-Indian actor Vinay Virmani would play the third character called David in the film. In January 2012, the producers signed Tabu and Isha Sharvani to play lead female roles in the film, with reports that Isha would be paired opposite Vikram.
Filming.
Scenes involving Vikram were filmed first out of the three segments and were canned in locations which were meant to show a Goan backdrop. The team thus shot scenes featuring Vikram and Isha Sharvani in Alleppey, Kerala in late February 2012, before moving to Kuttanad. Mangalore beach was designed to replicate the beaches of Goa and a song featuring Remo Fernandes was also shot in February. Ratnavelu revealed that scenes were also canned in Kapu, Karnataka disguising Goa and that Vikram finished his portions for the film by March 2012. Nishan, a Mumbai-based actor who had appeared in Malayalam language films, was also selected to play a role in the segment, while actress Rubi Chakravarti was also roped in to play Vikram's mother in the film after Bejoy Nambiar approached for a role written with her in mind. Prahlad Kakkar, a noted ad-maker, was convinced by Nambiar to make his debut in film by appearing in the role of a priest and consequently shot his scenes in Mangalore.
The scenes of the character playing a musician Vinay Virmani, was the second segment to be shot with Sejal Shah roped in as cinematographer. Lara Dutta plays an extended cameo role in both versions as a mother, whose child is tutored by Virmani character. Sheetal Menon, who appeared in "Shaitan" was also roped into play a pivotal role in Vinay Virmani's sequences. Singer Shweta Pandit also shot for the film in both languages making her debut as a musician, while Nassar was roped in to appear in the both version of the film. Manish Jha, director of the 2003 film "Matrubhoomi", was signed on to act in another pivotal role in the third segment with Nambiar noting "he was physically perfect for the part". Actor-director Satish Kaushik also shot for this portion of the film, portraying one of David's neighbours.
Nambiar noted that Neil Nitin Mukesh's scenes were the most problematic to shoot as a result of the actor's involvement in his other film "3G" being shot in Fiji and thus dates were difficult to accommodate Shilpi Shukla did great in the movie to. Akarsh Khurana, a theatre actor, who also helped write portions in the film, was also selected to play a major role and shot for scenes in Neil's portion. Monica Dogra was chosen to portray the female lead in this segment, being paired opposite Neil Nitin Mukesh. Anupama Kumar, who was previously seen in "Ishqiya", was one of the few South actors to be roped in to act in the Hindi version; she would play a Pakistani woman of the 1970s which she termed as "very different and exciting". The scenes involving Neil's character would start in Canada and finish in Ooty and completed by the end of 2012. A five day shooting was held at the City Hall of Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK in September 2012. The film was enticed to Northern Ireland on the back of a trip to India earlier this year by Enterprise Minister Arlene Foster. In a collaborative effort between Invest Northern Ireland and Northern Ireland Screen, Indian Production company Getaway Films has received £30,000 funding through the Northern Ireland Screen Fund supported by Invest NI and part funded by the European Regional Development Fund. The film was widely supported by the Northern Ireland Screen Initiative. Quoting Richard Williams, CEO, Northern Ireland Screen: “We are delighted to welcome the cast and crew of DAVID toNorthern Ireland. This might be a first for us but we hope not the last. India has a rich history of film-making and Indian cinema is a recognized global industry. In pursuit of our mission to develop the screen industry in Northern Ireland, it makes sense to look east, as well as west, in terms of inward investing films." 
In response to that Bejoy Nambiar, Director and Producer, DAVID: “Belfast has been a treasure chest of beautiful locations, fabulous people and a very supportive local government. Minister Foster and the Invest NI's India office have been amazing in their effort to introduce us to Belfast and to coax us to explore Northern Ireland as a filming location for Indian Films. And since we have been here, NI Screen and the Belfast Council have extended their sincere warmth and support, so much so that we don't feel like this is our the first time here. I am surprised that Indian films haven't been here before and am very thrilled that we are the first Indian production here. This is just the beginning. We are looking forward to being back here next spring." 
Marketing.
Bejoy Nambiar planned an innovative strategy to release the first look of the film on sites such as Twitter and YouTube. The trailer of both versions were received very positively all over.
Music.
The soundtrack of "David" consists of 15 tracks composed by eight various artists, including Prashant Pillai and Mikey McCleary, who had worked on Nambiar's "Shaitan (film)", too, and independent bands Bramfatura, Maatibaani and Modern Mafia. Tamil film composer Anirudh Ravichander of "Why This Kolaveri Di" fame, also contributed one song, making his Bollywood debut. One of the tracks would be a new version of the famous traditional Qawwali number "Dama Dam Mast Qalandar". The album will be released on 11 January 2013.
Critical Reception.
Roma Heer & Gautam Batra of wassupbollywood.com gave 2.75/5 for David saying "Watch David for its story, performances & direction. Screenplay may tire you but still you can watch if have patience."
Sukanya Verma for Rediff.com has given 2.5/5stars and says "David" could have been shorter, snappier. Shivesh Kumar of "IndiaWeekly" awarded the movie 2 out of 5 stars.
Namta Gupta of ratemovieshere.com has rated 3/5 stars and reviewed, "Story of David can provoke you and keep you on the edge. Watching this movie once would not harm you."
Aaron of tikkview.com given 3.5/5 for David and his review says "David is not perfect it has it;'s flaws but the director Nambair, is one of those young filmmakers in bollywood, who believes in delivering something 'different' and with his second Hindi movie ‘David’, the talented director only promises to bring forth more such creative works on screen and this is the reason why you shouldn't give this film a miss."
Shresht Poddar, of Score Magazine, gave the album 4.5 out of 5 stars saying, ""I am very pleased to say that Bejoy Nambiar’s David has a great soundtrack. Actually, one of the best in recent times. It is highly experimental with great diversity & is multi-generic – just like his films. Go for it.""
Box office.
The film opened to a poor response of 5% only and collected 50–60 lakhs nett on its first day.
The 2nd showed a little growth of around 50% bringing up the 2 day total to 1.60 crores. On day 3, it collected another Rs. 1.05 crores and the total collection for the 1st weekend would be Rs 2.57 crores nett at the domestic box office.David had a average 4th day and collected 2.1 crore.
