Kiefer William Frederick Dempsey George Rufus Sutherland (born 21 December 1966) is a Canadian actor, producer and director. He is best known for his portrayal of Jack Bauer on the Fox series "24" for which he won an Emmy Award, a Golden Globe award, two Screen Actors Guild Awards, and two Satellite Awards. Since January 2012, he has starred as Martin Bohm in the Fox drama "Touch".
Early life.
Sutherland was born in London, England, the son of Donald Sutherland and Shirley Douglas, both of whom are successful Canadian actors. His ancestry includes Scottish, English, and German. His maternal grandfather was Scottish-born Canadian politician Tommy Douglas, who is widely credited for bringing universal health care to Canada.
He is named after American-born director and writer Warren Kiefer, who, under the assumed name of Lorenzo Sabatini, directed Donald Sutherland in his very first feature film, the Italian low-budget horror film "Il castello dei morti vivi" ("Castle of the Living Dead").
His family moved to Corona, California and in 1970, his parents divorced. In 1975, Sutherland moved with his mother to Toronto. He attended elementary school at Crescent Town Elementary School, St. Clair Junior High East York, and John G. Althouse Middle School in Toronto. He attended five different high schools including St. Andrew's College, Martingrove Collegiate Institute, Harbord Collegiate Institute, Silverthorn Collegiate Institute, Malvern Collegiate Institute and Annex Village Campus. He also spent a semester at Regina Mundi Catholic College in London (Ontario) and attended weekend acting lessons at Sir Frederick Banting Secondary School.
Sutherland told "Jimmy Kimmel Live!" (2009) that he and Robert Downey, Jr. were room-mates for three years when he first moved to Hollywood to pursue his career in acting.
Career.
"Stand by Me" was the first film Sutherland made in the United States. He played the neighborhood bully in this coming of age story about the search for a dead body. Sutherland has appeared in more than 70 films, most notably "", "A Few Good Men", "Flatliners", "Young Guns", "The Vanishing", "The Three Musketeers", "Eye for an Eye", "Dark City", "A Time To Kill", and "The Sentinel".
The actor is also a frequent collaborator with director Joel Schumacher, and has appeared in "The Lost Boys", "Flatliners", "Phone Booth" and the big screen adaptation of "A Time to Kill". In "The Lost Boys", Sutherland was reunited with actor Cory Feldman, who he had previously worked with on "Stand by Me".
In 2005, Sutherland was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame in Toronto, where both of his parents have also been inducted. In 2009, he was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Sutherland was the first "Inside the Actors Studio" guest to be the child of a former guest; his father, Donald, appeared on the show in 1998. Sutherland was featured on the cover of the April 2006 edition of "Rolling Stone", in an article entitled "Alone in the Dark with Kiefer Sutherland." The article began with Sutherland revealing his interest to be killed off in "24". However, he stated, "Don't get me wrong. I love what I do." It also revealed that he devoted 10 months a year working on "24".
He has starred in Japanese commercials for CalorieMate, performing a parody of his Jack Bauer character. Sutherland also provides voice-overs for the current ad campaign for the Ford Motor Company of Canada. In mid-2006, he voiced the Apple, Inc. advertisement announcing the inclusion of Intel chips in their Macintosh computer line. He also voices the introduction to NHL games on the Versus network in the U.S. He has appeared in a Brazilian TV commercials for Citroën C4 sedan and a voice-over for a commercial for Bank of America. He voices Sgt. Roebuck in Treyarch's video game "" and Lars Alexandersson in "Street Fighter X Tekken".
Sutherland is a celebrity producer of "The 1 Second Film". In 2011, he made his Broadway debut, opposite Brian Cox, Jim Gaffigan, Chris Noth and Jason Patric in the Broadway revival of "That Championship Season", which opened in March 2011. The show has since closed. Sutherland stars in the Fox television series "Touch". Sutherland plays the father of an autistic boy who does not like to be touched, while the son also communicates future humanity interrelated events to his father through numbers and mathematics.
"24".
Since 2001, Sutherland has been associated most widely with the role of Jack Bauer, on the critically acclaimed television series "24". After being nominated four times for the "Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" Primetime Emmy Award, Sutherland won the award in 2006 for his role in "24"'s fifth season. In the opening skit of the 2006 Primetime Emmy Awards, Sutherland made an appearance as his "24" character, Jack Bauer. He was also nominated for Best actor in a Drama Television Series in the 2007 Golden Globe Awards for "24". According to his 2006 contract, his salary of $40 million for three seasons of the show made him the highest-earning actor on television. Sutherland constantly emphasizes that the show is merely "entertainment." The Dean of the United States Military Academy, Brigadier General Patrick Finnegan, visited the set of "24" in February 2007 to urge the show's makers to reduce the number of torture scenes and Sutherland accepted an invitation from the U.S. military to tell West Point cadets that it is wrong to torture prisoners. In an interview with "OK!" Magazine, Howard Gordon says that it would be an "unbearable loss" if they killed off Sutherland's character.
In an interview with Charlie Rose on 12 January 2007, Sutherland made clear statements of his opposition to torture, specifically that, "...it is widely known that you can torture someone and they'll basically tell you exactly what you want to hear, whether it's true or not, if you put someone in enough pain. Torture is not a way of procuring information. The way of procuring information is in fact quite the opposite, and unfortunately that takes a lot of time." (see minute 19:00) In another interview on 20 November 2008, Rose asked Sutherland, "You'd shut down Guantanamo tomorrow, would you not?" Sutherland's reply, "Me personally? Absolutely. And unless you can charge those detainees, I'd let them go too. The Constitution makes that really clear." (see minute 18:30)
On 14 February 2010, Fox TV announced they were temporarily suspending production of Season 8 of "24" due to a ruptured cyst near one of Sutherland's kidneys. According to the report, he waited a few days before going in to have "elective surgery" performed. It was anticipated that he would return after a week, but a further few days was needed and Fox reported that his return to set would be 1 March.
On 26 March 2010, it was announced that "24" would end at the conclusion of the 8th season, paving the way for the "24" feature film to go into production. Production was anticipated to begin at the beginning of 2011.
Personal life.
Family and relationships.
Sutherland has a twin sister, Rachel Sutherland, who is a TV post-production supervisor in Toronto.
Sutherland has one daughter, Sarah Jude, born 18 February 1988, from his first marriage to Camelia Kath, the widow of Chicago guitarist/singer Terry Kath, to whom he was married from 12 September 1987—1990. Sarah graduated from the Tisch School of the Arts in spring 2012 and made her acting debut on the HBO TV series Veep. Through his marriage to Camelia, he became stepfather to Michelle Kath. His stepdaughter Michelle married in 2004 and has sons Hammish (2005) and Quinn (2010)
Julia Roberts met Sutherland in 1990, when they co-starred in "Flatliners". In August 1990, Roberts and Sutherland announced their engagement, with an elaborate studio-planned wedding scheduled for 14 June 1991. Roberts broke the engagement three days before the wedding allegedly because Sutherland had been meeting with a stripper named Amanda Rice. Sutherland denied having an affair with Rice and said that they only met because he liked to play pool. On the day of what was supposed to be their wedding date, Roberts ran off to Ireland with Sutherland's friend Jason Patric.
On 29 June 1996, Sutherland married Kelly Winn. The couple separated in 1999. He filed for divorce in 2004. The divorce was finalized on 16 May 2008.
Hobbies.
Sutherland is a guitar collector, the majority of which are Gibson Les Pauls. Recently, the Gibson Custom shop has released a guitar (signed by Sutherland), the KS-336, as part of their 'Inspired By' series. When Queen appeared on VH1 in 2006 for the Rock Honors Event, Sutherland gave Queen's introduction and announced that they are his favorite band, and that he has listened to them ever since he was a child.
Sutherland is an American football fan, particularly of USC Trojans football, and recorded a birthday message for former USC head coach Pete Carroll's 56th birthday. After losing a bet to friend Dave Andreychuk over the 2010 New England Patriots versus Baltimore Ravens playoff game, Sutherland was forced to appear on the "Late Show with David Letterman" wearing a dress. He is also a NASCAR fan. He narrated the IMAX film "NASCAR: The IMAX Experience". Additionally, his character Jack Bauer in "24" has used the name of team owner Jack Roush as an alias.
Additionally, Sutherland paints. One of his paintings served as the cover art for the twelfth edition of the "Live X" acoustic compilation series released by the American alternative rock radio station WNNX.
In the late 1990s, Sutherland, inspired by the experience in his films "Young Guns", "The Cowboy Way", and "Cowboy Up", retired from acting briefly to pursue the rodeo circuit. He purchased a ranch in Montana, and travelled on the road with the rodeo, he participated in numerous roping contests, two of which he won in Phoenix and Albuquerque.
Legal troubles.
Sutherland was arrested early on 25 September 2007, on drunk driving charges, his second time since another incident in 2004, after performing poorly on a field sobriety test. His test exceeded the state's legal blood alcohol limit, and he was later released on a $25,000 bail. Sutherland pleaded no contest to the DUI charge and was sentenced to 48 days in jail. Initially, he arranged to split his sentence and spend 18 days in jail during "24's" winter break in late December and early January 2008; the Hollywood writers' strike interrupted production, allowing him to serve his sentence in 48 consecutive days.
Sutherland surrendered to NYPD on 7 May 2009 for head-butting fashion designer Jack McCollough, founder and co-designer of Proenza Schouler, at the Mercer Hotel in SoHo following a fundraiser for the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Several weeks later, Sutherland and McCollough issued a joint statement in which Sutherland apologized; Police later dropped the charges.
Business ventures.
Sutherland is the co-owner (along with Jude Cole) of the independent record label Ironworks.
Sutherland had reportedly fallen victim to a financial scam involving cattle in 2010. The perpetrator, Michael Wayne Carr, allegedly took US $869,000 from Sutherland, ostensibly on the account of steers to be purchased, according to The AP. Prosecutors alleged that Carr never purchased the steers. Carr pleaded guilty and was ordered to pay US $956,000 in restitution to Sutherland and his investment partner.
Awards and nominations.
Ranked No. 68 on the 2006 Forbes Celebrity 100 list of the world's most powerful celebrities. His earnings were a reported $23 million.
