WrestleMania XXVIII was the twenty-eighth annual WrestleMania professional wrestling pay-per-view (PPV) event produced by WWE. It took place on April 1, 2012 at Sun Life Stadium in Miami Gardens, Florida. It is the highest grossing PPV event in professional wrestling history.
There were eight matches on the event's card. The main event on the card was a bout between Dwayne "The Rock" Johnson and John Cena, a match that, for the first time ever, was announced a year in advance. Given the tagline "Once in a Lifetime", the match was considered a bout between the two icons of their generation who were both in their prime. The match, and its year long buildup, would be broadcast on NBC and later sent to DVD and Blu-Ray, collected under the title of "The Rock vs John Cena: Once in a Lifetime". The match would later be collected in "WWE Best PPV Matches of 2012" as the "Most Anticipated WrestleMania Match of All Time".
Production.
The city of Miami Gardens was one of the two major contenders to host WrestleMania XXVII along with Atlanta, Georgia. Ultimately, in February 2010, Atlanta was awarded the right to host the event. According to the Miami-Dade Sports Commission, WWE management felt that Miami's planning for the event would have been too hectic with many other sporting events held in the area around the same time of the planning, such as Super Bowl XLIV. However, the Miami area was reportedly considered for the next event due to its international ties, facilities, airports and experience of hosting previous major events.
Bidding documents were sent to seventeen cities in consideration for hosting a WrestleMania event between 2012 and 2014, with fourteen replying in interest. Other cities under consideration for WrestleMania XXVIII included Los Angeles, New Orleans, New York City, Toronto, Detroit, Tampa, Vancouver, St. Louis, Jacksonville, Orlando and Houston. The city of Dallas also showed interest but had to withdraw from bidding for the next two years due to hosting events such as the NCAA Final Four.
On February 9, 2011, "The Miami Herald" announced that Miami had won the right to host WrestleMania in 2012. WWE later officially announced the event in a press conference held at the Fontainebleau Miami Beach. WrestleMania XXVIII was the second Wrestlemania event that was hosted in the state of Florida, the fourth open-air event, and the third event to be held entirely outdoors. For hosting the event, WWE will received a $250,000 cash incentive from the Miami-Dade Sports Commission raised through grants and sponsorships. Along with WrestleMania XXVIII, a series of events grouped as "WrestleMania Week" were held in the week preceding the event including WrestleMania's annual "WrestleMania Axxess" fan convention at the Miami Beach Convention Center, the 2012 WWE Hall of Fame ceremony at the American Airlines Arena, the finals of the WrestleMania Reading Challenge, and a Celebrity Pro-Am Golf tournament.
Background.
WrestleMania featured professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing feuds, plots, and storylines that played out on WWE's primary television programs. Wrestlers portrayed villains or heroes as they followed a series of events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.
The main event of WrestleMania XXVIII featured The Rock wrestling against John Cena. On the February 14, 2011 episode of "Raw", The Rock was revealed as the host of WrestleMania XXVII, and upon his return to WWE, began a feud with John Cena (and Cena's opponent at that WrestleMania, then-WWE Champion, The Miz), which continued for weeks in terms of verbal insults, until the March 28 episode of "Raw", where Cena delivered the Attitude Adjustment to the Rock after he fended off attacks from the Miz and Alex Riley. At WrestleMania XXVII, the Rock got involved in the main event WWE Championship match, which initially ended in The Miz's favor via a double count-out. After the match was restarted under no disqualifications, no count-outs rules, the Rock delivered a Rock Bottom to Cena, thus enabling the Miz to win the match. The next night on "Raw", Cena challenged the Rock to a one-on-one match; Rock accepted and proposed that it be held at WrestleMania XXVIII. The following week, Cena announced his intent to defend the WWE Championship against The Rock in their match at WrestleMania XXVIII. On the May 2 episode of "Raw" celebrating the Rock's birthday, Cena, whilst holding the WWE Championship, confronted the Rock and declared his intent to keep the title until their match. At Survivor Series in November 2011, Cena teamed with the Rock (who made his in-ring return in a match in WWE after nearly eight years, last competing at WrestleMania XX), and billed as "the most charismatic tag team", and defeated the Miz and R-Truth, collectively known as Awesome Truth. After the match, The Rock gave a Rock Bottom to Cena. As Cena did not hold the WWE Championship heading into WrestleMania, it wound up being a standard singles match.
A second main event, billed as the "end of an era", featured the Undertaker against Triple H in a Hell in a Cell match. The previous year at WrestleMania XXVII, in a No Holds Barred match, The Undertaker defeated Triple H via submission, in their second encounter at a WrestleMania (the first being at WrestleMania X-Seven in 2001, where the Undertaker won as well). However, in the post-match events, due to the harsh physicality suffered during the bout, the Undertaker, for the first time in his career, was carted away from the Georgia Dome by the medical staff on a stretcher. After a near ten-month long hiatus, The Undertaker returned on the January 30, 2012 edition of "Raw", confronting and challenging Triple H to a rematch at WrestleMania XXVIII. The Undertaker, having been dissatisfied of his post-WrestleMania match scenario the previous year, stated that he "did not want 'that scene' to be a lasting memory" of him and was willing to give Triple H "another chance at immortality". After Triple H refused to accept the challenge the next week on "Raw", his close friend and WWE Hall of Famer, Shawn Michaels appeared on the February 13 episode of "Raw" to instigate him in accepting The Undertaker's challenge, which was in vain as Triple H stated he was willing to put his ego and personal agendas aside for the future of WWE, and viewed The Undertaker's 19-0 undefeated WrestleMania streak as a "brand" to cash-in for the company, finally ending the argument saying he would not be the one to end it. Then, on the February 20 episode of "Raw", The Undertaker still remained adamant in getting a WrestleMania rematch with Triple H, going so far as to label Triple H as a "coward", and comparing his abilities and career to that of Shawn Michaels. Enraged by these comments, Triple H finally accepted The Undertaker's challenge at WrestleMania XXVIII, saying that if "he wanted an end, they would go all the way", and proposed that they would compete in a Hell in a Cell match. On the March 5 episode of "Raw", Michaels confronted Triple H again, this time expressing his views on the debate of who was better than the other (Michaels or Triple H), and predicting Triple H's chances of defeating The Undertaker, in addition to announcing that he would be the special guest referee in their Hell in a Cell match at WrestleMania.
On July 17, 2011, at the Money in the Bank event, Daniel Bryan defeated seven other wrestlers to win the SmackDown Money in the Bank ladder match. On the July 22 episode of "SmackDown", Bryan declared his intentions of cashing-in his Money in the Bank contract at WrestleMania XXVIII. However, despite this claim, he attempted to cash-in his contract briefcase on the November 25 episode of "SmackDown". He pinned the reigning World Heavyweight Champion Mark Henry to supposedly win the title and began to celebrate, but SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long informed Bryan that Henry was not medically cleared to compete, and declared the match void, thereby returning the briefcase to Bryan and the title back to Henry. The next week on "Raw", Bryan acknowledged that he went back on his word, saying that headlining WrestleMania "was" his dream and that his "plans changed"; that the briefcase "doesn't guarantee anything", since he could be put out of action at any time. WWE, however, continued to maintain the advertisement for WrestleMania, until Bryan successfully cashed in his Money in the Bank contract briefcase on Big Show at the event on December 18, 2011, to become the new World Heavyweight Champion.
In January 2012, at the twenty-fifth annual Royal Rumble pay-per-view, Sheamus won the thirty-man Royal Rumble match, giving him the right to challenge either the WWE Champion or the World Heavyweight Champion at WrestleMania XXVIII. Sheamus announced on "SmackDown" that he would decide who he wishes to face at WrestleMania after the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view. At the Elimination Chamber event in February, Sheamus attacked Daniel Bryan, after the latter successfully retained his World Heavyweight Championship in an Elimination Chamber match, thus declaring his wish to challenge Bryan for his title at WrestleMania. The match was officially announced the next day on WWE.com.
Another match booked for WrestleMania featured two superstars from the Raw brand. CM Punk defending the WWE Championship against Chris Jericho. Since the summer of 2011, Punk had successfully defended the WWE Championship numerous times, calling himself the "best wrestler in the world". On the January 2, 2012 episode of "Raw", after extensive hype through several viral vignettes proclaiming the "end of the world as we know it" on that day, Chris Jericho returned to WWE after over a year, and established a villainous persona over the next several weeks. On the February 13 episode of "Raw", Jericho accused Punk in an in-ring segment of being a copycat of him, and that he (Punk) stole his proclamation of being the "best in the world". While competing in the Raw Elimination Chamber match at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view, Jericho was knocked out by a kick to the head by Punk, rendering him unable to compete any further, and Punk went on to win that match. This incident further fueled Jericho's animosity towards Punk. On the February 20 episode of "Raw", Jericho last eliminated Big Show to win a ten-man battle royal to determine the number-one contender to face Punk for the WWE Championship at WrestleMania XXVIII. In subsequent promos, both wrestlers expressed their desire to prove who is "the best in the world."
Another title match scheduled was between Cody Rhodes and Big Show for the former's WWE Intercontinental Championship. Their feud gained increased momentum week after week when, over January and February 2012, Rhodes began mocking Big Show's less than stellar performances at WrestleMania over the years, calling him "a reverse Undertaker" (a direct reference to The Undertaker's undefeated 19-0 record at WrestleMania, compared to Big Show's 3-8 record), in addition to citing the "ridiculous nature" of some of his matches, such as his Sumo match against Akebono at WrestleMania 21 and a No Disqualifications match against Floyd Mayweather, Jr. at WrestleMania XXIV, both of which Big Show lost. Rhodes also cost Big Show a chance at the World Heavyweight Championship, by eliminating him from the SmackDown Elimination Chamber match at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view in February, and a shot at the WWE Championship at WrestleMania, when he pulled Big Show over the top rope, aiding in his elimination by Chris Jericho in the end of a number-one contender's battle royal on the February 20 episode of "Raw". On the March 2 episode of "SmackDown", General Manager Theodore Long announced an official match between Rhodes and Big Show for the Intercontinental Championship at WrestleMania XXVIII, where the latter has vowed "to win at all costs."
At the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view in February 2012, Executive Vice President of Talent Relations and Interim Raw General Manager, John Laurinaitis and his legal counsel David Otunga expressed Laurinaitis' desire to be become the permanent General Manager of both Raw and SmackDown. Alberto Del Rio, Mark Henry, and Christian all came out and voiced their support for Laurinaitis over SmackDown General Manager Theodore Long. Later that night, Long agreed with Laurinaitis' desire for only one man to run both brands, but believed that it should be him. On the February 21 episode of SmackDown, the two General Managers got into an argument following a match between Raw's WWE Champion CM Punk and SmackDown's World Heavyweight Champion Daniel Bryan that ended in a draw, with each man supporting the opposing brand's world champion. The two were then given the chance by the WWE Board of Directors to run the other show for one night in order for the Board to evaluate them, with Long running the March 5 episode of Raw and Laurinaitis in charge of the March 9 episode of SmackDown. But being still not convinced of either man's decision-making, on March 12, the Board of Directors announced a 12-man tag team match for WrestleMania XXVIII, with the stipulation that the General Manager of the winning team being awarded stewardship of both Raw and SmackDown. The same night on Raw, Long appointed his assistant, Santino Marella to be the captain of his team, while Laurinaitis appointed Otunga to be his team's captain, naming Mark Henry as the first member of his team. On March 15, it was announced that R-Truth had been added to Long's team. On the March 16 episode of SmackDown, Christian officially joined Team Johnny (on Laurinaitis' word of being named the new number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship after WrestleMania, if his team wins), and Kofi Kingston was announced as Team Teddy's newest member. Prior to the March 19 episode of Raw, Laurinaitis and Otunga announced via WWE.com that Dolph Ziggler and Jack Swagger have been added to their team as well. On the March 23 episode of SmackDown, Long named Zack Ryder and The Great Khali as members of Team Teddy, while also making Hornswoggle his team's mascot. And finally, on the March 26 episode of Raw, The Miz was added as the last member of Team Johnny, while due to Christian being (kayfabe) injured by CM Punk later on in the show (the real reason being Christian not having fully recovered from his real-life ankle injury), Drew McIntyre was announced as his replacement. Also, on the same night, Booker T was named as the sixth and final member of Team Teddy.
Another match scheduled for WrestleMania was between Divas Beth Phoenix and Eve Torres taking on the team of Kelly Kelly and "Extra" co-host Maria Menounos. The feud between Phoenix and Menounos began on the October 12, 2009 episode of "Raw" when Menounos accompanied then-"Access Hollywood" host Nancy O'Dell, who was the guest host of "Raw" that night. Phoenix, angered over having been traded to the SmackDown brand by O'Dell, barged into their office and got into a confrontation with both women, leading to a Six-Diva tag team match later that night in which Menounos' team defeated Phoenix's team. On the 2011 edition of Tribute to the Troops, Menounos made an appearance, this time in an Eight-Diva tag team match, winning the match for her team by pinning Phoenix. Kelly and Eve, on the other hand, had a falling apart of their friendship after Eve admitted to having used Zack Ryder and John Cena to further her own career. On the March 15 episode of "Extra", Phoenix and Eve interrupted an interview between Kelly and Menounos, which resulted in a confrontation. Phoenix would then challenge Menounos to a match at WrestleMania, which the latter accepted. Later that night, it was announced on WWE.com that WWE officials had sanctioned a tag team match pitting Phoenix and Eve against Menounos and Kelly for WrestleMania XXVIII.
Another rivalry heading into WrestleMania was between Randy Orton and Kane. On the March 2 episode of SmackDown, Kane interrupted Orton's match against Daniel Bryan, causing Orton to lose via count-out. The two men ensued in a brawl, which ended with Orton ultimately being chokeslammed by Kane, who "welcomed back" from being injured at the hands of Bryan a few weeks ago. Orton retaliated on the March 5 episode of Raw, by delivering an RKO to Kane, who had just defeated R-Truth. On the March 9 episode of SmackDown, Orton and Kane once again brawled at the end of the show with no man appearing to gain an advantage. The next week on SmackDown, when Orton demanded Kane to explain the root cause of his attacks on him, the latter referred to his handshake with Orton after a Street Fight on the July 22, 2011 episode of SmackDown, in which Orton had defeated him. Kane, explaining that the handshake made him look weak and "human". claimed that this "wretched" self was now gone, and now wanted to eliminate that memory, and announced that he would challenge Orton at WrestleMania XXVIII.
On March 30, WWE announced on their website that a Triple Threat Tag Team match for the WWE Tag Team Championship between the defending champions Primo & Epico, The Usos (Jimmy and Jey), and the newly-formed team of Justin Gabriel and Tyson Kidd, would be streamed online free before the pay-per-view on both WWE.com and the official WWE YouTube channel.
Event.
Pre-show.
A non-televised Triple Threat Tag Team match for the WWE Tag Team Championship pitted champions Primo and Epico, The Usos, and Justin Gabriel and Tyson Kidd against each other. The match began with multiple aerial tactics and many pin attempts. In the midst of the match, Justin Gabriel botched a dive outside resulting in an elbow injury. The match ended when Epico hit Jey Uso with a "Backstabber" and pinned him to retain the titles.
Preliminary matches.
In the first televised match, World Heavyweight Champion Daniel Bryan defended his title against Sheamus. After receiving a good luck kiss from his storyline girlfriend AJ, Bryan was surprised by Sheamus, who hit a brogue kick and pinned him to win the title. With only eighteen seconds, this was one of the shortest title matches in WWE history.
In the second match, Randy Orton faced Kane. After trading moves back and forth, Orton gained the upperhand until Kane made a comeback. Kane continued to dominate the match until Orton kicked out of a chokeslam. Orton gained back momentum but after Orton attempting a "RKO"' from the second rope, he was chokeslammed again and pinned.
Next, the Intercontinental Championship was up for grabs between champion Cody Rhodes and Big Show. Rhodes attempted to avoid his opponent until Show caught him and tossed back inside. Show dominated from there with vicious attacks. Rhodes managed to make a comeback and gained the advantage, hitting Show with a disaster kick. As he went for another one, he took a spear mid-air to the groin from Show. Show knocked out Rhodes with a "WMD" and pinned him to win his first Intercontinental Championship.
A tag team match pitted Kelly Kelly and "Extra" correspondent Maria Menounos against Divas Champion Beth Phoenix and Eve. Kelly began to get the upperhand over Eve. Kelly tagged in Menounos who got off to a good start but was slowed down by interference from Phoenix. Phoenix and Eve would continue to wear down Menounos who had already suffered two cracked ribs prior to the event. Menounos eventually tagged in Kelly who began to dominate. Phoenix managed to wear down Kelly but Kelly countered a "Glam Slam" with a bulldog and tagged in Menounos. The climax of the match came when Kelly saved Menounos, knocked Phoenix into Eve on the apron, and Menounos rolled up Phoenix for the win.
Main event matches.
The first main event match was a Hell in a Cell match between Triple H and The Undertaker with Shawn Michaels as special guest referee billed as "the end of an era". The match started off with the two going back and forth. The match moved to the outside where The Undertaker dominated. Now back in the ring, Triple H assaulted Undertaker with the steel steps and even countered a "Hell's Gate". The match would intensify when Triple H brought steel chairs and a sledgehammer into the ring. After multiple big moves and weapon shots on each other the two men repeatedly kicked out. After being hit with multiple "Pedigrees", a "Sweet Chin Music", and multiple chair and sledgehammer shots, Undertaker managed to comeback and execute a "Tombstone Piledriver", however Triple H managed to kick out. Triple H hit one more "Pedigree" before the Undertaker kicked out, took back control, hit another "Tombstone", and won the match to extend his undefeated streak to 20-0. After the match, Undertaker and Michaels helped Triple H out of the ring and made it to the entrance stage where they embraced.
Next, a twelve-man tag team match was to determine who would run both "Raw" and "SmackDown", pitting teams representing Teddy Long and John Laurinaitis against each other. The match began with a back-and-forth between both teams. After Booker T (of Team Teddy) entered he was worn down by most of Team Johnny until the rest of both teams engaged in an all out brawl both inside and out of the ring. Then, Zack Ryder (of Team Teddy) started to dominate Team Johnny's Dolph Ziggler and The Miz, but as he was distracted by his storyline girlfriend Eve, The Miz could land hit him with a "Skull Crushing Finale" and scored a pinfall victory for Team Johnny, giving John Laurinaitis control of both shows.
The next saw WWE Champion CM Punk defend against Chris Jericho with the stipulation that if Punk was disqualified he would lose his title. Punk immediately started attacking Jericho. Jericho taunted and slapped Punk, trying to provoke him into getting himself disqualified. Punk grabbed a chair but resisted hitting Jericho and continued on with the match. After multiple finishing moves were applied, Punk countered "The Walls of Jericho" and applied the "Anaconda Vise", forcing Jericho to submit and allowing him to retain the WWE Championship.
The final match pitted John Cena and The Rock in a match billed "once in a lifetime". Cena and Rock viciously went back-and-forth with each other throughout the match. The Rock kicked out of two "Attitude Adjustments", Cena out of a "Rock Bottom" and "People's Elbow". When Cena attempted a "People's Elbow" on the Rock, he ran into another "Rock Bottom", which allowed the Rock to pick up the win.
Reception.
WrestleMania XXVIII received a highly positive reception. Rob McNichol, writing for British tabloid "The Sun", scored the event 8.5/10, with CM Punk vs. Chris Jericho being the match of the night for the 'wrestling purists.' However, they cited the "first 60 minutes of this four-hour show were a disaster", ridiculing the decision of the World Heavyweight Championship bout, describing it as a "transparent virtual slap in the face to those who admire the talents of the Irishman and the American Dragon." Examiner.com rated WrestleMania as 4 out of 5 stars, giving the match of the night to Triple H vs. The Undertaker, describing it as "a barrage of violence, passion, and pacing displayed by all three performers in the brutal cage", whilst also criticising the beginning of the show as 'underwhelming.' The Canadian Online Explorer ranked the show 6.5/10, giving full marks to both the Hell in a Cell and WWE Championship matches, whereas the Rock vs John Cena received a 7/10 rating.
Eric Larnick of The Huffington Post praised the main event match giving it a verdict of good; he applauded Dwayne Johnson, claiming that he worked "his butt off to prove that he can still go in the squared circle". The post also praised the WWE Championship and Hell in a Cell matches, ranking them alongside the main event. IGN called Daniel Bryan vs Sheamus the "worst match of the night" and the Undertaker vs Triple H the "match of the night". They too applauded the main event match, calling the unexpected outcome a good way for the crowd to go home happy.
The Baltimore Sun's Adam Testa led with a headline that Wrestlemania XXVIII was unable to live up to the hype, while the main event did. He claimed the match as being the match that could break or make the WrestleMania and ended in "an amazing sequence." The Rock's victory was again stated as shocking and welcome, leaving people curious about the aftermath of the event. Yahoo's A. Orien avery found The Rock vs. Hulk Hogan from WrestleMania X8 as the only comparable match from previous WrestleManias, though the Rock being in his prime would make the match more symbolic.
WrestleMania XXVIII garnered 1,217,000 buys, making it the most purchased wrestling event in history, surpassing WrestleMania 23's buyrate of approximately 1.2 million, with global gross sales in excess of $67 million. The event also set a new record for the highest grossing live event in WWE history, grossing $8.9 million.
