A triangle is one of the basic shapes of geometry: a polygon with three corners or vertices and three sides or edges which are line segments. A triangle with vertices "A", "B", and "C" is denoted formula_1.
In Euclidean geometry any three points, when non-, determine a unique triangle and a unique plane (i.e. a two-dimensional Euclidean space).
Types of triangle.
By relative lengths of sides.
In diagrams representing triangles (and other geometric figures), "tick" marks along the sides are used to denote sides of equal lengths – the equilateral triangle has tick marks on all 3 sides, the isosceles on 2 sides. The scalene has single, double, and triple tick marks, indicating that no sides are equal. Similarly, arcs on the inside of the vertices are used to indicate equal angles. The equilateral triangle indicates all 3 angles are equal; the isosceles shows 2 identical angles. The scalene indicates by 1, 2, and 3 arcs that no angles are equal.
By internal angles.
Triangles can also be classified according to their internal angles, measured here in degrees.
A triangle that has two angles with the same measure also has two sides with the same length, and therefore it is an isosceles triangle. It follows that in a triangle where all angles have the same measure, all three sides have the same length, and such a triangle is therefore equilateral.
Basic facts.
Triangles are assumed to be two-dimensional plane figures, unless the context provides otherwise (see Non-planar triangles, below). In rigorous treatments, a triangle is therefore called a "2-simplex" (see also Polytope). Elementary facts about triangles were presented by Euclid in books 1–4 of his "Elements", around 300 BC.
The measures of the interior angles of a triangle in Euclidean space always add up to 180 degrees. This allows determination of the measure of the third angle of any triangle given the measure of two angles. An "exterior angle" of a triangle is an angle that is a linear pair (and hence supplementary) to an interior angle. The measure of an exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the measures of the two interior angles that are not adjacent to it; this is the exterior angle theorem. The sum of the measures of the three exterior angles (one for each vertex) of any triangle is 360 degrees.
Similarity and congruence.
Two triangles are said to be "similar" if every angle of one triangle has the same measure as the corresponding angle in the other triangle. The corresponding sides of similar triangles have lengths that are in the same proportion, and this property is also sufficient to establish similarity.
Two triangles that are congruent have exactly the same size and shape: all pairs of corresponding interior angles are equal in measure, and all pairs of corresponding sides have the same length. (This is a total of six equalities, but three are often sufficient to prove congruence.)
Using right triangles and the concept of similarity, the trigonometric functions sine and cosine can be defined. These are functions of an angle which are investigated in trigonometry.
Right triangles.
A central theorem is the Pythagorean theorem, which states in any right triangle, the square of the length of the hypotenuse equals the sum of the squares of the lengths of the two other sides. If the hypotenuse has length "c", and the legs have lengths "a" and "b", then the theorem states that
The converse is true: if the lengths of the sides of a triangle satisfy the above equation, then the triangle has a right angle opposite side "c".
For all triangles, angles and sides are related by the law of cosines and law of sines (also called the "cosine rule" and "sine rule").
Existence of a triangle.
The sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle always exceeds the length of the third side, a principle known as the "triangle inequality". Since the vertices of a triangle are assumed to be non-collinear, it is not possible for the sum of the length of two sides be equal to the length of the third side.
Points, lines, and circles associated with a triangle.
There are hundreds of different constructions that find a special point associated with (and often inside) a triangle, satisfying some unique property: see the references section for a catalogue of them. Often they are constructed by finding three lines associated in a symmetrical way with the three sides (or vertices) and then proving that the three lines meet in a single point: an important tool for proving the existence of these is Ceva's theorem, which gives a criterion for determining when three such lines are concurrent. Similarly, lines associated with a triangle are often constructed by proving that three symmetrically constructed points are : here Menelaus' theorem gives a useful general criterion. In this section just a few of the most commonly encountered constructions are explained.
A perpendicular bisector of a side of a triangle is a straight line passing through the midpoint of the side and being perpendicular to it, i.e. forming a right angle with it. The three perpendicular bisectors meet in a single point, the triangle's circumcenter; this point is the center of the circumcircle, the circle passing through all three vertices. The diameter of this circle, called the "circumdiameter", can be found from the law of sines stated above. The circumcircle's radius is called the "circumradius".
Thales' theorem implies that if the circumcenter is located on one side of the triangle, then the opposite angle is a right one. If the circumcenter is located inside the triangle, then the triangle is acute; if the circumcenter is located outside the triangle, then the triangle is obtuse.
An altitude of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex and perpendicular to (i.e. forming a right angle with) the opposite side. This opposite side is called the "base" of the altitude, and the point where the altitude intersects the base (or its extension) is called the "foot" of the altitude. The length of the altitude is the distance between the base and the vertex. The three altitudes intersect in a single point, called the orthocenter of the triangle. The orthocenter lies inside the triangle if and only if the triangle is acute.
An angle bisector of a triangle is a straight line through a vertex which cuts the corresponding angle in half. The three angle bisectors intersect in a single point, the incenter, the center of the triangle's incircle. The incircle is the circle which lies inside the triangle and touches all three sides. Its radius is called the "inradius". There are three other important circles, the excircles; they lie outside the triangle and touch one side as well as the extensions of the other two. The centers of the in- and excircles form an orthocentric system.
\sin A = \frac {\textrm{opposite side}}{\textrm{hypotenuse}} = \frac {a}{h}\.</math>
Note that this ratio does not depend on the particular right triangle chosen, as long as it contains the angle "A", since all those triangles are similar.
The "cosine" of an angle is the ratio of the length of the adjacent side to the length of the hypotenuse. In our case
The "tangent" of an angle is the ratio of the length of the opposite side to the length of the adjacent side. In our case
The acronym "SOH-CAH-TOA" is a useful mnemonic for these ratios.
Inverse functions.
The inverse trigonometric functions can be used to calculate the internal angles for a right angled triangle with the length of any two sides.
Arcsin can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the opposite side and the length of the hypotenuse.
Arccos can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the adjacent side and the length of the hypontenuse.
Arctan can be used to calculate an angle from the length of the opposite side and the length of the adjacent side.
In introductory geometry and trigonometry courses, the notation sin−1, cos−1, etc., are often used in place of arcsin, arccos, etc. However, the arcsin, arccos, etc., notation is standard in higher mathematics where trigonometric functions are commonly raised to powers, as this avoids confusion between multiplicative inverse and compositional inverse.
Sine, cosine and tangent rules.
The law of sines, or sine rule, states that the ratio of the length of a side to the sine of its corresponding opposite angle is constant, that is
This ratio is equal to the diameter of the circumscribed circle of the given triangle. Another interpretation of this theorem is that every triangle with angles α, β and γ is similar to a triangle with side lengths equal to sin α, sin β and sin γ. This triangle can be constructed by first constructing a circle of diameter 1, and inscribing in it two of the angles of the triangle. The length of the sides of that triangle will be sin α, sin β and sin γ. The side whose length is sin α is opposite to the angle whose measure is α, etc.
It is not used very often, but can be used to find a side or an angle when you know two sides and an angle or two angles and a side.
Solution of triangles.
"Solution of triangles" is the historical term for the solving of the main trigonometric problem: to find missing characteristics of a triangle (three angles, the lengths of the three sides etc) when at least three of these characteristics are given. The triangle can be located on a plane or on a sphere. This problem often occurs in various trigonometric applications, such as geodesy, astronomy, construction, navigation etc.
Computing the area of a triangle.
where "b" is the length of the base of the triangle, and "h" is the height or altitude of the triangle. The term "base" denotes any side, and "height" denotes the length of a perpendicular from the vertex opposite the side onto the line containing the side itself. In 499 CE Aryabhata, a great mathematician-astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy, used this method in the "Aryabhatiya" (section 2.6).
Although simple, this formula is only useful if the height can be readily found. For example, the surveyor of a triangular field measures the length of each side, and can find the area from his results without having to construct a "height". Various methods may be used in practice, depending on what is known about the triangle. The following is a selection of frequently used formulae for the area of a triangle.
Using trigonometry.
The height of a triangle can be found through the application of trigonometry.
(where α is the interior angle at "A", β is the interior angle at "B", formula_24 is the interior angle at "C" and "c" is the line AB).
and analogously if the known side is "a" or "c".
and analogously if the known side is "b" or "c".
Using Heron's formula.
where formula_30 is the "semiperimeter", or half of the triangle's perimeter.
Three other equivalent ways of writing Heron's formula are
Using vectors.
The area of a parallelogram embedded in a three-dimensional Euclidean space can be calculated using vectors. Let vectors AB and AC point respectively from "A" to "B" and from "A" to "C". The area of parallelogram "ABDC" is then
which is the magnitude of the cross product of vectors AB and AC. The area of triangle ABC is half of this,
Using coordinates.
If vertex "A" is located at the origin (0, 0) of a Cartesian coordinate system and the coordinates of the other two vertices are given by and , then the area can be computed as times the absolute value of the determinant
which can be written as
If the points are labeled sequentially in the counterclockwise direction, the above determinant expressions are positive and the absolute value signs can be omitted. The above formula is known as the shoelace formula or the surveyor's formula.
If we locate the vertices in the complex plane and denote them in counterclockwise sequence as , , and , and denote their complex conjugates as formula_41, formula_42, and formula_43, then the formula
is equivalent to the shoelace formula.
Using line integrals.
The area within any closed curve, such as a triangle, is given by the line integral around the curve of the algebraic or signed distance of a point on the curve from an arbitrary oriented straight line "L". Points to the right of "L" as oriented are taken to be at negative distance from "L", while the weight for the integral is taken to be the component of arc length parallel to "L" rather than arc length itself.
This method is well suited to computation of the area of an arbitrary polygon. Taking "L" to be the "x"-axis, the line integral between consecutive vertices ("xi","yi") and ("xi"+1,"yi"+1) is given by the base times the mean height, namely . The sign of the area is an overall indicator of the direction of traversal, with negative area indicating counterclockwise traversal. The area of a triangle then falls out as the case of a polygon with three sides.
While the line integral method has in common with other coordinate-based methods the arbitrary choice of a coordinate system, unlike the others it makes no arbitrary choice of vertex of the triangle as origin or of side as base. Furthermore the choice of coordinate system defined by "L" commits to only two degrees of freedom rather than the usual three, since the weight is a local distance (e.g. in the above) whence the method does not require choosing an axis normal to "L".
When working in polar coordinates it is not necessary to convert to cartesian coordinates to use line integration, since the line integral between consecutive vertices ("ri",θ"i") and ("ri"+1,θ"i"+1) of a polygon is given directly by . This is valid for all values of θ, with some decrease in numerical accuracy when |θ| is many orders of magnitude greater than π. With this formulation negative area indicates clockwise traversal, which should be kept in mind when mixing polar and cartesian coordinates. Just as the choice of "y"-axis () is immaterial for line integration in cartesian coordinates, so is the choice of zero heading () immaterial here.
Formulas mimicking Heron's formula.
Three formulas have the same structure as Heron's formula but are expressed in terms of different variables. First, denoting the medians from sides "a", "b", and "c" respectively as "ma", "mb", and "mc" and their semi-sum as σ, we have
Next, denoting the altitudes from sides "a", "b", and "c" respectively as "ha", "hb", and "hc", and denoting the semi-sum of the reciprocals of the altitudes as formula_47 we have
And denoting the semi-sum of the angles' sines as , we have
where "D" is the diameter of the circumcircle: formula_50
Using Pick's theorem.
See Pick's theorem for a technique for finding the area of any arbitrary lattice polygon (one drawn on a grid with vertically and horizontally adjacent lattice points at equal distances, and with vertices on lattice points).
where "formula_52" is the number of internal lattice points and "B" is the number of lattice points lying on the border of the polygon.
Other area formulas.
Numerous other area formulas exist, such as
where "r" is the inradius, and "s" is the semiperimeter (in fact this formula holds for "all" tangential polygons);
and
for circumdiameter "D"; and
for angle α ≠ 90°.
Denoting the radius of the inscribed circle as "r" and the radii of the excircles as "r"1, "r"2, and "r"3, the area can be expressed as
for circumradius (radius of the circumcircle) "R", and
Upper bound on the area.
The area of any triangle with perimeter "p" is less than or equal to formula_63 with equality holding if and only if the triangle is equilateral.
Bisecting the area.
There are infinitely many lines that bisect the area of a triangle. Three of them are the medians, which are the only area bisectors that go through the centroid. Three other area bisectors are parallel to the triangle's sides.
Any line through a triangle that splits both the triangle's area and its perimeter in half goes through the triangle's incenter. There can be one, two, or three of these for any given triangle.
Further formulas for general Euclidean triangles.
The formulas in this section are true for all Euclidean triangles.
The medians and the sides are related by
and
and equivalently for "mb" and "mc".
For angle α opposite side "a", the length of the internal bisector is given by
for semiperimeter "s", where the bisector length is measured from the vertex to where it meets the opposite side.
where "ha" etc. are the altitudes to the subscripted sides;
and
Suppose two adjacent but non-overlapping triangles share the same side of length "f" and share the same circumcircle, so that the side of length "f" is a chord of the circumcircle and the triangles have side lengths ("a", "b", "f") and ("c", "d", "f"), with the two triangles together forming a cyclic quadrilateral with side lengths in sequence ("a", "b", "c", "d"). Then
Let "M" be the centroid of a triangle with vertices "A", "B", and "C", and let "P" be any interior point. Then the distances between the points are related by
Let "pa", "pb", and "pc" be the distances from the centroid to the sides of lengths "a", "b", and "c". Then
and
The product of two sides of a triangle equals the altitude to the third side times the diameter of the circumcircle.
Carnot's Theorem states that the sum of the distances from the circumcenter to the three sides equals the sum of the circumradius and the inradius. Here a segment's length is considered to be negative if and only if the segment lies entirely outside the triangle. This method is especially useful for deducing the properties of more abstract forms of triangles, such as the ones induced by Lie algebras, that otherwise have the same properties as usual triangles.
Euler's theorem states that the distance "d" between the circumcenter and the incenter is given by
or equivalently
where "R" is the circumradius and "r" is the inradius. Thus for all triangles "R" ≥ 2"r", with equality holding for equilateral triangles.
If we denote that the orthocenter divides one altitude into segments of lengths "u" and "v", another altitude into segment lengths "w" and "x", and the third altitude into segment lengths "y" and "z", then "uv" = "wx" = "yz".
The distance from a side to the circumcenter equals half the distance from the opposite vertex to the orthocenter.
The sum of the squares of the distances from the vertices to the orthocenter plus the sum of the squares of the sides equals twelve times the square of the circumradius.
Morley's trisector theorem.
Morley's trisector theorem states that in any triangle, the three points of intersection of the adjacent angle trisectors form an equilateral triangle, called the Morley triangle.
Figures inscribed in a triangle.
As discussed above, every triangle has a unique inscribed circle (incircle) that is interior to the triangle and tangent to all three sides.
Every triangle has a unique Steiner inellipse which is interior to the triangle and tangent at the midpoints of the sides. Marden's theorem shows how to find the foci of this ellipse. This ellipse has the greatest area of any ellipse tangent to all three sides of the triangle.
For any ellipse inscribed in a triangle "ABC", let the foci be "P" and "Q". Then
Every triangle has three inscribed squares (squares in its interior such that all four of a square's vertices lie on a side of the triangle, so two of them lie on the same side and hence one side of the square coincides with part of a side of the triangle). However, in the case of a right triangle two of the squares coincide and have a vertex at the triangle's right angle, so a right triangle has only two "distinct" inscribed squares. Within a given triangle, a longer common side is associated with a smaller inscribed square. If an inscribed square has side of length "q" and the triangle has a side of length "a", part of which side coincides with a side of the square, then "q", "a", and the triangle's area "T" are related according to
The largest possible ratio of the area of the inscribed square to the area of the triangle is 1/2, which occurs when , , and the altitude of the triangle from the base of length "a" is equal to "a".
Partitioning into isosceles triangles.
For any integer "n" ≥ 4, any triangle can be partitioned into "n" isosceles triangles.
Figures circumscribed about a triangle.
As mentioned above, every triangle has a unique circumcircle, a circle passing through all three vertices, whose center is the intersection of the perpendicular bisectors of the triangle's sides. 
Further, every triangle has a unique Steiner circumellipse, which passes through the triangle's vertices and has its center at the triangle's centroid. Of all ellipses going through the triangle's vertices, it has the smallest area.
Non-planar triangles.
A non-planar triangle is a triangle which is not contained in a (flat) plane. Some examples of non-planar triangles in non-Euclidean geometries are spherical triangles in spherical geometry and hyperbolic triangles in hyperbolic geometry.
While the measures of the internal angles in planar triangles always sum to 180°, a hyperbolic triangle has measures of angles that sum to less than 180°, and a spherical triangle has measures of angles that sum to more than 180°. A hyperbolic triangle can be obtained by drawing on a negatively curved surface, such as a saddle surface, and a spherical triangle can be obtained by drawing on a positively curved surface such as a sphere. Thus, if one draws a giant triangle on the surface of the Earth, one will find that the sum of the measures of its angles is greater than 180°; in fact it will be between 180° and 540°. In particular it is possible to draw a triangle on a sphere such that the measure of each of its internal angles is equal to 90°, adding up to a total of 270°.
Specifically, on a sphere the sum of the angles of a triangle is
where "f" is the fraction of the sphere's area which is enclosed by the triangle. For example, suppose that we draw a triangle on the Earth's surface with vertices at the North Pole, at a point on the equator at 0° longitude, and a point on the equator at 90° West longitude. The great circle line between the latter two points is the equator, and the great circle line between either of those points and the North Pole is a line of longitude; so there are right angles at the two points on the equator. Moreover, the angle at the North Pole is also 90° because the other two vertices differ by 90° of longitude. So the sum of the angles in this triangle is . The triangle encloses 1/4 of the northern hemisphere (90°/360° as viewed from the North Pole) and therefore 1/8 of the Earth's surface, so in the formula ; thus the formula correctly gives the sum of the triangle's angles as 270°.
From the above angle sum formula we can also see that the Earth's surface is locally flat: If we draw an arbitrarily small triangle in the neighborhood of one point on the Earth's surface, the fraction "f" of the Earth's surface which is enclosed by the triangle will be arbitrarily close to zero. In this case the angle sum formula simplifies to 180°, which we know is what Euclidean geometry tells us for triangles on a flat surface.
Triangles in construction.
Rectangles have been the most popular and common geometric form for buildings since the shape is easy to stack and organize; as a standard, it is easy to design furniture and fixtures to fit inside rectangularly shaped buildings. But triangles, while more difficult to use conceptually, provide a great deal of strength. As computer technology helps architects design creative new buildings, triangular shapes are becoming increasingly prevalent as parts of buildings and as the primary shape for some types of skyscrapers as well as building materials. In Tokyo in 1989, architects had wondered whether it was possible to build a 500-story tower to provide affordable office space for this densely packed city, but with the danger to buildings from earthquakes, architects considered that a triangular shape would have been necessary if such a building was ever to have been built (it hasn't by 2011). In New York City, as Broadway crisscrosses major avenues, the resulting blocks are cut like triangles, and buildings have been built on these shapes; one such building is the triangularly shaped Flatiron Building which real estate people admit has a "warren of awkward spaces that do not easily accommodate modern office furniture" but that has not prevented the structure from becoming a landmark icon. Designers have made houses in Norway using triangular themes. Triangle shapes have appeared in churches as well as public buildings including colleges as well as supports for innovative home designs. Triangles are sturdy; while a rectangle can collapse into a parallelogram from pressure to one of its points, triangles have a natural strength which supports structures against lateral pressures. A triangle will not change shape unless its sides are bent or extended or broken or if its joints break; in essence, each of the three sides supports the other two. A rectangle, in contrast, is more dependent on the strength of its joints in a structural sense. Some innovative designers have proposed making bricks not out of rectangles, but with triangular shapes which can be combined in three dimensions. It is likely that triangles will be used increasingly in new ways as architecture increases in complexity. It is important to remember that triangles are strong in terms of rigidity, but while packed in a tessellating arrangement triangles are not as strong as hexagons under compression (hence the prevalence of hexagonal forms in nature). Tessellated triangles still maintain superior strength for cantilevering however, and this is the basis for one of the strongest man made structures, the tetrahedral truss.
