Heidi Blair Pratt (née Montag; born September 15, 1986) is an American television personality. In 2004, she appeared in "", a former MTV reality television series in which her then-friend Lauren Conrad served as a main cast member. In 2006, Montag rose to fame as one of the original cast members of its spin-off "The Hills", which chronicled the lives of Conrad, Montag, and their friends Audrina Patridge and Whitney Port.
In 2006, Montag began dating fellow cast member Spencer Pratt; their relationship and the subsequent feud between Conrad and Montag became a central plot through the remainder of the series. The couple, collectively named "Speidi", married in 2009; their controversial appearances have drawn received much negative media attention. In 2007, Montag launched a music career with the release of her song "Higher". In 2009, she performed her song "Body Language" at the 2009 Miss Universe; the performance was met with a generally negative response. That year, Montag and Pratt appeared on the second season of the reality television series "I'm a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"; they had numerous confrontations and withdrew from the series twice.
In January 2010, Montag gained further notoriety after undergoing ten cosmetic surgery procedures in one day. That month, her debut studio album "Superficial" was released; it was both critically and commercially panned, failing to make back the money Montag spent making it. She has since announced plans to record a second album. In January 2013, Montag and Pratt participated as a single entity on the eleventh edition of the British reality series "Celebrity Big Brother"; despite criticism from other contestants and the public, they finished in second place and were credited as the only interesting housemates.
Life and career.
Early life.
Heidi Blair Montag was born on September 15, 1986 in Crested Butte, Colorado to parents Bill and Darlene. They later divorced, and her mother remarried to Tim Egelhoff; they owned a restaurant in Crested Butte, which was open for twenty-one years before it closed. Her sister Holly is older by three years, and held a recurring position on "The Hills". After graduating from high school, Montag moved to California where she enrolled at the Academy of Art University in San Francisco.
2006–10: "The Hills" and "Superficial".
During freshman orientation at the Academy of Art University, Montag met Lauren Conrad, who at the time was a featured cast member on the MTV reality series "". After the friends transferred to Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in Los Angeles, Montag appeared in four episodes during the show's second season. In 2005, Montag began dating Jordan Eubanks; she ended their relationship in early 2006, calling it "the best decision of life". In 2006, Conrad received her own spin-off series "The Hills", which premiered on May 31. The housemates planned to attend school together, though Montag dropped out after receiving a job at Bolthouse Productions. According to Montag, she "did not find the school challenging." Within two years, she was promoted to event planner at Bolthouse. By the second season, Montag began dating Spencer Pratt; the couple moved into an apartment together by the end of the season. In the third season, Conrad ends her friendship with Montag after she suspects that Pratt spread rumors of a sex tape with her former boyfriend Jason Wahler; Montag stands by her boyfriend when Lauren confronts her. The feud continued through each subsequent season.
In late 2007, Montag began work on her debut studio album, which she aimed to release the following year. In August 2007, a demo version of her song "Body Language", which featured rapping from Pratt, was leaked on "On Air With Ryan Seacrest". Montag stated that the song was a "joke" and did not want it to serve as her music debut. Her first promotional single "Higher" and its accompanying music video were released in February 2008 to an overwhelmingly negative response. In 2008, Montag digitally released extended plays "Wherever I Am" and "Here She Is..."
In May 2007, Montag and Pratt announced their engagement. The fourth season sees Heidi and Spencer elope in Mexico, while Conrad and Montag appear to come to terms. The fifteen-minute ceremony was held on November 20, 2008, with no family members present. As Montag and Pratt decide to marry in the fifth season, she wants Conrad to attend their wedding, an invitation she initially declines. After much debate, Conrad attended the wedding and made peace with Montag in her final appearance in the series. The ceremony was held on April 25, 2009 in Pasadena, California. Montag later expressed much desire to have children, while Pratt was opposed to the idea. In May 2010, they made their final appearance on "The Hills" during the fourth episode of the sixth season. Pratt had threatened to kill a series producer, causing the two to be temporarily taken off the show; his behavior worsened upon completion of anger management training, and they were removed from the cast. Montag later filed charges against series creator Adam Divello, claiming sexual harassment.
On March 3, 2008, Montag's stepbrother Eric O'Hara was killed in an accidental fall from an icy roof. That year, Montag was featured on the front cover of the February issue of "Maxim" and premiered her fashion line Heidiwood on April 11. In October, the line's carrier Anchor Blue confirmed that it would not renew her one-year contract. In January 2009, Montag and Pratt appeared as themselves in a guest appearance on the CBS sitcom "How I Met Your Mother". The couple appeared on the second season of the reality series "I'm a Celebrity... Get Me out of Here!" in April 2009. In early June 2009, it was reported that the couple had quit the show, although they later returned. The couple ultimately withdrew from appearing on the series after Montag suffered from a gastric ulcer which caused her to be hospitalized. Their appearance on the show was criticized after the couple claimed they were subject to torture. While competing on "I'm A Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here!", Montag supported the "Feed the Children" foundation. In May 2009, Montag and Pratt gave out donated pizza from Pizza Hut to homeless people. In 2010, Montag and Pratt participated in the "Avon Walk for Breast Cancer".
After several more leaks, Montag hired songwriter Cathy Dennis to write for her album. Montag later released her fourth promotional single, "More Is More", in early 2009. On the "Billboard" issue dated July 1, 2009, "More Is More" debuted on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart at number fifty, becoming her first song to chart. After five weeks on the chart, it peaked at number twenty-seven. In August 2009, the finished version of "Body Language" became her first official single; she performed the song during the Miss Universe 2009 pageant in the Bahamas on August 23. The performance received generally negative reviews from critics. Montag released her second official single "Superficial" on November 23. Montag appeared on the cover of the September 2009 issue of "Playboy".
In 2009, Montag and Pratt released the book "How to Be Famous: Our Guide to Looking the Part, Playing the Press, and Becoming a Tabloid Fixture", which the couple has jokingly stated they wrote because "they say you should write what you know, and know how to be famous." It received generally negative reviews. In October 2011, Montag announced that she is writing a memoir. On April 10, 2010, Montag hosted the grand opening of the Liquid Pool in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Montag's debut album "Superficial" was digitally released in January 2010. She stated that the self-funded album cost almost $2 million to record, and sold approximately 1,000 copies in its first week of release. In 2012, Montag and producer Steve Morales began work on her second studio album. That April, she released her third EP "Dreams Come True".
On July 30, 2010, Montag filed for divorce, citing irreconcilable differences in the petition. However, the couple called off the divorce in September 2010. In November 2010, Montag and Pratt announced that the reason behind the couple's divorce was to help Montag's career. Later that month, they renewed their wedding vows at a beachfront house in Carpinteria, California.
2011–present: "Famous Food" and "Celebrity Big Brother UK".
In 2010, Montag auditioned for a role in the third installment in the Transformers series, as a replacement for the former female lead Megan Fox; she was ultimately not featured in the film. In February 2011, Montag made her feature film debut as Kimberly in "Just Go with It"; it was met with a generally unfavorable response. Later that summer, she competed alongside Ashley Dupre, DJ Paul, Juicy J, Vincent Pastore, Danielle Staub, and Jake Pavelka in the VH1 reality series "Famous Food". The celebrities worked to open a Hollywood restaurant; the winner, DJ Paul, was given a partnership stake in the business.
In January 2013, Montag and Pratt (as a single entity) competed as housemates on the eleventh edition of the UK television series "Celebrity Big Brother". They had notable arguments with numerous Housemates, mainly Rylan Clarke. The two were nominated for (and survived) eviction three times while in the house. They spent 23 days in the house and became the runner-ups of the series on the final day. On January 24, it was reported that the couple would star in a reality series to be filmed in the UK. On February 18, they appeared in a television special, "Speidi: Scandals, Secrets and Surgery!"
On February 10, Montag confirmed that she was working on a song with British producer Mike Stock; she later confirmed that she would be recording a duet with fellow "Celebrity Big Brother" contestant and now-reconciled friend Rylan Clark.
Public image.
Criticism.
Montag and Pratt's relationship has gained much media attention, largely due to their antics and his antagonistic role on "The Hills" and with other celebritie, including Al Roker. They have been scrutinized by several celebrities, and were described by Roker and Paul Telegdy of NBC as "everything that's wrong with America". 
Plastic surgery.
In April 2007, Montag had a breast augmentation and rhinoplasty, which she confirmed to "Us Weekly" in September. In January 2010, Montag revealed to "People" magazine that she had ten plastic surgery procedures in one day, performed by Dr. Frank Ryan on November 20, 2009. Among the procedures were brow-lifts, ear-pinnings, a chin reduction, as well as a second rhinoplasty and second breast augmentation. She revealed that she almost died from too much Demerol, reducing her breath rate to five breaths per minute, but said it was worth it. Despite a negative reception to her procedures, Montag has gained support from various celebrities including Wendy Williams and Joan Rivers, whom stated that Montag looked "fabulous" after the procedures. Montag has also stated that at one point she would exercise as much as fourteen hours a day to keep her weight down.
