Miyazaki wrote the script after he decided the film would be based on his friend's ten-year-old daughter, who came to visit his house each summer. At the time, Miyazaki was developing two personal projects, but they were rejected. Production of "Spirited Away" began in 2000. During production, Miyazaki realized the film would be over three hours and decided to cut out several parts of the story for its July 27, 2001 release. Pixar director John Lasseter, a fan of Miyazaki, was approached by Walt Disney Pictures to supervise an English-language translation for the film's North American release. Lasseter hired Kirk Wise as director and Donald W. Ernst as producer of the adaptation. Screenwriters Cindy Davis Hewitt and Donald H. Hewitt wrote the English-language dialogue, which they wrote to match the characters' original Japanese-language lip movements. The English-language adaptation was released on September 20, 2002.
When released, "Spirited Away" became the most successful film in Japanese history, grossing over $274 million worldwide. The film overtook "Titanic" (at the time the top grossing film worldwide) in the Japanese box office to become the highest-grossing film in Japanese history with a $229,607,878 total. Acclaimed by international critics, the film is often considered one of the greatest animated films of all-time and it won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature at the 75th Academy Awards, the Golden Bear at the 2002 Berlin International Film Festival (tied with "Bloody Sunday") and is among the top ten in the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14.
Plot.
Ten-year-old Chihiro Ogino and her parents are traveling to their new home when her father takes a wrong turn. Thinking that they have found an abandoned amusement park, her father insists on exploring and they cross a dry riverbed. While Chihiro's parents eat at an empty restaurant stall, Chihiro finds an exquisite bathhouse. She meets a young boy, Haku, who warns her to return across the river before sunset. However, Chihiro discovers too late that her parents turned into pigs and she is unable to cross the flooded river.
After finding Chihiro, Haku has her ask for a job from the bathhouse's boiler-man, Kamaji, a spider yōkai commanding the susuwatari. Kamaji and the worker Lin send Chihiro to the witch Yubaba, who runs the bathhouse. Yubaba gives Chihiro a job but renames her . While visiting her parents' pigpen, Sen finds a goodbye card addressed to Chihiro and realizes that she has already forgotten her name. Haku warns her that Yubaba controls people by taking their names and that if she forgets hers like he has forgotten his, Chihiro cannot leave the spirit world. While working, Sen invites a silent masked creature named No-Face inside, believing him to be a customer. A stink spirit arrives and is Sen's first customer. She discovers he is the spirit of a polluted river. In gratitude for cleaning him, he gives Sen a magic emetic dumpling. No-Face tempts a worker with gold, then swallows him. He demands food and begins tipping extensively.
Sen discovers paper shikigami attacking a dragon and recognizes it as Haku transformed. When Haku crashes into Yubaba's penthouse, Sen follows him upstairs. She reaches Haku, and a shikigami stowed away on her back transforms into Zeniba, Yubaba's twin sister. She transforms Yubaba's baby son Boh into a mouse, creates a decoy baby and turns Yubaba's bird creature into a tiny bird. Zeniba tells Sen that Haku has stolen a magic gold seal from her, and warns Sen that it carries a deadly curse. After Haku dives to the boiler room with Sen and Boh on his back, she feeds him part of the dumpling, causing him to vomit both the seal and a black slug, which Sen crushes under her foot.
Firming her resolve to return the seal and apologize for Haku, Sen confronts No-Face, who is now massive, and feeds him the rest of the dumpling. While vomiting, No-Face chases Sen out of the bathhouse before returning to his normal size. Sen, No-Face and Boh travel to Zeniba. Enraged at the damage caused by No-Face, Yubaba blames Sen for inviting him in and orders that her parents be slaughtered. After Haku reveals that Boh is missing, Yubaba promises to free Sen and her parents in exchange for retrieving Boh.
Sen, No-Face and Boh arrive at Zeniba's house. Zeniba reveals that Sen's love for Haku broke his curse, and Yubaba had used the black slug to control Haku. Haku appears in his dragon form and flies both Sen and Boh back to the bathhouse. On the way back, Sen recalls a memory from her youth in which she had fallen into the Kohaku River but was washed safely ashore. After correctly guessing that Haku is the spirit of the Kohaku River (and thus revealing his real name), Haku is completely freed from Yubaba's control. When they arrive at the bathhouse, Yubaba makes a deal with Sen that in order to break the curse on her parents, Sen must recognize them from among a group of pigs. After Sen correctly states that none of the pigs is either of her parents, Sen is given back her real name Chihiro. Haku takes Chihiro to the now dry riverbed and vows to meet her again. Chihiro crosses the river and reunites with her restored parents, who do not remember what happened. They walk back to their car and drive off.
Cast.
The cast also includes: Yumi Tamai as , A worker at the bathhouse who becomes Chihiro's caretaker, identified as the transformed spirit of a Sable (weasel); she is voiced by Susan Egan in the English version. Ryunosuke Kamiki voices , Yubaba's son and Zeniba's nephew; he is voiced by Tara Strong in the English version. Akio Nakamura voices , a spirit attaching himself to Chihiro; in the English version, he is voiced by Bob Bergen.
Production.
Every summer, Hayao Miyazaki spent his vacation at a mountain cabin with his family and five girls who were friends of the family. The idea for "Spirited Away" came about when he wanted to make a film for these friends. Miyazaki had previously directed films such as "My Neighbor Totoro" and "Kiki's Delivery Service", which were for small children and teenagers, but he had not created a film for ten-year-old girls. For inspiration, he read shōjo manga magazines like "Nakayoshi" and "Ribon" the girls had left at the cabin, but felt they only offered subjects on "crushes" and romance. When looking at his young friends, Miyazaki felt this was not what they "held dear in their hearts" and decided to produce the film about a girl heroine whom they could look up to instead.
Miyazaki wanted to produce a new film for years. He previously wrote two project proposals, but they were rejected. The first one was based on the Japanese book "Kirino Mukouno Fushigina Machi", and the second one was about a teenage heroine. Miyazaki's third proposal, which ended up becoming "Sen and Chihiro Spirited Away", was more successful. The three stories revolved around a bathhouse that was based on a bathhouse in Miyazaki's hometown. Miyazaki thought the bathhouse was a mysterious place, and there was a small door next to one of the bathtubs in the bathhouse. Miyazaki was always curious to what was behind it, and he made up several stories about it; one of which was the inspiration for the bathhouse in "Spirited Away".
Production of "Spirited Away" commenced in 2000 on a budget of ¥1.9 billion (US$19 million). As with "Princess Mononoke", Miyazaki and the Studio Ghibli staff experimented with computer animation. With the use of more computers and programs such as Softimage, the staff learned the software, but kept the technology at a level to enhance the story, not to "steal the show." Each character was mostly hand-drawn, with Miyazaki working alongside his animators to see they were getting it just right. The biggest difficulty in making the film was to reduce its length. When production started, Miyazaki realized it would be more than three hours long if he made it according to his plot. He had to delete many scenes from the story, and tried to reduce the "eye-candy" in the film because he wanted it to be simple. Miyazaki did not want to make the hero a "pretty girl." At the beginning, he was frustrated at how she looked "dull" and thought, "She isn't cute. Isn't there something we can do?" As the film neared the end, however, he was relieved to feel "she will be a charming woman."
Miyazaki based some of the buildings in the spirit world on the buildings in the real-life Edo-Tokyo Open Air Architectural Museum in Koganei, Tokyo, Japan. He often visited the museum for inspiration while working on the film. Miyazaki had always been interested in the Pseudo-Western style buildings from the Meiji period that were available there. The museum made Miyazaki feel nostalgic, "especially when I stand here alone in the evening, near closing time, and the sun is setting – tears well up in my eyes." Another major inspiration was the Notoyaryokan, a traditional Japanese inn located in Yamagata Prefecture, famous for its exquisite architecture and ornamental features. The old gold town of Jiufen in Taiwan also served as an inspirational model for Miyazaki's film. The Dōgo Onsen is also often said to be a key inspiration for the Spirited Away onsen/bathhouse
Music.
The film score of "Spirited Away" was composed and conducted by Miyazaki's regular collaborator Joe Hisaishi, and performed by the New Japan Philharmonic. His piece received the 56th Mainichi Film Competition Award for Best Music, the Tokyo International Anime Fair 2001 Best Music Award in the Theater Movie category, and the 16th Japan Gold Disk Award for Animation Album of the Year. Later, Hisaishi added lyrics to "One Summer's Day" and named the new version which was performed by Ayaka Hirahara.
The closing song, was written and performed by Youmi Kimura, a composer and lyre-player from Osaka. The lyrics were written by Kimura's friend Wakako Kaku. The song was intended to be used for , a different Miyazaki film which was never released. In the special features of the DVD, Hayao Miyazaki explains how the song in fact inspired him to create "Spirited Away".
Besides the original soundtrack, there is also an image album, which contains ten tracks.
English adaptation.
Walt Disney Pictures dubbed the English adaptation of "Spirited Away", under the supervision of Pixar animator John Lasseter. Lasseter is a "huge" Miyazaki fan, and he and his staff often sit down and watch some of Miyazaki's work when they encounter story problems. The first viewing of "Spirited Away" in the United States was in Pixar's screening room. After seeing the film, Lasseter was "ecstatic." Upon hearing his reaction to the film, people at Disney asked Lasseter if he would be interested in trying to bring "Spirited Away" to an American audience. Despite his busy schedule, Lasseter agreed to executive produce the English adaptation. Soon, several others began to join the project: "Beauty and the Beast" co-director Kirk Wise and "Aladdin" co-producer Donald W. Ernst joined Lasseter as director and producer of "Spirited Away" respectively.
The cast of the film consisted of Daveigh Chase, Susan Egan, David Ogden Stiers and John Ratzenberger (considered by Lasseter as his "good luck charm"). With the cast and talent in place, word began to spread around the Internet. Initially, news was light. Pixar had already begun to push their upcoming fall films, but "Spirited Away" was only mentioned in a small scrolling section of their film page on Disney's official website. The promotions were also quite trying, as Disney had sidelined their official website for "Spirited Away" and hidden it in the confines of Buena Vista's many 'labyrinths'. While homepages for films like "Signs" were clearly displayed, it was only through some people's curiosity the "Spirited Away" website could be found.
Themes.
The major themes of "Spirited Away" center on the protagonist Chihiro and her liminal journey through the realm of spirits, wherein Chihiro becomes separated from everything she has known. Chihiro's experience in the alternate world, frequently compared to Lewis Carroll's "Alice's Adventures in Wonderland", represents her passage from childhood to adulthood. Yubaba had many similarities to The Coachman from "Pinocchio", in the sense that she transformed humans into pigs in a similar way that the boys of Pleasure Island were transformed into donkeys. Upon gaining employment at the bathhouse, Yubaba's seizure of Chihiro's true name, a common theme in folklore, symbolically kills the child Chihiro, who must therefore assume adulthood. The following trials and obstacles Chihiro must overcome thus become rites-of-passage according to the monomyth format; to recover "continuity with her past", Chihiro must create a new identity.
Besides the coming of age theme, "Spirited Away" contains critical commentary on modern Japanese society concerning generational conflicts, the struggle with dissolving traditional culture and customs within a global society, and environmental pollution. Just as Chihiro seeks her past identity, Japan, in its anxiety over the economic downturn occurring during the release of Spirited Away in 2001, sought to reconnect to past values. In interview, Miyazaki has commented on this nostalgic element for an old Japan. Initially, Chihiro travels past the abandoned fairground, a symbol for Japan's burst "economic bubble", and her parents' gluttony and transformation into pigs, to reach the fantasy world replete with Japanese culture and fable in the amalgam of the bathhouse.
Nonetheless, the "bathhouse of the spirits has its own ambivalence, and its own darkness... Miyazaki is not so simple-minded as to locate a perfect vision in the past or the spiritual." and as a place of "excess and greed" as depicted in the initial appearance of the No-Face. In stark contrast to the "archetypal approaches to cultural recovery such as recognition, proper identification, spiritual cleansing and sacrifice," embodied in Chihiro's journey and transformation, the constant background presence of the ambiguity of the bathhouse reminds the audience reality is not so simple: "the bathhouse's simultaneous incorporation of the carnivalesque and the chaotic suggests the threats to the collectivity are not simply outside ones." The environmental comments concerning the trash deforming the River God and Haku's plight over the loss of his river to apartment complexes further indicate the sources of pollution within the bathhouse, a place of ritual purity, come from within the Japanese society.
Release.
Box office.
"Spirited Away" opened theatrically in Japan on July 27, 2001 by Japanese film distributor Toho, grossing US$229,607,878 to become the highest-grossing film in Japanese history. It was the first film to have earned $200 million at the worldwide box office before opening in the United States. 
The film was dubbed into English by Walt Disney Pictures, under the supervision of Pixar's John Lasseter. The dubbed version premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival on September 7, 2002 and was subsequently released in North America on September 20, 2002. The film grossed US$449,839 in its opening weekend and had made slightly over $10 million by September 2003. The film went on to gross US$274,925,095 worldwide.
Critical reception.
"Spirited Away" received critical acclaim . The film holds a 97% approval rating on the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 156 reviews, with an average rating of 8.5/10, and the consensus: ""Spirited Away" is a dazzling, enchanting, and gorgeously drawn fairy tale that will leave viewers a little more curious and fascinated by our world." On Metacritic, the film achieved a weighted average score of 94 out of 100 based on 37 reviews, signifying "universal acclaim".
Roger Ebert of the "Chicago Sun-Times" gave the film a full four stars and praised the film and Miyazaki's direction. Ebert also said that "Spirited Away" was one of "the year's best films." Elvis Mitchell of "The New York Times" positively reviewed the film and praised the animation sequences. Mitchell also drew a favorable comparison to Lewis Carroll's "Through the Looking-Glass" and also said that his movies are about "moodiness as mood" and the characters "heightens the tension." Derek Elley of "Variety" said that "Spirited Away" "can be enjoyed by sprigs and adults alike" and praised the animation and music. Kenneth Turan of the "Los Angeles Times" praised the voice acting and said the film is the "product of a fierce and fearless imagination whose creations are unlike any[thing a person has seen before". Turan also praised Miyazaki's direction. "Orlando Sentinel"'s critic Jay Boyar also praised Miyazaki's direction and said the film is "the perfect choice for a child who has moved into a new home."
"Rotten Tomatoes" ranked "Spirited Away" as the thirteenth-best animated film on the site. In 2005, it was ranked as the twelfth-best animated film of all time by IGN. The film is also ranked No. 9 of the highest-rated movies of all time on Metacritic; being the highest rated traditionally animated film on the site. The film ranked number 10 in ""Empire" magazine's "The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema" in 2010.
Home media.
"Spirited Away" was first released on VHS and DVD format on July 19, 2002. The Japanese DVD releases includes storyboards for the film and the special edition includes a Ghibli DVD player.
In North America, the film was released on DVD and VHS formats by Buena Vista Distribution on April 15, 2003. The attention brought by the Oscar win resulted in the film becoming a strong seller. The bonus features include Japanese trailers, a making-of documentary which originally aired on Nippon Television, interviews with the North American voice actors, a select storyboard-to-scene comparison and "The Art of Spirited Away", a documentary narrated by actor Jason Marsden.
The film was released on DVD in the UK on March 29, 2004. In 2005, it was re-released by Optimum Releasing with a more accurate subtitle track and additional bonus features.
