Idrissa Akuna "Idris" Elba (born 6 September 1972) is an English television, theatre, and film actor who has starred in both British and American productions. He grew up in Canning Town, East London. One of his first acting roles was in the soap opera "Family Affairs". He is known for playing Russell "Stringer" Bell, a Baltimore drug lord and aspiring businessman, in HBO's critically acclaimed show "The Wire". Elba is a DJ under the moniker DJ Big Driis/Big Driis the Londoner, and a hip-hop soul recording artist.
Some of his other most known roles have come in "American Gangster", "Takers", "The Losers", "Thor" and "Prometheus". Besides a prominent role on "The Wire", Elba's other television roles include "Ultraviolet" and "The Inspector Lynley Mysteries", recurring roles in "The Office" and "The Big C", and the title role of Detective John Luther in "Luther", which airs on BBC One. Elba has won a Golden Globe for his portrayal of DCI Luther.
Early life.
Elba, an only child, was born Idrissa Akuna Elba, and shortened his first name at school in Canning Town, where he first became involved in acting. His father, Winston, is a Sierra Leonean and worked at a Ford factory, and his mother, Eve, is a Ghanaian and had a clerical job. Elba's parents met in West Africa before moving to East London. Elba grew up in East Ham, and began helping an uncle with his wedding-DJ business in 1986, and within a year he had started his own DJ company with some of his best friends. Elba left school in 1988 and won a place in the National Youth Music Theatre, thanks to a £1,500 Prince’s Trust grant, but later ended up having to do everything from tyre-fitting to cold-call advertising sales to pay the rent between roles in "Crimewatch" murder reconstructions. Elba was working in nightclubs under the DJ nickname Big Driis in 1991, but began auditioning for television parts in his early twenties. After a stint in the National Youth Music Theatre, Elba worked the night shift at a Ford factory in Dagenham from 1989–90. Elba started his acting career while in secondary school with encouragement from his drama teacher.
Acting career.
Television.
Although his film, television, and stage work officially commenced around 1992, in 1995 he landed his first role on a series called "Bramwell", a medical drama set in 1890s England. His first credited role arrived in 1995, with a supporting role as a gigolo on the episode of "Absolutely Fabulous", entitled "Sex." Many supporting roles on British television followed, including such series as "The Bill" and "The Ruth Rendell Mysteries". He joined the cast of the soap opera "Family Affairs" and rose to prominence in the acclaimed serial "Ultraviolet". He went on to appear in a more established television series, "Dangerfield", in 1999, playing a forensic scientist.
He decided to move to New York City soon after. He returned to England occasionally for a job, such as a part in one of the "Inspector Lynley Mysteries", a top-rated crime series. In 2001, Elba played Achilles in a stage production of "Troilus and Cressida" in New York City. After a supporting turn on a 2001 episode of "Law & Order", he landed a starring role on a 2002 HBO drama, "The Wire". From 2002 to 2004, Elba portrayed Russell "Stringer" Bell in the HBO drama series, perhaps his best known role in the US. In 2005, he portrayed Captain Augustin Muganza in "Sometimes in April", an HBO film about the Rwandan Genocide. Elba appeared on the 2007 BET special "Black Men: The Truth". Elba appeared in the role of Charlie Gotso in "The No. 1 Ladies' Detective Agency" opposite Jill Scott and Anika Noni Rose, filmed in Botswana. The series premiered on 23 March 2008, Easter Sunday, on BBC One, receiving a high 6.3 million viewers and 27% of the audience share.
In January 2009, it was reported per "Variety" that Elba would portray Charles Miner, a new rival to Dunder Mifflin regional manager Michael Scott (Steve Carell) for NBC's "The Office". Elba appeared in a six episode story arc later in the 2009 season as well as the season finale.
In September 2009, Elba signed a deal to star as the lead role in the 6-part BBC television show "Luther", which aired in May 2010. In October 2009, it NBC announced Elba as executive producer of an as yet untitled legal drama. He portrayed Laura Linney's lover on Showtime's "The Big C" in 2010.
At the 69th Golden Globe Awards telecast on 15 January 2012, Elba won the Award for Best Actor in a Series, Mini-Series, or Motion Picture Made for Television for his portrayal of DCI Luther in the BBC Crime-Thriller series "Luther".
Film work.
In 2006, Elba signed on as the lead of the 2007 film "Tyler Perry's Daddy's Little Girls", playing Monty, a blue-collar mechanic who falls in love with a six-figure attorney (Gabrielle Union) helping him gain custody of his kids, and finds the relationship and his custody hopes threatened by the return of his ex-wife. He joined the supporting cast of Juan Carlos Fresnadillo's "28 Weeks Later" (2007), the zombie horror sequel to Danny Boyle's 2002 "28 Days Later". He filmed "This Christmas" with Chris Brown, Mekhi Phifer, Loretta Devine and Regina King, that brought in nearly $50 million at the box office in 2007.
In 2008, Elba starred in the horror film "Prom Night" and Guy Ritchie's "RocknRolla". In January 2009, Elba starred in horror film "The Unborn". He starred in "Obsessed", alongside Beyoncé Knowles and Ali Larter, as an asset manager who has a beautiful wife (Knowles) and thriving career until a temp office worker (Larter) begins stalking him. "Obsessed" was a box office success, taking $29 million in its opening weekend. "Obsessed" was released on DVD on 4 August 2009.
Elba next film was "Legacy" (2010) in which he portrayed a black ops soldier, Malcolm, who returned to Brooklyn after a failed mission in Eastern Europe, where he undertook a journey looking for retribution. He starred in Dark Castle's adaptation of DC/Vertigo's "The Losers", under the direction of Sylvain White, in the role of Roque, the second-in-command of a black-ops team out for revenge against a government that did them wrong. Filming took place in Puerto Rico and the movie was released in April 2010. Elba appeared in the 2010 thriller "Takers", also starring Hayden Christensen, Chris Brown, T.I., and Paul Walker. He played Heimdall in Kenneth Branagh's 2011 "Thor" film (based upon the Marvel Comics superhero of the same name). In August 2010, Elba signed up to portray the title character in a reboot of James Patterson's Alex Cross film franchise. However in February 2011 he was replaced by Tyler Perry. Elba appeared in the 2012 sequel, "", alongside Nicolas Cage, with Elba playing an alcoholic warrior monk tasked with finding Ghost Rider. On Wednesday, 22 June 2011, Legendary Pictures announced that Elba had joined Guillermo del Toro's next film, "Pacific Rim" in the role of Sensi". In February 2012, Elba finally confirmed the rumours that he would portray former South African President Nelson Mandela in the film based on the autobiography, "Long Walk to Freedom". In June 2012, Elba portrayed the spaceship captain in "Prometheus".
Music career.
In 2001, Elba appeared in music videos for Fat Joe, Angie Stone and English rapper Giggs. In 2006, he recorded the four-song EP "Big Man" for Hevlar Records. He co-produced and performed on the intro to Jay-Z's 2007 album "American Gangster". He DJ'd at the 2007 NBA All Star parties at the The Venetian and Ice House Lounge in Las Vegas. Elba appeared in the "Respect My Conglomerate" music video for Busta Rhymes's 2009 "Back on My BS" album. In July 2009, Elba was the DJ for BET's new series "Rising Icons". Elba announced the release of his first single "Please Be True." Elba is currently working on his second EP, and plans to tour Europe in late 2009. In the August 2009 issue of "Essence" magazine, he announced the name of his six-song EP as "Kings Among Kings". He released his EP "High Class Problems Vol. 1" in the United Kingdom in February 2010. In 2011, he performed on the intro to Pharoahe Monch's album "W.A.R. (We Are Renegades)". In 2012 he directed and performed in the Mumford and Sons video Lover of the Light.
Personal life.
Elba is currently single. He and his ex-wife have a daughter, Isan. Elba spends much of his time in London, but also owns a home in Atlanta, so he can be close to his daughter.
In April 2009, the Prince's Trust, which Elba credits with helping to start his career, appointed him its Anti-Crime Ambassador, and in July 2010, he announced his support for Oona King in her campaign to become the Labour Party candidate for Mayor of London in 2012.
Elba is a fan of Arsenal F.C., while his father supports Manchester United.
In the media.
Elba was featured as one of the "Ten Hottest Men on the Planet" in the April 2004 issue of "Essence" magazine and again in the November 2005 issue. He was selected as one of "People Magazine"'s annual 100 Most Beautiful People in the World, in May 2007. Elba appeared on the August 2009 and the November 2011 covers of "Essence" magazine. He appeared on the August 2010 cover of "Ebony" magazine. In 2012, Elba also served as a celebrity endorser for "Tanqueray" gin, appearing online in ads.
Elba has also been in talks with James Bond producer Barbara Broccoli, to possibly portray the British spy in future films, but Elba has had concerns that his color, rather than his skills as an actor, may be given more attention. However, actress Naomie Harris has expressed her support for Elba if he was to take on the role.
