Kick-Ass 2 is an upcoming 2013 film based on the comic book of the same name by Mark Millar and John S. Romita, Jr. and is a sequel to the 2010 film "Kick-Ass". The film was written and directed by Jeff Wadlow and co-produced by Matthew Vaughn who directed the first film.
The film stars Aaron Taylor-Johnson, Chloë Grace Moretz and Christopher Mintz-Plasse reprising their roles from the first film. 
"Kick-Ass 2" began principal photography on 7 September 2012, and concluded on 23 November 2012. The film is due for release on 28 June 2013 in the United States and on 19 July 2013 in the United Kingdom.
Development and pre-production.
In May 2012, it was reported that a sequel would be distributed by Universal Studios, and that Matthew Vaughn had chosen Jeff Wadlow, who also wrote the script, to direct the sequel. Later that month, Aaron Taylor-Johnson and Chloë Grace Moretz entered negotiations to reprise their roles as Kick-Ass and Hit-Girl, respectively.
In July 2012, Christopher Mintz-Plasse confirmed that he would return as Chris D'Amico who becomes the super-villain The Mother Fucker, the main antagonist of the film. That same month, it was announced that John Leguizamo would play a character named Javier, one of The Mother Fucker's bodyguards.
In August 2012, it was reported that Donald Faison would play the superhero Doctor Gravity. Also that month, Yancy Butler was set to reprise her role as Angie D'Amico, Lyndsy Fonseca stated that she would return as Katie Deauxma in a smaller role, Robert Emms was cast as the former police officer turned superhero Insect Man, Morris Chestnut was confirmed to replace Omari Hardwick as Hit-Girl's guardian Marcus Williams, Lindy Booth was confirmed to play Night Bitch, a superhero seeking to avenge the murder of her sister, Andy Nyman was announced to play one of the villians named The Tumor, and Claudia Lee joined the cast as Brooke, the leader of a gang of school bullies. 
In September 2012, Jim Carrey was officialy cast in the role of Colonel Stars and Stripes, the leader of a group of superheroes called "Justice Forever". Also in September, Enzo Cilenti was confirmed to appear in the film as Javier's sidekick. It was confirmed that bodybuilder Olga Kurkulina would portray the villainess Mother Russia. It was revealed that Clark Duke would reprise his role as Marty Eisenberg, who becomes the superhero Battle Guy, and that Augustus Prew would take over the role of Todd Haynes from Evan Peters, who becomes the superhero Ass-Kicker.
Filming.
Principal photography began on 7 September 2012 in Mississauga, Canada. Once filming in Mississauga wrapped in late September, the cast and crew continued shooting in London, England. Filming concluded on 23 November 2012.
