Vincent Anthony "Vince" Vaughn (born March 28, 1970) is an American film actor, screenwriter, producer, comedian and activist. He began acting in the late 1980s, appearing in minor television roles before attaining wider recognition with the 1996 movie "Swingers". He has since appeared in a number of films, including ', "Return to Paradise", "Old School", ', "Wedding Crashers", "The Break Up", "Fred Claus", "Couples Retreat" and "The Watch". Vaughn is also a close friend to actor/director Jon Favreau. He is one of the tallest leading men in Hollywood at 6 feet and 5 inches.
Early life.
Vince Vaughn was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota. His mother, Shae Eileen (née DePalmo), a native of Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, is a real-estate agent and stock broker who was once ranked as one of the United States' top money managers by "Bloomberg Wealth Manager" magazine. His father, Vernon Lindsay Vaughn, worked as a salesman for a toy company. His parents divorced in 1991. He has two older sisters, Victoria and Valerie. He is of English, Irish, German, Lebanese, and Italian ancestry, and, as a child, he was raised "both Protestant and Catholic" by his Catholic mother and Protestant father.
Vaughn grew up in Buffalo Grove, Illinois, where he played football, baseball and wrestled, although he has called himself unathletic and "very average" at sports in high school. He then moved to Lake Forest, Illinois, where he graduated from Lake Forest High School in 1988. He was introduced to musical theater at a young age and decided to become an actor in 1987. He has credited his mother as the inspiration behind his career, saying, "I saw her overcome stuff, and I thought if you worked hard at something you'd give yourself a chance."
Career.
In 1988, Vaughn was cast in a Chevrolet television commercial and subsequently moved to Hollywood. Although he appeared in the 1989 season of the television series, "China Beach" and in three "CBS Schoolbreak Specials" (in 1990), he was a struggling actor and faced many rejections.
His first film role was 1993's "Rudy" playing Jamie O'Hare, where he also struck up a friendship with featured Jon Favreau. Two years later, he was cast a lead role in a proposed revival of "77 Sunset Strip" that was to air on the fledgling WB Television Network, but the project ceased development after initial testing. Vaughn did not receive wider success until his role in 1996's "Swingers" with Jon Favreau. "Swingers" was released in July 1996 and became a successful independent film. Vince's father Vernon also did a cameo in this film.
Afterwards, director Steven Spielberg cast Vaughn in the blockbuster "" which gave him increased exposure. In 1998, he starred in the critically acclaimed drama "Return to Paradise" with Anne Heche. In 2000, he starred in "The Cell" with Jennifer Lopez and in 2001, appeared in "Made", another film penned by Favreau. Vaughn also appeared in Dwight Yoakam's directorial debut movie "South of Heaven, West of Hell".
Vaughn's role in the successful 2003 comedy "Old School" skyrocketed his popularity. In 2004, he appeared alongside Ben Stiller in the hit films "Starsky & Hutch" and "". He then had roles in 2005's "Be Cool", "Thumbsucker" and "Mr. & Mrs. Smith".
Also in 2005, Vaughn starred alongside Owen Wilson in the comedy "Wedding Crashers", which grossed over $200 million at the United States box office. After this series of roles, Vaughn was dubbed one of the Hollywood Frat Pack, a group of actors who frequently co-star in film comedies. In 2006, Vaughn starred with Jennifer Aniston in the comedy-drama "The Break-Up" (also with Favreau and his father).
In 2007, Vaughn also starred in a comedy called "Fred Claus", in which he played the sarcastic, wild-at-heart older brother of Santa Claus (Paul Giamatti). "Fred Claus" was directed by David Dobkin, who previously directed Vaughn in "Wedding Crashers", and co-starred Elizabeth Banks and Kevin Spacey. Next, he momentarily moved from comedy to drama in Sean Penn's critically acclaimed film "Into the Wild", a film about the adventures of Christopher McCandless, which was also a best-selling book by Jon Krakauer. He played the role of Wayne Westerberg opposite Emile Hirsch as McCandless.
In 2009, Vaughn starred in "Couples Retreat", a comedy chronicling four couples who partake in therapy sessions at a tropical island resort. Malin Åkerman played his wife. Vince's father Vernon portrayed his father in this film.
In February 2010, Vaughn was among the nearly 80 musicians and actors to sing on the charity-single remake of "We Are the World".
Vaughn starred in Ron Howard's comedy, "The Dilemma", released in January 2011. Vaughn is set to produce and star in a movie based on Ridley Pearson's thriller novel "The Risk Agent".
On July 31, 2012, it was announced that Vaughn would be developing a reboot produced by CBS to the sitcom "The Brady Bunch", which was taken off the air in 1974.
On December 5, 2012 it was announced that Vaughn is working on a project with Peter Billingsley and Glenn Beck called Pursuit of the Truth for TheBlaze TV.
Personal life.
Family and relationships.
Vaughn dated Jennifer Aniston, his co-star in "The Break-Up", between 2005 and 2006 in a relationship that became a subject of tabloid speculation. In the fall of 2006, Vaughn filed a lawsuit against three tabloid magazines accusing them of falsely claiming that he had been unfaithful to Aniston. In December 2006, both Vaughn and Aniston's reps confirmed that they had broken up.
On March 5, 2009, it was announced that Vaughn and Canadian realtor Kyla Weber were engaged. Vaughn and Weber married on January 2, 2010, in a small ceremony at the Great Hall of the historic Armour House at Lake Forest Academy in Vaughn's hometown of Lake Forest, Illinois. The couple's daughter, Locklyn Kyla Vaughn, was born on December 18, 2010 in Chicago.
Political opinions.
Vaughn supported Republican Presidential candidate Ron Paul in both the 2008 and 2012 elections. 
Vaughn has appeared at a number of Libertarian inaugurations and announced his support for Ron Paul's candidacy for president.
Sports teams.
Vaughn is a fan of the Fighting Irish, (South bend, Indiana) of Notre Dame, and has been seen on game day cheering on the Irish. He is a strong supporter of the Chicago Cubs baseball team. He has been spotted at many local games, and has sung "Take Me Out to the Ballgame" during the seventh inning stretch at Wrigley several times. He has occasionally appeared at games of the crosstown White Sox as well. He is also an avid hockey enthusiast, notably of the NHL's Chicago Blackhawks. He is a Blackhawks season ticket holder and regularly attends home games at the United Center where he has maintained a presence including the team's 2010 and 2011 NHL Playoffs.
Awards.
2006
2007
