This is a list of characters from the Disney/Pixar's "Toy Story" trilogy which consists of the animated films "Toy Story" (released 1995), "Toy Story 2" (1999), and "Toy Story 3" (2010).
Andy's toys.
Woody.
Sheriff Woody Pride is a cowboy, and Andy's favorite. Appearing in all three "Toy Story" films, he usually acts as the leader of the gang. His rivalry with Buzz forms the basis of the plot of the first film. In "Toy Story 2", he is stolen at a yard sale by a toy collector, causing the other toys to embark on a rescue mission.
Buzz Lightyear.
Buzz Lightyear is a "space ranger", and wears a space suit with various features such as retractable wings and transparent helmet, a laser "weapon", and various sound effects. In "Toy Story", He begins the series and develops a rivalry with Woody, who resents him for getting more attention as the newcomer. He is extremely loyal to his friends. During his time trapped at Sid's house, Hannah, Sid's sister, called Buzz Mrs. Nesbit. In "Toy Story 3", a friendship begins to develop between Buzz and Jessie. He is particularly open with his affection when switched to "Spanish mode".
Jessie.
Jessica Jane "Jessie" Pride is a cowgirl, and part of the Woody's Round Up gang. She first appeared in "Toy Story 2" along with Bullseye and Stinky Pete. Initially, Jessie was hesitant to join Andy's friends. After she becomes part of the family, she is very happy. In "Toy Story 3", she was riding Bullseye when Woody fell off the train in Andy's opening sequence. She argued with Woody on their way to Sunnyside Daycare because of when the others think Andy threw them out. Later in the film, Jessie feels close with Buzz, even when Buzz got switched into Spanish. At the end, Jessie and Buzz danced to the Spanish version of "You've Got a Friend in Me".
Rex.
Rex is an excitable large, green, plastic "Tyrannosaurus rex" who suffers from anxiety, an inferiority complex ("I just don't think I could take that kind of rejection!") and the concern that he is not scary enough. Rex's worst fear (after Sid) is that Andy will get another, scarier dinosaur, but feels better after Buzz gives him a few pointers on how to roar more effectively. He is among the largest of Andy's toys, and is often depicted as the heaviest. He is voiced by Earl Boen in the "Toy Story 2" video game. Comic irony is created by the fact that although Rex is a toy dinosaur he dislikes confrontation and is sensitive in nature. 
In "Toy Story", he states that he was manufactured by a smaller company that was purchased in a leveraged buyout by Mattel (coincidentally, real-life Rex toys used to be made by Hasbro, but as of 2009 are indeed made by Mattel). He is first introduced when he moves Woody's doodle pad, then tries to scare Woody with his roar. When Buzz arrives, Rex is fascinated by his cool features. Later, when Woody knocks Buzz out the window, he relucantly sides against Woody out of pressure from the other toys, even though he knows that it was an accident he is however a great deal less antagonistic than most the other toys in this instance and is also the one of the few not to attempt physical attack on Woody. He later feels guilty when everyone discovers Woody was telling the truth all along. He gains confidence at the end, saying he could play as the dominant predator if Andy gets a leaf eater.
The beginning of "Toy Story 2", he is shown playing the "Buzz Lightyear: Attack on Zurg" video game, which he loses, much to his frustration. He is responsible for the toys seeing the commercial for Al's Toy Barn commercial when he accidentally clicks the remote control. Though afraid, he is brave enough to go with Buzz, Hamm, Slinky, and Mr. Potato Head to rescue Woody, believing that his video game experiences have prepared him for real combat. Inside Al's Toy Barn, he excitedly finds a "Buzz Lightyear" video game strategy guide, which he takes with him. He loses the guide later, but is still able to give Buzz #2 tips from the guide on defeating Zurg. In a parody of "Jurassic Park", he chases a car driven by the toys in Al's Toy Barn, in which Mr. Potato Head spots his reflection in the rear view mirror. It is Rex's tail sticking out of Al's bag that later causes the real Buzz to go after them. When Zurg is about to finish off Buzz #2, he turns away, not bearing to look anymore, but his tail knocks Zurg down the elevator shaft, making him feel overjoyed about finally defeating Zurg for real.
In "Toy Story 3", he is Woody's "Dinosaur who Eats Force Field Dogs" in Andy's opening western play sequence, where he frightens One-Eyed Bart and his gang with a terrifying roar, but is then overpowered by a flood of monkeys. He is seen to be especially sad about Andy's lack of attention to the toys, expressing joy when Andy touches him for only a few moments. When the toys are initially left for the garbage pickup, he is ultimately responsible for saving them when he uses his tail to rip a hole in the garbage bag. He is initially happy to be at Sunnyside, and is visibly sad when Woody leaves, but becomes dismayed after a rough playtime with the toddlers, commenting "Andy never played with us like that!" He is imprisoned along with Andy's other toys by Lotso and his gang. Later, at the garbage dump, Rex is the last to escape the shredder, only barely escaping when he grabs onto a broken fan. Standing on the shredded trash, he discovers a source of light thinking that it's daylight, but Woody convinces him that it's not; it's the light of the flame from the incinerator. When the toys are finally given to Bonnie, Rex becomes close friends with Trixie the Triceratops.
In an outtake of "Toy Story 2", the toys use him as a battering ram, only for Rex to hurt his head when banged against the locked grate. Rex makes a cameo appearance in an outtake of "Monsters, Inc." where he waits at the crosswalk with Mike and Sulley in a scene reminiscent of "Jurassic Park". Rex is a playable character in the "Toy Story Racer" video game. In the movie "WALL-E", Rex is seen in the background inside the truck.
Rex reappears in the theatrical short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry" and "Partysaurus Rex".
Slinky Dog.
Slinky Dog is among one of Woody's most faithful, loyal companions; a plastic dachshund with a Slinky replacing a mid-section. He shares a particularly close bond with Woody, as mentioned earlier, and is depicted as being typically easygoing, relaxed, and friendly. As an occasional gag, his abdomen may either benefit or burden him with its uses and disadvantages, such as its capability to stretch to convenient lengths or it becoming intertwined with various objects. He first debuted in the first film of the franchise, in which he appeared to be among the most faithful to Woody even after his betrayal of Buzz (albeit he still seemed skeptical of Woody after his return, but seemed reluctant to accept the facts of the cowboy's vengeance). He may usually play a slightly minor role, but peppered with moments of vitality in the film, such as endeavors embarked upon by the toys, where the advantages presented by his convenient Slinky mid-section can be used as a weapon or helpful tool. He reappeared in "Toy Story 2" in a slightly larger role, accompanying the other toys on their quest to locate Woody who has been snatched by a toy collector named Al at a yard sale, but still filling a similar purpose as on other occasions. Naturally, he made an appearance in "Toy Story 3" as well, where, like the others, he was crestfallen by Andy's maturity and donation of the toys to a daycare center in which they are subjected to violent play and abuse, joining the others on missions and on accomplishing goals, and was later adopted by Bonnie. In this film, his Slinky body was very useful in one scene, when he helped to bridge a gap between a ledge and a bin when they try to escape the daycare.
Hamm.
Hamm is a wise cracking realist piggy bank with a cork in his belly in place of a stopper. He and Mr. Potato Head appear to be best friends, and are often seen playing games, such as Battleship (with Hamm always winning). Out of all the toys, he is shown to have the most knowledge of the outside, often being very familiar with various gadgets that are shown, likely as an homage to Ratzenberger's famous role of mail carrier and bar know-it-all Cliff Clavin on the sitcom "Cheers". 
In "Toy Story", Hamm first appears early in the film, when Mr. Potato Head mixes up his face and jokes that he's "Picasso", but Hamm doesn't get it, causing Potato Head to call him an "uncultured swine". He interrupts Woody's staff meeting by yelling that there are "birthday guests at 3:00". He becomes fascinated with Buzz's features and makes fun of Woody, along with Potato Head. When Woody accidentally knocks Buzz off the window, Hamm is one of the many toys who believes that Woody did it intentionally, and is happy to see that Woody has disappeared. Later, when Hamm and Potato Head spot Woody at Sid's House with Buzz's broken arm, they believe he murdered Buzz, and leave him stranded there. When Woody and Buzz escape from Sid's House, and Woody pushes RC out of the moving truck, Hamm thinks he's trying to murder RC as well, and attacks him along with the others. Hamm feels guilty when it is discovered that Woody was telling the truth all along. At the end, Hamm cheers for Potato Head when Molly gets a Mrs. Potato Head for Christmas.
In "Toy Story 2", Hamm is shown to hate the Al's Toy Barn chicken mascot the most of all the toys. When Woody is stolen, he and Mr. Potato Head set up a crime scene to present Woody's kidnapping to the other toys. After helping the toys find the Al's Toy Barn commercial on TV, Hamm goes with Buzz, Slinky, Rex, and Mr. Potato Head on a mission to rescue Woody. On the mission, it is revealed that Hamm is embarrassed to be seen without his cork in. In Al's Toy Barn, Hamm spots a "Bonus Belt" Buzz, thinking he is Andy's Buzz, though he comments on the new Buzz's odd behavior. Ultimately, Hamm and the other toys are able to rescue Woody and return home. In the morning, Hamm attempts to beat a "Buzz Lightyear: Attack on Zurg" video game that is previously tried by Rex and asks if he can play for him, but Rex doesn't want to play after Rex defeated Zurg in the elevator, He fails at the Buzz Lightyear Video Game. Hamm and Rex then watch an Al's Toy Barn commercial on TV in which Al cries and seems to have been poor, which makes Hamm comment that crime doesn't pay.
In "Toy Story 3", Hamm is "Evil Dr. Porkchop" in Andy's western play opening sequence, appearing in a giant pig-shaped spaceship to rescue One-Eyed Bart and thwart Woody and his gang. Later, when the toys are accidentally thrown out, Hamm is angry, believing that Andy threw them out on purpose. He escapes with the rest of the toys to Sunnyside Daycare, where he is initially happy to be played with, but dismayed as he realizes the toddlers are too rough. Later that night, Hamm and Mr. Potato Head argue about who didn't believe Woody, and Hamm was right, while Mr. Potato Head was wrong. When the toys are imprisoned by Lotso and his henchmen, Hamm is shown to be able to play the harmonica. When Woody comes back to rescue the toys from Sunnyside he quotes "Return of the Astro-Nut" on Buzz being turned back to demo. He helps the toys escape by fighting with Rex to distract Buzz, who has been switched to demo mode by Lotso, so that Jessie can trap him under a plastic container. Hamm and Rex, being the heaviest of the toys, sit on top of the container to prevent Buzz from escaping. When Woody returns with Buzz's instruction manual to switch him back, Hamm reads the instructions while the others hold Buzz down. When they were about to die in the incinerator, Hamm grabbed the hands of Slinky and Rex. Later, after the toys are rescued from an incinerator-related death at the dump due to Lotso's selfishness, Hamm, along with Slinky, wants revenge, but Woody talks them both out of it. He is donated along with Andy's other toys to Bonnie, where he becomes best friends with Buttercup.
In a 2010 advertisement for the United States Postal Service promoting "Toy Story 3", Hamm wears a postal worker's hat while promoting the Priority Mail service; Ratzenberger is best known for his role as mailman Cliff Clavin on the long-running sitcom "Cheers". He also makes an appearance in the "Toy Story 3" video game as the mayor in Toy Box mode.
Hamm also appears in the theatrical short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry" and "Partysaurus Rex".
Mr. Potato Head.
Mr. Potato Head (often referred to as simply Potato Head) is a doll based on the real-life toy by Playskool. He is an outspoken and sarcastic potato-shaped toy: his patented design allows him to separate his detachable parts from his body by removing them from the holes on his body. He also has a compartment on his lower back to store extra appendages. He is capable of retaining control over his parts even if they are several meters away from his main body. For example, he can still see if one or both of his detachable eyes are removed, as well as being able to move his hands if they are detached. The same thing applies to his "Mrs." counterpart, as she was able to see Andy in his room through her eye left behind. While this attribute is mostly used for comedic effect (i.e. as a running gag, he often finds himself being split or falling apart due to outside forces), it does have its uses, particularly in the second and third films. 
In "Toy Story", he becomes fascinated with all the features of the Buzz Lightyear action figure that Andy has received for his birthday, Potato Head ridicules Woody for not having a laser like Buzz as well as Woody's pullstring. After Buzz is knocked out of the window, Potato Head blames Woody for kicking him out, thinking that Woody might do the same to him if Andy plays with him more often, and turns the other toys against Woody and leads a mutiny with them (making him a secondary antagonist) although this could partially be Mr. Potato Head letting out his own jealousy of Andy's love for Woody. When Woody reveals himself at Sid's House later, Mr. Potato Head convinces the others to refuse to help him, still assuming that Woody attacked Buzz. They are packed up and put in a moving truck later but Woody catches up with them and however when Woody tosses RC onto the street to rescue Buzz, Potato Head, still distrusting Woody, orders the other toys to mutiny again, and "toss him overboard", however, when Bo Peep reveals that "Woody was telling the truth," the toys realize their mistake. He decides to reform himself by holding Slinky's tail to help Woody and Buzz back at the truck but gets hit after Slinky's attempt fails. When Woody tosses RC in the truck, Potato Head gets hit. At the end of the film, he is surprised to hear Molly receiving Mrs. Potato Head for her Christmas present and promptly removes his mustache for it.
In "Toy Story 2", after Al McWhiggin steals Woody, he goes with Buzz, Hamm, Rex, and Slinky to rescue Woody. Later, when they are going to leave, Mrs. Potato Head packs some extra pair of shoes and angry eyes on his back compartment. When the toys cross the street to Al's Toy Barn, they cause a semi to jackknife, and the chains restraining a large pipe on the semi break, freeing the pipe, which rolls down the street, during which Mr. Potato Head gets one of his feet stuck in a chewing gum and has to pull his foot off the gum before the pipe can crush him. After the toys break into Al's room using Al's Toy Barn, Potato Head attempts to frighten Jessie by reaching into his back compartment for his angry eyes, but attaches his spare pair of shoes by mistake. When the toys leave the apartment after Al leaves with Woody, Potato Head throws his hat like a frisbee to jam the closing doors, letting the toys pass through. Outside, he is the first to spot an idling Pizza Planet delivery truck nearby. While the toys chase Al in the truck, Potato Head saves three alien toys from flying out the window. In the airport, when he sees the luggage area, he gasps and his angry eyes and pair of shoes come out after his compartment opens. He feels annoyed when the aliens repeatedly express their eternal gratefulness towards him, but after the toys return home, he reluctantly gives in when his wife wants to adopt the aliens, much to his dismay.
In "Toy Story 3", Potato Head is resentful of the aliens, who still worship him for saving their lives. Potato Head is sad that Andy doesn't play with them anymore, and complains all that to Woody. He is frustrated that Andy threw them away, which he did not. Again, Potato Head is the toy most doubtful of Woody when he and the other toys are almost thrown away by accident. Potato Head is excited to get played with in Sunnyside. After a rough playtime with the toddlers, he and Mrs. Potato Head's parts are scattered on the floor, and he gets his parts stuck up a kid's nose. Later that night, his wife Mrs. Potato Head through the other eye left in Andy's bedroom, spots that Andy is looking for his toys, making Mr. Potato Head and other toys shocked. Slinky Dog told Mr. Potato Head about Woody was telling the truth, that's because Mr. Potato Head didn't believe Woody, was mentioned by Hamm. When Lotso's dark attitude is revealed, he tries to defend his friends from Lotso, but Big Baby throws him into the "The Box" on Lotso's order. When Jessie told Woody she was wrong to leave Andy, Potato Head agrees saying that she was wrong. The toys decide to break out of Sunnyside with an escape plan and Potato Head is used as a distraction due to his attitude. He confronts Ken and is put in the sandbox again. His body parts separate and attach themselves to a tortilla, turning him into Mr. Tortilla Head. He checks if Lotso is sleeping. He is, so he shakes the signal. However, a pigeon comes, who he calls "Feathers". Feathers starts pecking Tortilla Head, and he scares the pigeon away, only tearing apart seconds after, forcing him to use a cucumber from the garden instead. Mr. Cucumber Head comes to the toys after his big mixup and dilemma. Bullseye returns his plastic body to him then they slide down the slide. The toys manage to escape Sunnyside, he and the other toys jump on the garbage truck and once they need metal he and his wife grab on a cheese shredder but after they escape that he and the other toys end up in a landfill, facing death at the incinerator. However, Potato Head and the toys are saved by his wife's adoptive alien children, who he now accepts and declares himself to be eternally grateful, just as the aliens had told him when they met. They eventually return back to Andy's home and they got washed up, but Mr. Potato Head pulls his nose and water comes out then he says his farewell to Woody before Andy comes into the room. Potato Head is donated to Bonnie at the end of the film.
Potato Head reappears in the theatrical short films "Hawaiian Vacation" and "Small Fry", and will return in "Partysaurus Rex".
He is seen as an Interactive Audio-Animatronic at "Toy Story Midway Mania!". It is stated on the Toy Story website that Mr. Potato Head was Andy's second toy.
Mrs. Potato Head.
Mrs. Potato Head is Mr. Potato Head's wife and female counterpart. Unlike her husband, Mrs. Potato Head is sweet and not hot-headed or impatient. Although mentioned as one of Molly's Christmas presents near the end of the first movie, she isn't seen until "Toy Story 2". 
In "Toy Story 2", her husband has found her lost earring. Before her husband leaves with Buzz and his troops, she stores his "extra pair of shoes and angry eyes" into his back compartment. (The outtakes show Mrs. Potato Head overloading her husband's back compartment with several unnecessary appendages: cheese puffs, a key, a golf ball, a plastic steak, a rubber ducky, a yo-yo, a bouncy ball, wind-up novelty teeth, two yellow crayons, blue Play-Doh, a dime, and monkey chow). She also warns the toys by saying "Don't talk to any toy you don't know!" She isn't seen until the end of the film. She becomes an adoptive mother of the three Squeeze Toy Aliens that Andy's toys had found in the Pizza Planet truck, as they won't leave because Mr. Potato Head saved their lives. She is then happily watching Wheezy sing his version of "You've Got a Friend in Me" with her husband.
In "Toy Story 3", she has a much more major role. She is "One-Eyed Betty", One-Eyed Bart's wife in the opening sequence. She uses her ninja skills and her nunchuk to herd Woody to the back, and eventually off the train. She whacks him with her purse and he falls off the train, but he is okay thanks to Bullseye. After One-Eyed Bart and Betty rob tons of gold, they are transported to Dr. Porkchop's aircraft. At the present time when Andy's toys all cram themselves in the toy box, Mrs. Potato Head loses one of her eyes. She is still not donated and believes Andy threw them on purpose, which he didn't. They are later donated to Sunnyside Daycare. She and her husband experience a rough playtime with the toddlers at the Caterpillar Room. When the toys hear something from the halls, Mrs. Potato Head uses her eye and looks under the door. She at first just sees the dark hall, but then she sees Andy packing in his room, due to the eye she left behind in Andy's house. She tells the toys it truly was an accident that they were almost thrown away by accident. When Lotso is revealed to be evil, Mrs. Potato Head complains about her chewed up pocketbook and yells at him when he calls her "Sweet Potato", along with telling him she needs more respect and having over 30 accessories. But Lotso takes off her mouth. He then locks all the toys in bins. Mrs. Potato Head is surprised to see her husband all covered in sand from spending the night in the "Box". The toys plan an escape plan after they reunite with Woody. Mrs. Potato Head uses the key to open the door. Mrs. Potato Head thinks Mr. Potato Head lost weight and was so tall when he was in a cucumber. The toys manage to escape, but they are taken to the dump. Mrs. Potato Head screams when her alien children get run over. She alarms Buzz and Jessie when a TV is about to fall on them. She is saved from death in an incinerator by her adoptive children, and much to her delight, her husband now accepts them. She recovers her missing eye before she and the toys are donated to Bonnie. Even though she was Molly's Christmas gift in the first film, the second and third films imply that she is one of Andy's toys.
Mrs. Potato Head reappears in the theatrical short film "Hawaiian Vacation" and acts as a tour guide for Ken and Barbie in their Hawaiian adventures. She also reappears in "Small Fry" and "Partysaurus Rex"
Bullseye.
Bullseye (voiced by Frank Welker) the horse is the first toy with which Woody interacted in Al's penthouse. He was extremely happy to finally see Woody over a long time in storage. When Woody found a shelf full of collectibles of him and his roundup gang, Bullseye jumped to the record player while attempting to catch a toy snake fired from a toy boot by Woody. When Woody loses an arm, he attempts to get his arm back from Al, who is sleeping with a fallen bowl of scattered cheese puffs everywhere. Bullseye joins in and tries to help him. Woody told him to go and reminded him he's trying to get him to storage, but Bullseye licks him and wants to help, so Woody allowed him to. But he licked Al's cheesy fingers, but stopped when Woody told him to stop. Bullseye is shown to loathe fights as he hides in a can when Jessie jumps on Woody. He is also upset at Woody's intention to abandon the Roundup gang to return to Andy. Bullseye doesn't want Woody to leave and sadly looked at him when he stared at the vent, which is the way out. But Bullseye grins when Woody decides to stay with the gang. Later when Woody was doing an introduction, he called Bullseye to ride like the wind, but his saddle fell, making him move out, embarrassed. When Buzz and the toys find Woody, Slinky tangled Jessie and Bullseye so they could grab Woody and run. But Woody refused to join them, but later did. When Woody ultimately decides to return to Andy's room, it is Bullseye's loyalty that causes Woody to try to get the other toys to join him. At the airport, after Bullseye escapes from Al's case, Woody and Buzz Lightyear mount Bullseye and gallop across the airfield to rescue Jessie from being sent to Japan. Although Woody gets separated from Buzz, Buzz commandeers Bullseye to follow Woody, as they are seen galloping next to the wheels of the plane Woody and Jessie are on as it heads down the runway. The mission finally ends when Woody and Jessie swing down from the plane and land on Bullseye back right behind Buzz, seconds before the plane takes off. After the toys return home, both Bullseye and Jessie come along as part of Andy's toys. Bullseye has every letter of Andy's name printed on the sole of each of his hooves. Bullseye happily watches Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me".
Bullseye returns in "Toy Story 3" as one of the remaining toys in Andy's room. He is still Woody's horse in the opening sequence and saves him when he falls off the train by One-Eyed Betty. Bullseye's fast speed helps Woody catch the train and rescue the orphans. Bullseye is really sad when Andy wouldn't play with them anymore. After Andy's mom thought the bag the toys were in was trash, Bullseye and the toys manage to safely hide in a recycling bin. The toys are donated to Sunnyside Daycare. At Sunnyside, he proves his loyalty to Woody when he makes clear he wants to stay with him. He only stays when Woody tells him to since Woody doesn't want him to be alone in the attic. Bullseye is roughly tumbled over by a screaming toddler with a rolling wheel toy. After the toddler play session, Bullseye is covered with paint and has a blue sticker in his snout, which is removed by Jessie. When Lotso is revealed to be evil, he locks the toys up and shows them Woody's hat, making Bullseye miss Woody and sad he's gone. Bullseye is extremely happy when Woody comes back to Sunnyside and gives him back his hat. The toys plan an escape. Bullseye helps by going through the playground, carrying the aliens on his back. He goes with Woody and is almost caught by Big Baby when Bullseye jumps and accidentally makes an alien fall and squeak. But they hide inside a pail. The toys then go to the garbage dump, and Bullseye is the most desperate to escape the incinerator. They are rescued by the three aliens. At the end, Bullseye is donated to Bonnie, along with the rest of the toys. In Bonnie's room Bullseye changes the channel of a radio to a Spanish channel causing Buzz and Jessie to dance to the Spanish version of "You've got a friend in me".
Bullseye acts like a dog in many ways. Unlike most of the other toys, Bullseye cannot communicate in clear speech but sounds like an actual horse and uses body language to speak. According to a character interview that used to be on the Toy Story website, Bullseye communicated with Jessie while in storage by tapping his hooves to yes or no questions.
Bullseye reappears in the short films "Hawaiian Vacation" and "Small Fry", and will return in "Partysaurus Rex".
Aliens.
The Little Green Men (also referred to as "LGMs" in "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command" Series) are a series of green, three-eyed rubber aliens. They could squeak and are a part of Andy's toys after the events of Toy Story 2. Though at first glance it's not clear whether they are male or female, they are identified in the third film by Mr. Potato Head as " boys", meaning all three are male.
In "Toy Story", Buzz finds a giant claw game in Pizza Planet, thinking that it is the spaceship Woody was talking about, along with the "Ready To Launch" sign. When Buzz jumps in the spaceship, he sees hundreds of them. When Buzz asks who is in charge, the Little Green Men say 'the claw'. The claw belongs in the machine; the Little Green Men say that the claw will decide who will go and who will stay. When Woody spots Sid at Pizza Planet, he gets in the machine and tries to grab Buzz. As he does, Sid gets a Little Green Man, which makes Sid realize there is a Buzz Lightyear when Buzz is under the Little Green Man who got chosen. Woody pulls Buzz's legs so he does not get taken by Sid, but the Little Green Men bring Buzz, with Woody hanging on Buzz's feet, to get chosen, saying they must not fight the claw. As a result, Woody, Buzz, and the Little Green Man get taken to Sid's house. Sid gives the Little Green Man to his dog, Scud, as he grabs and chews it apart, making Woody and Buzz watch in horror. Near the end of the movie, the Little Green Man who was previously torn apart by Scud is seen to be intact, and it helps Woody try to scare Sid by getting out of Scud's food bowl and walking like a zombie toward Sid.
In "Toy Story 2", a trio of them are hanging above the dashboard in the Pizza Planet truck. Buzz groans when he sees them, remembering them from the claw game. They tell Potato Head to "use the wand of power", which is the truck's gear lever, which they mistoook for the control lever of the giant claw game. They nearly fall out of the window, due to the sharp turns from Buzz trying to catch Al in his car. Fortunately, Mr. Potato Head saves them. The Little Green Men are thankful and hand him his ear. Throughout the rest of the movie they frequently say "You have saved our lives, we are eternally grateful", much to Potato Head's dismay. The Little Green Men join the quest to save Woody and chase after the luggage with Rex, Hamm, and Potato Head, only to find cameras. Back home, the trio, along with Bullseye and Jessie, end up becoming some of Andy's toys. They say their gratefulness to Mr. Potato Head, and Mrs. Potato Head is so happy that he saved their lives, so she suggests that they adopt them, with the Little Green Men calling Potato Head "daddy". They then watched Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me".
They reappear in "Toy Story 3" as the "henchmen" under One-Eyed Bart and One-Eyed Betty, and serve as the getaway drivers during the western opening sequence and drive Barbie's corvette. The car is destroyed by Buzz's laser and they are transported to Dr. Porkchop's aircraft. In the present time, the same trio continues to express their gratefulness to Mr. Potato Head. When Andy's mother mistakes the trash bag containing them as trash, she puts the toys on the curb, but they manage to escape the garbage bag. They are donated to Sunnyside along with the rest of Andy's toys. In Sunnyside, the Little Green Men find a toy crane, which reminds them of the claw game in Pizza Planet. The Little Green Men get sat on during a rough playtime with the toddlers. The toys plan to escape Sunnyside. The Little Green Men have to go through the playground with Woody and ride on Bullseye. They almost get caught by Big Baby because one of the Little Green Men falls off Bullseye and squeaks, but manage to hide inside a pail. Later when Andy's toys escape, one of the Little Green Men's feet gets stuck in the lid of the trash chute. Woody goes in to help, but after he helps the Little Green Man, Lotso (who had previously been thrown by Big Baby) grabs Woody's feet and pulls him into the chute. The toys then wind up at the dump. The Little Green Men are separated from the others by a bulldozer when they wander off, having spotted a crane. Woody and Mrs. Potato Head yell and try to warn them, but presuming them to be dead after being plowed by the bulldozer. In the end, however, they are revealed to have avoided the conveyor belt and later rescue everyone from an incinerator with a giant claw crane for which Mr. Potato Head finally acknowledges them as his children. The trio are later delivered to Bonnie along with the rest of Andy's toys.
The Aliens reappear in the theatrical short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry" and "Partysaurus Rex".
Barbie.
In "Toy Story 2", the toys discover Barbie dolls in an aisle while searching for Woody. Hamm asks them if they know where Al is. Tour Guide Barbie volunteered to help and got in their car and gave them a tour around Al's Toy Barn. The toys crash into a bouncy ball machine when Rex showed his strategy guide in front of everyone, making Tour Guide Barbie not see where she was going. Rex chased after the car when he fell off, making Tour Guide Barbie tell everyone to remain seated, along with reciting it in Spanish.
In "Toy Story 3", a Barbie appears to be one of the toys Andy's sister, Molly, owns. She has a ponytail decorated in a pink scarf with a matching belt around her waist and the same color of high heel shoes on her feet and wears a turquoise sleeveless unitard with striped legwarmers. In Sunnyside, she falls in love with Ken. Ken begs her to join him in the Butterfly room. When Ken goes to the gambling den with his henchmen, he tells Barbie to wait in the dream house. After Ken and the others reset Buzz, Barbie breaks up with him. They later try to escape Sunnyside. Barbie tricks Ken into his house, where she asks him on where to find a manual to Buzz Lightyear. Ken tells Barbie where the manual is. She assists Andy's friends in resetting Buzz back to his original state. When they are stopped by Lotso and his gang from escaping Sunnyside, Barbie tells Lotso, about how it is better to have them be treated fairly than be ruled by a dictator. Her statement makes Ken come to her help, which makes Barbie fall back in love with him and hugs him shortly after Lotso forcefully throws Ken to Andy's friends. In the end credits of the film, they are once again in a relationship and change Sunnyside, becoming its co-leaders, after Lotso is destroyed. At a party at Sunnyside, Barbie is seen coming down the toy elevator on Ken's Dream House with a gold dress.
Sarge and the Bucket O' Soldiers.
Sarge (also known as Army Sarge and Sergeant) is the gung-ho commander of an army of plastic toy soldiers from "Bucket O Soldiers" and loosely based on his voice actor's role as Gunnery Sergeant Hartman in the 1987 film "Full Metal Jacket". 
In "Toy Story", he and the Bucket O' Soldiers are set in particular positions. They are highly disciplined with a "Leave no man behind" policy and are masters of reconnaissance. Woody describes them as "professionals." The soldiers venture out of Andy's room and hide in an indoor plant to report Andy's birthday presents to the toys and one of his comrades was injured after Mrs. Davis accidentally steps on one of them. They announced the first few presents, but didn't get to tell Andy got a Buzz Lightyear action figure. Sarge and his soldiers thought Woody was a murderer when he knocked Buzz off the window, so they "frag" him and each one of them attack Woody, along with the other toys. In the moving van, the soldiers attack Woody when he pushed RC off the van, making Sarge and the toys think he's murdering him now. However, Sarge sees that it was an accident Woody knocked Buzz off the window and is proud to work under Woody once again, as shown at the end of the film when they hide in a Christmas tree to report to the toys what Andy and Molly are getting for Christmas.
In "Toy Story 2", the role of Sarge is very minor. He first orders the soldiers to keep looking for Woody's hat in the toy box. When Buster was about to come to the room, Sarge and his army held back the door (with help from Rocky) to prevent Buster's entry, but Buster bursts open the door, causing the soldiers to go flying everywhere. When Woody alerts the toys about the yard sale occurring outside the house, he signals Sarge for an "emergency roll call" and Sarge orders the toys to line up in a single-file line. At the end, Sarge and his soldiers watch Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me".
In "Toy Story 3", several years after "Toy Story 2", only Sarge and two of his men are seen. Woody ordered Sarge and his men to retrieve the phone. That plan, however failed. Knowing that Andy is going to get out the trash bag, Sarge and his last two men (who have attached parachutes) leave Andy's room to find a better life. Buzz believes they are going AWOL, but Sarge claims that their mission is complete, and that when trash bags come out, the Army men are always the first to be thrown away (it is likely that the rest of the soldiers had either left prior to that day, or were sold in a yard sale). They appear again at the end of the film where they land on Sunnyside, and possibly recognizing Barbie, living a happy life under Ken and Barbie's leadership.
Bo Peep.
Bo Peep is a porcelain figurine attached to Molly's bedside lamp inspired by the heroine of the famed nursery rhyme; a beautiful, sweet-natured shepherdess accompanied by a single figure merged together to resemble three sheep, who serves as Woody's romantic interest of the films. In spite of her status as one of Molly's toys technically, like Mrs. Potato Head she may closer fall under the category of Andy's toy, the only factor interfering is Molly's true ownership over her. In Andy's games of imaginative play she is used as the damsel-in-distress of the stories, and she is depicted as gentle, ladylike, and kindhearted. In the first film, after Woody's exclusion from the group after Buzz Lightyear started to attract more attention, she remained loyal to him rather than taunting him because of Buzz's rise in popularity. She continued to show her attraction to Woody into the sequel, flirting with him, and she may play something of a minor role on occasion. However, she did not return in 'Toy Story 3', as she had apparently been either broken, damaged, lost, or sold over the years like a few of the other characters, to Woody's sadness. The particular reason for her disappearance was never disclosed officially, though Woody shows grief over her loss.
RC.
RC (often known as RC car) is Andy's remote controlled buggy. He has a green body with blue splash decals on the front. RC speaks in "revving" sounds (he can't talk, but Potato Head and the toys can understand his motor sounds). RC stands for "Radio Controlled". RC is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer Video Game.
In "Toy Story", RC was fascinated with Buzz's features. When Woody becomes really jealous, he calls out to Buzz that there is a toy trapped underneath the desk. Woody sneaks over to RC, starts him up, and tried to hit Buzz but misses. However, RC hits a board instead, causing thumbtacks on the board to fall and a globe to roll. Buzz falls out a window when the globe hits a red lamp and swings around and hits him. RC says to the other toys that Woody pushed Buzz out the window on purpose. RC then turns on Woody and thinks that he murdered Buzz. When Woody went to the moving van, he got RC out of the box and pushes him into the street and controlled him to rescue Buzz during the moving scene at the end of the film. After the toys mistakenly think that Woody is trying to get rid of RC, they toss Woody out of the moving truck into the street. RC finds Buzz hiding under the car in the streets and is thrilled to see him. Buzz controlled RC to catch Woody. Woody switched the remote to turbo mode to catch up with the truck, but RC's batteries deplete, causing him to slow down and finally stop. When Woody lights the rocket taped onto Buzz's back, Woody and Buzz hold onto RC as they rocket toward the truck, but the force of the rocket lifts Woody up from RC. Nevertheless, Woody manages to toss RC back into the truck (knocking Mr. Potato Head apart in the process) before he and Buzz go skyrocketing into the air.
In "Toy Story 2", RC had a very minor role. He was used when Andy played with his toys. With Buzz riding him, he crashed into Evil Dr. Porkchop and knocked him down. He isn't seen again until the end of the film, when he watched Wheezy sing "You've Got a Friend in Me".
RC didn't appear in "Toy Story 3", since he was most likely sold in a yard sale along with Bo Peep and some other unfortunate toys and appears only in archive footage.
Wheezy.
Wheezy (also known as Wheezy the Penguin) is a rubber squeeze toy penguin with a red bow tie. 
In "Toy Story 2", Wheezy is introduced when Woody finds him on the shelf, where Andy's mom had put him intending to fix his broken squeaker, then forgot about him. He is about to be sold at the yard sale, and in saving him, Woody ends up falling so that he is stuck at the yard sale himself and subsequently stolen by Al. At the end of the film, he gets a new "squeaker" and sings "You've Got a Friend in Me", the ending theme of the movie. During the outtakes, he describes himself as "not a good catcher" as he fails to catch Mike's microphone thus hurting himself several times. 
Wheezy does not directly appear in "Toy Story 3" as he was sold in a yard sale 5 years after "Toy Story 2", as mentioned by Woody, but he does appear in footage of Andy as a boy. Wheezy appears in the "Toy Story 3" video game, where he is voiced by Charlie Adler in toy box mode along with Bo Peep.
Etch.
Etch is an Etch-A-Sketch magic screen by Ohio Art Company. Etch can draw quickly and accurately. Such sketches include guns, portraits of Buzz, Woody and Al, Hangman nooses, and even semi-complicated maps. This is his form of communication as he is unable to talk.
In "Toy Story", Woody compliments Etch's art by saying that he has the fastest knobs in the west. He was also seen in the background many times, such as during the staff meetings and during Andy's birthday and Christmas gift opening scenes. He became fascinated with Buzz during the middle of the film when he sketched a portrait of him. Angered by this, Woody erased it.
In "Toy Story 2", Etch was seen helping Hamm, Mr. Potato Head and the gang to identify Woody's kidnapper, Al. Later on, when the toys were surfing channels to find the location on how to find Al's Toy Barn, Etch is seen in the back as he was ready to draw a map for Buzz. Near the end of the movie, sometime before Andy comes back from cowboy camp, Etch, as well as the rest of the toys (then including Jessie, Bullseye, and the Aliens), were aligned to welcome Andy home, with a "Welcome Home, Andy" sign written on Etch.
Etch was sold in yard sale years after the second "Toy Story", was mentioned by Woody, and only appeared in the archive footage of Andy as a kid in "Toy Story 3".
Mr. Spell.
Mr. Spell is based on a popular 1970s Speak & Spell toy by Texas Instruments. He frequently holds or has held seminars on a variety of topics such as "plastic corrosion awareness" and "what to do if you or part of you is swallowed". He also reveals the words he is saying.
When Andy's friends came to his birthday party, the toys panicked in thinking that they might be replaced with new toys and Mr. Spell, along with basically everyone else aside from Woody, ran to the window in panic to see the size of the presents. Then later, when Andy's friends were running up to his room, Woody told everyone to go back to their places and the toys began to scatter and Mr. Spell can be seen in the overhead shot running in fright and then again behind Mr. Potato Head.
In "Toy Story 2", when Buster finds Woody, Mr. Spell displays 13.5, the amount of time in seconds it has elapsed for Buster to find Woody, setting a new record. Later, after Woody is stolen from a yard sale, Buzz uses Mr. Spell to help Andy's toys figure out who has stolen Woody.
Mr. Spell was sold at a yard sale after the events of Toy Story 2, along with Wheezy, Etch, Bo Peep, Lenny, RC, and Rocky.
Rocky Gibraltar.
Rocky Gibraltar, more simply referred to as Rocky, is a figure of a heavyweight wrestler, probably based on Wrestling Superstars collectible wrestling figures made by Hasbro. He is the second strongest toy in Andy's room, after Buzz Lightyear. In the first movie, he is seen lifting weights (tinker toys) with Snake, Buzz, Mr. Potato Head, and Rex. Rocky lifts the heaviest weights out of all of Andy's toys. As with Troll, Rocky is silent and plays a minor role in the movies, but he can speak in the Disney Adventures comics and in the Toy Story Activity Center CD-ROM game from Disney Interactive, in the Activity Center computer game, he can be seen on the top shelf playing cards with Hamm and replies in third-person, saying, "Rocky needs to work on brain muscles". He is one of the toys who stand against Woody, who accidentally knocked Buzz off a window, by the way of snapping him. After Woody throws RC off the moving truck, Rocky, under Mr. Potato Head's orders, spins Woody in the air and later tosses him off the truck personally. But when the toys realize that Woody's only use of RC is to help Buzz onto the truck, Bo Peep calls Rocky who then redeems himself by lowering the truck's ramp for them.
In "Toy Story 2", Rocky, along with Sarge's toy soldiers, tries to hold back the door to prevent Buster from entering, but Buster rams the door open, causing Rocky and the soldiers to go flying. Rocky is also seen holding Wheezy as Wheezy begs Buzz to rescue Woody and when waving Buzz and his rescue squad goodbye as they leave on their mission. At the end of the movie, Rocky is seen enjoying Wheezy's rendition of "You've Got a Friend in Me". He only appears in the third film via archive footage of Andy as a child.
Rocky's name and a logo on his championship belt are references to the Rock of Gibraltar. Rocky is a playable character in the Toy Story Racer Video Game.
Lenny.
Lenny (often known as Lenny the Binoculars) is a pair of wind up binoculars. He is used as binoculars by the other toys in various situations and is talkative when he warns the toys what he sees on his watch. Joe Ranft voiced the character in the first film. Lenny does not speak in "Toy Story 2", unlike the first film, and his role is more minor. Buzz uses Lenny to keep watch on Woody during the events at the yard sale until Al McWhiggin of Al's Toy Barn steals Woody. Lenny does not appear in "Toy Story 3", but appears in archive footage from when Andy was young. Lenny, along with Bo Peep, RC, Wheezy, Rocky, Etch, Mr. Spell, and others, were sold, possibly at a yard sale, before "Toy Story 3". Lenny is a playable character in the "Toy Story Racer" video game.
Sid's house.
The following toys are only seen in the first film.
Combat Carl.
Combat Carl is Sid's G.I. Joe-type doll who's blown up by a huge M-80, in Sid's first scene (technically dead).
He is later seen as pieces coming out of the ground to frighten Sid.
Mutant toys.
The Mutant Toys are unfortunate, mutilated toys who live their unhappy lives in the darkest corners of Sid's room. They are assembled by Sid from mixed pieces of several toys that belong to him and Hannah (hence the baby doll's parts). They don't talk (probably due to the mutilations they suffered); though it is revealed they know morse code. They also look horrifying (in fact, Woody and Buzz think they're cannibals who are going to eat them), but they actually are friendly and timid. They fix Buzz's broken arm (as well as repairing Janie and the Pterodactyl) and also help Woody realize his plan to save Buzz from the clutches of Sid. They close in on Sid as Woody tells Sid how much they hate being mutilated, and they all rejoice in victory after Woody frightens Sid away with his own voice. In "Toy Story Treats", the Mutant Toys appear in Andy's house (it was unknown if they were visiting, or if Andy adopted them).
Additionally, when Sid is attacked, there can be seen a bunch of other broken toys, including a Squeeze Toy Alien (the one that Sid gave to Scud), a burned rag doll (who repeatedly utters "Mama!"), a huge red pickup truck, an armless yellow soldier with a nail in his head, and a headless yellow soldier with a broken leg.
Al's Toy Barn and apartment.
Shown in a Buzz Lightyear commercial in Toy Story, this section contains characters from "Toy Story 2". Al's Toy Barn appears in "".
Stinky Pete the Prospector.
Stinky Pete, or also known The Prospector as Jessie calls him, is a prospector doll. He is a toy modeled after a character on the fictional television show, "Woody's Roundup", where the characters consists of Sheriff Woody, Jessie, Stinky Pete, and Bullseye. The Prospector doll seen in the film had never been opened and was still "Mint in the Box", making him sought after by collectors. He serves as the main antagonist of Toy Story 2.
In contrast to the character on the show, Stinky Pete is quite intelligent, manipulative, and well-spoken and, when he first appears, seems to be a grandfather figure and mentor. However, he becomes embittered due to all the years he spent on a dime store shelf watching every other toy be sold, until Al McWhiggin eventually found him. Stinky Pete also bears a particular grudge against space toys, like Buzz Lightyear, whom he had blamed for causing the show to be canceled after the launch of Sputnik, which caused children all over America to lose their interest in cowboy toys, shifting their interest to space adventures instead.
Before Woody was stolen by Al in the second film, one day, years after he bought Prospector, he, Jessie, and Bullseye, had to spend years in storage while Al bought more toys and advertisements for "Woody's Roundup". After Al stole Woody, Prospector and Jessie were excited about this because now they could go to the Konishi Toy Museum in Japan, whereupon they will be treated with respect. Woody reveals that he has an owner named Andy Davis, infuriating Jessie, and leading Prospector to make a goal to make sure Woody does not go back to Andy at any cost, despite that he is now aware that Al actually stole Woody and that he still belongs to Andy. 
When Al accidentally rips off Woody's arm, Stinky Pete secretly leaves his box and sabotages Woody's attempt to recover his arm by turning the TV on to prevent Woody from returning to Andy. He frames Jessie for this by putting the TV remote near her before returning to his box and pretends that he "doesn't know" how the TV turned on. He later convinces Woody to wait until his arm is fixed in the morning, to which is done after Al call in a cleaner. After Woody's arm is fixed, the Prospector convinces Woody after a story that Jessie tells Woody about her old owner, that Andy won't play with him anymore when Andy goes to college, but in Japan, Woody will be treasured forever which makes Woody agree to stay with them, rather than go back to Andy much to Prospector's and Jessie's delight. 
However, Woody's friends arrive during a celebration of going to Japan and they try to convince Woody to return to Andy but Woody angrily refuses, which result in the toys sadly saying goodbye and leaving. However, before leaving, Buzz says an upset goodbye to Woody by saying that he'll be staying behind glass forever and not being loved again if he chooses to go to Japan, leaving Woody to think over his choice. However, Woody has a change of heart, and warns Buzz that he is coming with them, and invites his friends to come with him to Andy's house.
Prospector is angered with Woody leaving with Jessie and Bullseye back to Andy's house, and sabotages Woody's attempts. He sees children as destroyers of toys whose ultimate fate will be "spending eternity rotting in some landfill". This makes him all the more determined to go to the Tokyo museum and become an exhibit for the rest of his life, unlike Woody and Jessie. When the Prospector punches Buzz off the ramp at the airport, Woody then fights the Prospector for harming his friend, but the Prospector attempts to finish him off, assuring him that he will be fixed again in Japan. Fortunately, the other toys blind and stun the Prospector with flash cameras that the toys found after they confused another green luggage to be Woody's. Buzz, having survived the fall, captures the Prospector and Woody instructs Buzz and the other toys to dump the Prospector into a Barbie doll backpack that belongs to a little girl named Amy, who enjoys decorating her dolls' faces with tattoos, as punishment and revenge for his betrayal, knowing it will make him learn the true meaning of playtime. Upon learning of Amy's occupations of decorating her dolls, the Prospector starts to weep as he is taken to his new owner's home. Ironically, this fate is a rectification of a past injustice done to the Prospector. Since much of his anger came from sitting on a dime store shelf while all the other toys were claimed by children; now he is finally being owned by a child after waiting 50 years.
However, after the film's release, the film's website featured interviews with the characters. In Prospector's interview, he has reformed and said that he has become accustomed to Amy decorating him, as well of being fond of Amy herself.
The Prospector doesn't appear in the third film, though he seems to accurately predicts the events of the third film. He asks Woody if Andy will take him to college, and later tells the rest of the toys that children destroy toys, which occurs in the Sunnyside Daycare, and that they'll end up in a landfill, where the toys are narrowly rescued from the incinerator after an escape attempt. The Prospector once questions Woody about Andy not playing with Woody anymore when Andy goes to college, but in "Toy Story 3", his prediction nearly comes true.
According to his box, the Prospector had only a total of 9 sayings. In one outtake, the Prospector is seen talking to two Barbie dolls in the box, promising them a role in the third film (in a funny turn of events, Barbie "did" appear in the third film as a titular character). In another outtake, while giving Woody a choice to go back to Andy's home or stay, the Prospector suffers a bout of flatulence, implied to be the reason for his nickname.
Despite not appearing in the third film, the Prospector does appear in the Toy Box Mode of "".
According to the DVD commentary, the Pixar team had deliberated for a while what the proper comeuppance for the Prospector would be before it was decided for him to be placed in a Barbie bag with a face-painted Barbie.
Utility Belt Buzz.
Utility Belt Buzz, also known as "Buzz #2" or "The New Buzz" (in the books based on "Toy Story 2" to tell the two Buzz toys apart), is a Buzz Lightyear action figure, one of the latest in its line, and wears a special, limited-edition anti-gravitational belt from the Buzz Lightyear Attack On Zurg Game. When the "real" Buzz Lightyear sees this new belt, knowing that Andy would be pleased, he decides that he wants one too; he then makes a foolish attempt to steal it off Buzz #2. Immediately as Buzz tries to swipe the belt for himself, he is arrested by Buzz #2. Like Buzz in the first film, he believes that he is a real Buzz Lightyear space ranger. However, he is aware that there are hundreds of other Buzz Lightyear "space rangers" like himself (and recognizes the original Buzz as a fellow space ranger), but he thinks that they're in cryogenic stasis.
After trapping Buzz in a box, he is mistaken for the real Buzz by the gang. When Rex mentions that he knows how to defeat Emperor Zurg- having recently acquired a walkthrough guide for the "Buzz Lightyear" video game that he's been stuck on, Buzz #2 quickly decides to tag along. While the gang search Al's Toy Barn with Buzz #2, they become increasingly suspicious of his cocky attitude ("I'm Buzz Lightyear! I'm always sure!") and strange actions, until they are finally reunited with the original Buzz, who defuses his counterpart's confusion by claiming that the situation is a 'Code 546' (Precisely what this involves is unknown, but it prompted Buzz #2 to refer to Woody as "Your Majesty").
Heading to the elevator on the way down, they encounter a savage Emperor Zurg toy and Buzz #2 engages him in battle. When Buzz #2 claims Zurg killed his father, Zurg responds he "is" his father, causing Buzz #2 to scream in dismay (a parody of "The Empire Strikes Back"). Rex defeats Zurg by accident, sending him falling off the elevator to his apparent doom by knocking him off-balance with his tail when he turns away as Zurg prepares to shoot Buzz #2, upsetting Buzz #2. Buzz #2 is last seen playing catch with his "dad", the Zurg toy, whose attitude towards Buzz has changed after the fall.
Evil Emperor Zurg.
Evil Emperor Zurg is a space villain action figure and Buzz Lightyear's archenemy. He has red evil eyes with neon gritting teeth, silver horns on his head, a purple tunic with a black cape on it and his weapon, a gun (which has a power control that, as an homage to "This is Spinal Tap", goes to 11). In some cases, he does not have a gun but a hand like the one on his other arm. In the first film, Zurg is a referenced character, and does not appear at all. However, Zurg is first seen in the opening sequence of the second film when Buzz is trying to take his main power away from him (Zurg's main power is from an AA battery). In the ensuing battle, Zurg vaporizes the top half of Buzz Lightyear's body with his gun. The sequence then cuts showing that the opening sequence was actually a video game played by Rex. As the story progresses, a Zurg toy in Al's Toy Barn bursts out from its box and follows Andy's Buzz Lightyear, who is on the way to rescue Woody from Al McWhiggin. Zurg is deluded, similar to Andy's Buzz in the first film. In the second film, another copy of Buzz Lightyear, who also acts similar to Buzz in the first film, escapes from Al's Toy Barn and battles with Zurg using toy components (pin balls and lights). In a reference to the relationship of Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader, the principal hero and villain respectively of the original Star Wars trilogy, Evil Emperor Zurg claims he is in fact the father of Buzz, in an almost word-for-word parody of the scene in Star Wars. As Zurg attempts to finish off Buzz #2 (at point-blank range), Rex accidentally hits Zurg with his large tail, sending him falling down the elevator shaft. The second Buzz then looks over the shaft and reaches his hand out, thinking he has lost his father, while Rex is excited that he has finally managed to defeat Zurg in real life. Near the end of the film, Zurg is seen to have survived his fall with a bent horn and is now playing catch with the Buzz copy. He supposedly bumped his head so hard so as he forgot he was Buzz Lightyear's worst enemy. The second Buzz Lightyear then says, "Oh, you're a great dad!" as he rushes to catch another ball fired by Zurg.
Zurg is mentioned in the third film by Buzz in his bad guy character after Lotso resets him to Demo mode. Zurg has a brief cameo during a sequence in the end credits, where he is donated to Sunnyside Daycare center and greeted by Stretch. It is unknown what actually happened to his ion blaster unless it was lost by his previous owner. It is also unknown whether he thinks he is the 'real' Zurg or if he already knows that he's just a toy.
Zurg also appears in "Buzz Lightyear of Star Command" and its direct-to-video movie "". Zurg says he is Lightyear's father during a fight in order to shock Lightyear, before regaining the advantage during the fight and then denying the truth of that previous claim. Whether or not this is actually true, Buzz definitely does not know who his father is. This version of Zurg is also severely lightened up, going from the movie's Darth Vader-esque version to a far less intimidating one; in the TV series Zurg is a flamboyant villain who is just as much a comic relief character as he is a formidable opponent, similar to Skeletor. This Zurg is known for videotaping Buzz's speeches, maintaining a troll doll collection, and various other comedic habits. He is shown to have a bit of a British accent throughout the series. It is revealed in the first episode that there is a Nana Zurg, but she is never seen at all (although he claims that she's "plenty evil"). Zurg would appear to be a cyborg of some description, also much like Darth Vader. However, it has also been discussed amongst fans that his "cybernetic" traits could also very well be because of advanced technology. There is yet to be a clear answer.
In the TV series, he is the warlord-like ruler of an evil empire and is in command of an army of Hornet robots, as well of a minion workforce consisting of Grubs and Brainpods. The seat of which is the hellish Planet Z (standing for Xrghthung). In various media surrounding the film, his planet is said to be called Xrghthung. However, because this is unpronounceable in the TV series it is changed to simply "Z." It is unknown whether Zurg rules over any other worlds, but, if he does, they have not been revealed. Planet Z evidently possesses vast resources and forces enabling Zurg to be a serious threat to the Galactic Alliance. Despite being frequently gullible and bungling, Zurg is evidently highly intelligent, able to concoct sound military tactics and Machiavellian evil schemes. Additionally, he occasionally references stereotypes of typical evil villains and intentionally violates them, showing how aware he is of his similarity to them. For example, when designing a vast prison on Planet Z, he declines building an execution arena, for it simply "gives the captives more time to get away." When he was designing a schematic for a new base, he expressedly forbade for air vents that allow "hero-sized objects" into the control room. "And, may I remind you, no giant trash compactor! When heroes fall in, they always have enough time to figure a way out. Make it- an incinerator!"
Despite his camp nature, he is just as fearsome and ruthless as his movie counterpart. Zurg is frequently mentioned to be the most evil villain in the galaxy and appears to possess authority over all other villains. In fact, he would appear to be a physical manifestation of pure evil. He is particularly proud of this and frequently brags of how "evil" he is. He is a parody of Darth Vader on Star Wars, Darkseid on DC Comics and Megatron on Transformers.
Zurg appears as a playable character in "" on the PlayStation 3 in Toy Box Mode after completing several missions. He also has a convertible (The ZurgsMobile) that matches his personality.
Tour Guide Barbie.
Tour Guide Barbie is a Barbie doll initially from Al's Toy Barn in "Toy Story 2". She and all of the other Barbie dolls in the film are voiced by Jodi Benson. When Hamm, Slinky Dog, Rex and Mr. Potato Head come upon the Barbie aisle at Al's Toy Barn while searching for Woody, Tour Guide Barbie hops into the toy car they are driving. She gives the toys a tour in the toy barn and helps them locate Buzz Lightyear (they actually find a different, 'limited-edition' Buzz Lightyear). After the outtakes of the film, Tour Guide Barbie waves goodbye to the audience until her face hurts from smiling.
Rock 'Em Sock 'Em Robots.
Two fighting robots, red and blue, that Al has on his desk in his office inside Al's Toy Barn. When Buzz Lightyear (Buzz 2 now) and the toys come to the office, Slinky asks them if they've seen Woody (describing as "a cowboy doll with a bad arm"). The Blue first politely responds that he hasn't, leaving the Red and the Blue to argue over who was being asked. They then fight each other with the Blue defeating the Red. They are voiced by John Lasseter (Blue) and Lee Unkrich (Red).
They can also be seen in Bob Parr's office in "The Incredibles".
Hot Wheels.
A hot wheels track and cars can been seen in the first 2 films where Woody and Buzz can be seen using the cars as skateboards and the track as a ramp to saftly get from the desk to the floor. The track set is based on the Hot Wheels Stunt Action Set from 1968. The 2 cars that were used are the Hot wheels "Classic Nomad" and "Red Barron" both originally released in 1970.
Sunnyside Daycare.
These characters appear in "Toy Story 3" and live at Sunnyside Daycare.
Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear.
Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear (Lotso for short), voiced by Ned Beatty is a plush, purple teddy bear with a big plum nose, a sweet strawberry scent and a southern accent, who uses a wooden toy mallet as a cane and is the leader of the toys at the Sunnyside Daycare Center. He initially acts like a kind-hearted and wise caretaker, but is later revealed to be more of a ruthless warden, although his backstory makes him more of a tragic villain. He is the main antagonist of Toy Story 3.
In "Toy Story 3", he welcomes Andy's toys to Sunnyside and assigns them to the Caterpillar Room, where they are roughly played with by the youngest children. At Bonnie's house, Woody realizes from Chuckles that he, along with Lotso and Big Baby, were once owned and loved by a girl named Daisy. Lotso became Daisy's favorite toy when she unwrapped him on Christmas. During their time with Daisy, Lotso was considered a kind-hearted friend to both Chuckles and Big Baby. One day, Daisy and her family had a picnic in the countryside. When she fell asleep, her parents put her into the car and drove away, accidentally leaving the toys behind. Lotso led his two friends on a long trek back to Daisy's house, only to discover that Daisy had gotten another Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear. Lotso became embittered, convinced Big Baby and Chuckles that they had been replaced, and they leave Daisy's home. Later, Lotso discovered the Sunnyside Daycare Center and turned it into an internment camp for toys. Big Baby took on the role of Lotso's enforcer while Chuckles was found by Bonnie and is taken home.
Meanwhile, Lotso's minions catch Buzz outside of the Caterpillar Room and restrain him in the library where Lotso comes in, having learned that Buzz is actually requesting a transfer of himself and the rest of Andy's toys to the Butterfly Room. Thinking of Buzz to be useful to him, Lotso grants it only to him, stating that the kids going to the Caterpillar Room really need some toys to play with. Buzz understands what Lotso meant, but respectfully refuses, saying that he and the rest of Andy's toys stay together as a family. Lotso then orders his henchmen to switch to Buzz's demo mode. Lotso manipulates Buzz into imprisoning the rest of the Andy's toys with the help of the minions.
When Woody returns, he works on a plan to turn Buzz back to himself, but they reset to Spanish. Andy's toys work on their plan to escape the daycare center. Lotso corners them and gives a last offer for them to stay at Sunnyside just as a garbage truck comes along. Woody brings up the subject of Daisy, leading into an argument between him and the stuffed bear. Woody throws out Big Baby's "Daisy" name-tag, causing Big Baby to regain his memory of Daisy, but Lotso destroys it and reveals his true feelings about toys: that they are trash waiting to be thrown away, destroyed, and forgotten. Outraged by this act of treachery, Big Baby turns against Lotso and throws him into the dumpster. Seeking revenge, Lotso pulls Woody in with him, forcing Woody's friends to follow them to the landfill. 
At the landfill, the toys end up on a conveyor belt leading to a shredder. Finding Lotso stuck under a large golf bag, Woody and Buzz rescue him and escape the shredder, only to find they have ended up on another belt leading to an incinerator. As they are about to reach the incinerator, Lotso sees an emergency stop button, and with Woody and Buzz's help, manages to reach it. However, rather than pushing the button, he leaves them to their deaths, as he still believes that all toys are meant to be trash waiting to be destroyed and forgotten. As the toys resign themselves to their fate, the Squeeze Toy Aliens save them by grabbing them from the rubble with a giant crane claw. Woody talks Hamm and Slinky out of seeking revenge against Lotso, knowing that the dump is the right place for Lotso of his selfishness. Lotso is eventually found by a garbage man, who recalls that he once had a Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear as a kid, and straps Lotso to the grille of a garbage truck with three other toys before driving away.
Lotso was originally going to be in the first film, but the technology to make the fur right had yet to exist for the first and second films, so he was saved for the third film. An early version of Lotso can be seen in the first film when Woody says, "Everybody hear me? Up on the shelf, can you hear me? Great!" and can be seen in the second film at Al's Toy Barn. Test audiences who had sympathized with Lotso for his backstory had wanted him to push the button in the incinerator scene to redeem himself. However, according to the DVD commentary, director Lee Unkrich explained that Lotso not pushing the button to save the Toys was meant for the audience to really care about the characters after three films of getting to know them when it looked like it was the end for them in the incinerator. The Pixar team took note of the people's concerns and made Lotso to be an outright, selfish liar.
Lotso is the only primary Toy Story villain to be incapable of redemption, unlike Sid Phillips (who has become a more sane human being after seeing his toys come to life) and Stinky Pete (who has turned over a new leaf after getting accustomed to his new owner, Amy).
Beatty was nominated for an MTV Movie Award for Best Villain for his performance as Lotso, and Pixar and he received wide spread praise for the character's backstory and Beatty's performance. IGN named Lotso the best villain of the summer of 2010.
Ken.
Ken (voiced by Michael Keaton) is a smooth-talking doll who falls in love with Barbie. He first appears wearing light blue pleated and cuffed shorts, and a tucked-in leopard-print shirt with short sleeves. His accessories include matching ascot, sensible loafers and a fashion-forward gold belt. He lives in Ken's Dreamhouse, a big yellow doll house with three stories, a large wardrobe room, and an elevator. Barbie originally breaks up with Ken when she finds him, Lotso, and a reset Buzz Lightyear locking up her friends. Stimulated, Ken orders her locked up as well. 
However, as part of a plan to escape, she pretends to forgive Ken, gaining access to his dream house. Barbie then ties Ken hostage to try to get him to reveal how to reset Buzz back to normal. As a provocation, she rips his clothing apart. Ken reveals the truth after she begins to sabotage his Nehru jacket. He is not seen again until Lotso has the toys cornered at the dumpster. Ken comes to Barbie's help by trying to stop Lotso, having realized Barbie through her understanding of civics. Lotso tells Ken "there are 100,000,000 others just like her", but Ken insists that for him, there is no one else like her, and wins back her affections. 
In the end credits of the film, he and Barbie are seen greeting new toys at Sunnyside as Barbie becomes his girlfriend again, and they both take charge of the Sunnyside toys as the new leaders. He resembles a real doll from 1988 called Animal Lovin' Ken. Due to being called a "girl's toy," it is often joked about his femininity: such as his large selection and obsession with clothes, him wearing Barbie's scarf, his rather feminine boxer-shorts, Bookworm not being suspicious seeing who he believed being Ken (Barbie in a spacesuit outfit) in high heels, as well as at the end Buzz believing Barbie wrote them the fancy note, only to discover Ken's signature at the end.
Ken, along with Barbie, appears in the theatrical short, "Hawaiian Vacation", in which the two embark on a journey to Hawaii, but ends up in Bonnie's room, where Woody and the other toys reenact various Hawaiian scenes.
Big Baby.
Big Baby is a Bitty Baby doll with a lazy eye who carries around a bottle and is adorned with childlike scribbling that resembles ferocious tattoos. He was once one of Daisy's toys before he, Lotso, and Chuckles were lost at a rest area. After returning home, Lotso lied to Big Baby that she replaced them and arrived at Sunnyside. While there, Lotso took full control and Big Baby acted as his second-in-command and enforcer at Sunnyside. Eventually, Woody reveals to Lotso that Daisy still cared about them, causing Big Baby to regain his memory of his former owner, whom he called "Mama". Lotso insults and bullies Big Baby for his attachment to Daisy and destroys the name tag. Angered by that, Big Baby throws him in the dumpster, blows him a raspberry, and helps Woody and his friends escape Sunnyside. 
In the credits, Big Baby is shown to be having a happier time at Sunnyside under Barbie and Ken's care and is seen happily hugging and spinning the couple. At a party at Sunnyside he is shown wearing gold just like Barbie and Ken. The baby who provided the voice for Big Baby is named "Woody", according to Lee Unkrich's Twitter account, and the film's credits confirm it as being Woody Smith (listed under Additional Voices).
Twitch.
Twitch (voiced by John Cygan) is a green "insectaloid warrior" action figure with a bug's head, orange eyes with ferocious chomping mandibles, wings, and two muscular arms. He is one of the toy thugs working for Lotso. He helps to reprogram Buzz, and later apprehends Andy's other toys. He keeps a search light working in the playground. He and Sparks "break" the Chatter telephone before he is convinced of Lotso's evil by Woody and Ken. Because of how Lotso abused Big Baby, Twitch reforms and is seen living in a happier Sunnyside. In the credits, he is shown happily enduring playtime with the young children in the Caterpillar Room, switching with Chunk so he can rest.
Twitch is reminiscent of the 1980s "He-Man and the Masters of the Universe" toy line, and other similar lines.
Stretch.
Stretch (voiced by Whoopi Goldberg) is a toy rubber octopus with sticky suckers on her eight long arms and a glittery, purple body. She is Lotso's only henchwoman, and at first welcomes the toys, but later helps capture them with her elastic tentacles. With her cohorts, she later catches Woody and his friends, and was eager to push them into the dumpster, should they not admit defeat. Stretch was seen to be the first toy to doubt Lotso's leadership and motives, as she was seen to visibly cringe at Lotso's true demeanor being revealed. It was then after Lotso destroys Big Baby's locket, he angrily orders Stretch to push Woody and his friends into the dumpster, which Stretch is now reluctant to do, causing Lotso to reveal his true feelings about all toys. Eventually, Lotso is thrown into the dumpster by Big Baby for his lies and treachery, and Stretch immediately leaves the area, shocked at what had happened but relieved. In the credits, she welcomes new toys happily without Lotso and is later seen sneaking a message to Woody and the gang in Bonnie's backpack. She is based on a purple Wacky WallWalker toy from the 1980s.
Chunk.
Chunk (voiced by Jack Angel) is an orange muscular rock monster toy. He has two red eyes when fierce, blue eyes when he's friendly, huge fists, and a face that you can change by rolling it up or down to a different facial expression or pressing a button at the top of his head. He welcomes the toys to Sunnyside, but later helps Lotso and Buzz imprison them. He then is convinced of Lotso's deception when he punches Big Baby, and is seen helping Woody and his friends climb to safety with Big Baby. In the credits, he is seen taking the abuse of the younger children, later taking a rest while Twitch takes his place. He is based on the short lived Rock Lords toyline.
Chunk is not very intelligent: during a gambling scene, he describes Buzz as "not the sharpest knife in the... place where they put the knives". He enjoys teasing Ken since during the gambling scene he called him a "girl's toy".
Sparks.
Sparks (voiced by Jan Rabson) is a blue, silver and red toy robot with flashing red eyes, red claws, and a blaster cavity in his chest that spits out real sparks when he is rolling around on his wheels (but is completely safe for children). He can also elevate his body to make himself taller. He is seen in the film greeting Buzz upon Andy's toys' arrival, and later gambling in Lotso's gang's hideout. He only has two lines in the film. They are "Nah, disposable" and "Neither are you, Chunk." He is later seen helping lock up Andy's toys when they try to escape, and is seen for the remainder of the film patrolling Sunnyside. When Andy's toys are about to escape, Sparks and the other toys are convinced of their leader's treachery, and turn on him. He is seen living happily at Sunnyside after Lotso's defeat in the credits. He is based on the Sparking action Transformers toys from the 1980s. In the end credit video clips he seems to be friends with a donated Zurg.
Jack-in-the-Box.
Jack-in-the-Box (voiced by Lee Unkrich) is one of the toys at Sunnyside Daycare. He is a Jack in the Box toy who is first seen popping out of his box when Andy's toys fall onto the floor after they accidentally knock the box they are in off the counter. It is unknown whether he is allied to Lotso and his gang or not, but he is most likely not as he is never seen with him. In the end credits, he is seen welcoming more toys, including an Emperor Zurg action figure, who arrive in another box of donated toys. When the toys have a "beach party" at a sandbox, he is seen playing beach volleyball with Chunk as they bounce a Luxo ball back and forth between each other's teams. Later that night, he is seen dancing and high-fiving Ken as all the Sunnyside toys have a disco party in the Butterfly Room.
There was also a mutant Jack-in-the-Box which had a green left glove with black fingernails pop out in "Toy Story" called "Hand-in-the-Box".
Chatter Telephone.
Chatter Telephone (voiced by Teddy Newton) is a toy based on itself. He only speaks when his receiver is lifted from its cradle. He is the oldest toy in the daycare, and becomes an ally to Woody. When Woody returns to Sunnyside, he immediately says that coming back was a mistake because Lotso had rigged his security after he left and that the best action would be to just lay low. He reluctantly gives him instructions on how to escape Sunnyside. For this, he is later brutally beaten and broken for helping Woody and his group escape, and eventually rats Woody out when convinced that Woody and the other toys had already escaped, but are caught just before they can do so. He sadly apologizes to Woody who could only show sympathy for the broken toy. In the credits, he has been repaired and now lives a happier life there at Sunnyside Daycare without Lotso. When Woody talked to him, he called him Ol' Timer.
Bookworm.
The Bookworm (voiced by Richard Kind) is a green worm flashlight with glasses. He is a genius who loves reading books. He keeps a library of instruction manuals in a closet at Sunnyside, and gives Lotso the instruction manual for Buzz Lightyear. He later gives the same manual to Barbie (who he thinks is Ken since she is disguised in his spacesuit outfit). In the credits, he is happy without Lotso, and is seen using his flashlight to light a disco ball during a party at Sunnyside. He is based on the Glo Worm toys from the 1980s. He only has two lines in the film.
Cymbal-banging monkey.
The Cymbal banging monkey is a monkey toy based on the infamously frightening Musical Jolly Chimp toy from the 1960s. It monitors the Sunnyside Daycare security cameras at night, and can alert Lotso and the gang of any toys attempting to escape by screeching into a microphone to broadcast over the intercom. Chatter Telephone tells Woody that he must get rid of the monkey before he and his friends can escape. Woody and Slinky manage to succeed in taking it down by wrapping it up in Scotch Tape. In the credits, it is seen in a much happier situation, gently playing its clash cymbals while wearing star-shaped sunglasses.
Bonnie's toys.
These characters are the toys owned by Bonnie in "Toy Story 3".
Chuckles.
Chuckles (voiced by Bud Luckey) is a brokenhearted clown who was once owned by Daisy (along with Lotso and Big Baby), and is later owned by Bonnie. He is first seen mournfully looking out the kitchen window in Bonnie's house, where he tells Woody about Lotso's past, stating that Lotso used to be a good friend. Chuckles explains that he, Lotso, and Big Baby were accidentally left behind on a trip with Daisy's family, and when they finally made it back to Daisy's house, both him and Lotso discovered that Lotso had been replaced, which caused Lotso to snap. Chuckles objected when Lotso claimed all three had been replaced, but Lotso silenced him, and lied to Big Baby, saying that Daisy didn't love him anymore. After the three found their way to Sunnyside and Lotso took over, running it like a prison, Chuckles was damaged and Bonnie found him and took him home. He still feels sorry for what happened to Lotso, but then knows that what Lotso is doing at Sunnyside is wrong. He gives Woody a pendant (which belonged to Big Baby) that says "My heart belongs to Daisy", which later leads Big Baby to discover Lotso's deception and turn on him. In one of the end credits sequences, Chuckles sees a crayon-drawn picture of him, and Dolly says that "Bonnie really got your smile", making Chuckles happy again. 
Chuckles returns in the short film "Hawaiian Vacation" and he sings a Hawaiian love song while playing a ukelele when Barbie and Ken get their recreated Hawaiian adventures. He also appears in "Small Fry".
Mr. Pricklepants.
Mr. Pricklepants (voiced by Timothy Dalton) is a stuffed hedgehog. He wears lederhosen and a Tyrolean hat, and views himself as a thespian. Mr. Pricklepants was made in Germany (although he speaks with an English accent and actor's diction, which may also refer to his previous role in "The Rocketeer" as a German character whilst the actor Dalton who portrayed him is actually Welsh) and is from the Waldfreunde (Forest Friends) collection of premium imported plush toys, presumably a reference to Steiff plush toys. Throughout "Toy Story 3", he expresses great interest in theater arts and in the same respect, takes the art of role playing as a child's toy very seriously. Buttercup refers to him sarcastically as "Baron von Shush" due to his habit of "shushing" the other toys when they break character. Before the film ends, he is seen walking and talking with Hamm. During the credits, he plays Romeo, with one of the aliens playing Juliet.
Mr. Pricklepants reappears in the short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry", and "Partysaurus Rex".
Trixie.
Trixie (voiced by Kristen Schaal) is a blue toy "Triceratops", who may be of the same toyline as Rex. During one of Bonnie's toys' improv sessions, she mentions coming from the doctor with "life-changing news". She chats online with "a dinosaur toy down the street" who goes by the name "Velocistar237". She becomes best friends with Rex during the credits, playing cooperatively on a computer. 
Trixie reappears in the short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry", and "Partysaurus Rex".
Buttercup.
Buttercup (voiced by Jeff Garlin) is a white toy unicorn with blue eyes, a yellow mane and tail, and small pink heart-shaped nostrils. Despite his frilly and feminine outward appearance, he speaks with a gruff, masculine voice. He is the most level-headed of Bonnie's toys, and helps Woody get back to Sunnyside. In the credits, after Woody and his friends are donated to Bonnie, he is often seen with Hamm, as his new best friend.
Buttercup reappears in the short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry", and "Partysaurus Rex".
Dolly.
Dolly (voiced by Bonnie Hunt) is a soft dress-up rag doll with purple hair, googly-eyes, an orange dress with buttons sewn on, and gently blushing cheeks. She helps Woody get back to Sunnyside Daycare Center with the rest of Andy's toys. In the "Toy Story 3" video game, she is seen as a witch. It is indicated that she is the leader of Bonnie's toys.
Dolly appears in the theatrical short films "Hawaiian Vacation", "Small Fry", and "Partysaurus Rex".
Peas-in-a-Pod.
Voiced by
Peas-in-a-Pod are three soft, plush green balls in a green zip-up case that looks like a pea pod, hence the name. They are based on the Vegimals peas. They have the personalities of small children, and their names are Peaty, Peatrice, and Peanelope.
The Peas-in-a-Pod reappear in the short film "Hawaiian Vacation", voiced this time by Zoe Levin. They also appear in "Small Fry".
Totoro.
The title character from "My Neighbor Totoro", who is also the mascot of Studio Ghibli, appears as one of Bonnie's toys. He is a big plush toy and does not speak at all during the film, nor is he spoken to by anyone by his name. He does however display his famous grin during the credit scenes, and at the end of the film, he is seen juggling the alien triplets, while Mr. and Mrs. Potato Head watch. According to the tie-in book, "The Art of Toy Story 3", Totoro's appearance in the film was meant to be a tribute to Hayao Miyazaki, who is a close friend of Pixar executive John Lasseter. In addition to Lasseter's relationship to Miyazaki, another factor that contributed to Totoro's appearance was Disney's role in dubbing Studio Ghibli films for their English-language releases.
For unknown reasons, Totoro has not appeared in any of the Toy Story shorts, most likely due to copyright concerns from Studio Ghibli.
Humans.
Andy Davis.
Andy Davis is the owner of Woody, Buzz and the other toys in each of the three films. He lives with his mother and younger sister Molly; his father is never seen or mentioned in the films and supplementary materials indicate that his parents may have divorced, or Andy's father may have either died or simply left the family. "Toy Story 2" implies that Woody might be a hand-me-down toy, and when introducing the 2009 set of Toy Story collectibles, John Lasseter said "We always imagined he was a hand-me-down to Andy from his father."
In "Toy Story", Andy is 6 years old and receives a Buzz Lightyear action figure for his 6th birthday. Tension erupts between Buzz and Woody, who has always prided himself on being Andy's favorite. Andy initially spends much more time with his new toy, but still has a special place in his heart for Woody. Thus, he becomes concerned when both toys go missing for a time, fearing they would be lost during his family's move to a new house.
In "Toy Story 2", Andy is now 8 years old, but is only seen in the beginning and for a short while in the ending. During his appearances, it is clear that he still loves his toys very much. At the end of the film, Andy is pleased to have five new toys  Jessie, Bullseye, and the three Squeeze Toy Aliens  added into his collection. He marks them as he has all his toys, with his name on the soles of their feet, or in Bullseye's case, one letter of his name on each hoof.
In "Toy Story 3", Andy is now 17 years old and preparing to go off to college, intending to put most of his toys in the attic except for Woody, whom he initially plans to take with him. While he apparently hasn't played with his toys for some years and has given many of them away, he is still resistant to his mother's suggestion to either donate or sell his remaining toys, referring to them as "junk" (which the toys believe is what he truly thinks). When they go missing, however, he becomes upset and confused when he can't find them. Before he goes to college, Woody secretly puts the address of Bonnie (the young daughter of a family friend) on the box with the toys in it, causing Andy to come around to the idea of donating them. He passes them on to four-year-old Bonnie, who he realizes will look after his childhood playthings and gives them each their own introduction, stating the qualities that make each of them special. When Bonnie finds Woody in the box as well, Andy shows great reluctance to pass on his favorite toy, but ultimately relents, allowing the toys to stay together in an environment where they'll be loved and played with. He spends a while playing with Bonnie and the toys one last time before departing for college, and is noticeably sad when Bonnie has Woody "wave" to him. He then responds with a quiet "Thanks, guys". This is presumed to be Andy's final appearance in the "Toy Story" franchise.
According to Toy Story producer Ralph Guggenheim in a December 1995 Animation Magazine article: John Lasseter and the story team for "Toy Story" reviewed the names of Pixar employees' children looking for the right name for Woody's owner. Andy Davis was ultimately named after and based on Andy Luckey, the son of legendary animator Bud Luckey, Pixar's fifth employee and the creator of Woody. Andy Luckey has declined to publicly comment on the connection.
Present-day Andy is voiced by John Morris in all three films, and by Charlie Bright in the third film as a child. In the DVD feature for "Toy Story 3" on the voice cast, the Pixar crew remark that they weren't sure if Morris would want to do it or would sound right, and were ecstatic when they realised his voice was perfect for a teenage Andy.
Molly Davis.
Molly Davis is Andy's younger sister, seen as a baby in the first film, a toddler in the second film, and as a pre-teenager in the third film. Andy uses her crib as the town jail during playtime at the beginning of the first film, implying they are sharing a room. When the family moves later in the film, Andy and Molly get separate rooms, though Molly has plans to move into Andy's presumably larger room once he leaves for college. One of her first acts in the film series is to traumatize Mr. Potato Head, slobbering on him and throwing him from the crib and causing his parts to scatter, earning her the nickname "Princess Drool" from him. At the end of the first film, she receives a Mrs. Potato Head toy for Christmas, which becomes the wife for Mr. Potato Head in the next two films. Woody's love interest Bo Peep might also be her toy. As seen in Toy Story 3, she also owned a Barbie doll, which she donates to the daycare center as she was less interested in toys by that time (echoing Jessie's description of the changes she witnessed to her owner Emily in the second film). She is voiced as an infant and a toddler in the first and second films by Hannah Unkrich, and in the third film by Beatrice Miller.
Ms. Davis.
Ms. Davis (her first name is never mentioned) is Andy and Molly's mother, though her marital status is unknown since their father is never seen or mentioned in any of the films. She is voiced by Laurie Metcalf in all three films. In the first film, she has brown hair and ties it in a ponytail. In the other two films, her physical appearance is noticeably different and instead of brown, she has blonde hair and leaves it down. Though presented as a loving mother to Andy and Molly, Ms. Davis is actually a major (though indirect) threat to the toys, as she frequently asks Andy to throw out the toys he no longer wants. Ms. Davis' actions regarding the toys sets the plot in motion in all three films, though they are not really malicious. In the first film, she purchases a Buzz Lightyear toy for Andy on his birthday, prompting the rivalry between Buzz and Woody which leads to them being lost and forced to find their way home. In the second film, she puts Wheezy up for sale at a yard sale (due to a broken squeaker Wheezy has got), prompting Woody's rescue attempt where he is subsequently stolen by Al. In the third film, she orders Andy to clean out his room before going to college and mistakenly throws away the bag of toys Andy was putting in the attic, causing them to be donated to a daycare center. Despite this, in the second film, she is overly protective of Woody, describing him as an old family toy.
Sid Phillips.
Sid Phillips is a hyperactive, 13-year-old teenager.
He was Andy's wild neighbor (until Andy moved) and the worst nightmare that any toy could have and likes to destroy and torture toys, such as wanting to initially strap a rocket to Woody (a crack at "Dr. Strangelove") but settles for Buzz when he cannot find Woody ("I've always wanted to put a spaceman into orbit."). He is the main antagonist of the original Toy Story film. His idea of fun is scaring his sister and destroying her toys in various methods (exploding, burning or using in his mad doctor plays). He also enjoys skateboarding. His mother is only ever heard but does nothing about Sid destroying his sister's stuff; his father is only glimpsed asleep in a chair with the TV on (Scud is visibly aware of the thought of waking him up when pursuing Buzz). Sid is voiced by Erik von Detten in the first and third movie.
At the end of the first film, when Woody and Sid's mutant toys decide to rescue Buzz by scaring Sid, he becomes very frightened of toys, and Woody pulls the last straw on him by coming alive and telling him to take good care of his toys or else ("From now on, you must take good care of your toys! Because if you don't we'll find out, Sid. We toys can see everything. So play nice!"), causing Sid to panic and run back into his house and into his room, and his sister scares him for life with her toys. He seems to be the only human depicted in the film to have witnessed toys actually come alive. It is not clarified if he and Andy were friends, enemies or if they didn't know each other.
Sid does not appear in the second film, but is mentioned once by Buzz during the toys' mission to rescue Woody from Al McWhiggin.
An adult Sid makes a cameo appearance in the third film as a garbageman with a small beard, recognizable by his Zero Skull T-shirt.
Hannah Phillips.
Hannah Phillips is Sid's sweet-natured, younger sister who appears a few times in the first film. She was voiced by Sarah Freeman. In "Toy Story", Hannah has gotten used to having her toys mutilated by Sid. Most of her dolls have different heads or altered body parts, and at the end of the film she finds typical sibling enjoyment in scaring her brother after he has been horrified by Woody and the other toys. She spends most of the time during the movie playing with her altered dolls. She calls Buzz "Mrs. Nesbit".
Al McWhiggin.
Al (called Al McWhiggin on his name desk, The Chicken Man by Andy's toys, and Poultry Man by Utility Belt Buzz) is an owner of a chain of local toy stores and also an obsessive collector of all things related to the old "Woody's Round-up" TV series. Al steals Woody in hope of selling him to a Japanese toy museum. Al is unscrupulously obsessive, overweight, very impatient and lazy (he complains of having to "drive all the way to work on a Saturday", even though his apartment is across the street from the store.); he is voiced by and partially inspired by Wayne Knight (during the production of "Toy Story 2", Knight had a goatee, like Al in the movie). Cartoonist and animator Scott Shaw has also been acknowledged as another model and inspiration for Al.
Al is the owner of a large toy shop called "Al's Toy Barn". The store is first seen during the first "Toy Story" on an advertisement of Buzz Lightyear toys, but Al did not appear. He is first seen in "Toy Story 2" during an advertisement on TV in which he dresses in a chicken suit, of which Hamm, after turning off the TV, remarks: "I despise that chicken". Later, he is seen trying to buy Woody at a yard sale held by Andy's mom. After Andy's mom refuses to hand over the doll and locks Woody in a box, Al steals Woody, intending to sell him, along with the rest of his collection of Woody's Roundup toys and memorabilia, to a toy museum in Japan for a large sum of money.
However, just as Al's plane is about to fly off to Japan with the Roundup Gang packed in luggage, Andy's toys, led by Buzz, are able to save Woody, along with Jessie and Bullseye; meanwhile the Prospector is placed in a mischievous girl's backpack for his betrayal. Al is unable to control himself from sobbing hysterically over his losses as a result, Hamm responded to it by saying, "Well, I guess crime doesn't pay".
Al's last name was revealed on the nameplate on his office desk; also, when he is done taking pictures, he answers his cellphone. and Mr. Konishi can be heard saying his full name. According to "Disney Adventures" magazine, Al wasn't allowed to play with his toys as a child, leading to his toy-collecting niche. It is implied that Al's full name is Carl McWhiggin since that Mr. Konishi is heard calling him that on the phone.
His car's license plate reads LZTYBRN, which is "Al's Toy Barn" minus the vowel letters. It is also the actual license plate of Ash Brannon, co-director of "Toy Story 2", according to the "Toy Story 2: Special Edition" commentary.
Al's car resembles Flo from " Cars".
Geri the Cleaner.
Geri, an elderly specialist in toy restoration and repair with a fully loaded toy repair kit, comes to Al's apartment in "Toy Story 2" to fix Woody up in preparation for his trip to Japan. He insists that Al let him take his time with the work and views it as more than a simple job, asserting, "You can't rush art". A scene which has reference to the "Marathon Man" dentist scene. Geri was voiced by the late Jonathan Harris. Geri's character model was reused from a previous Pixar short, Geri's Game, where he plays a chess game against himself.
Emily.
Emily was the name of Jessie's former owner and is mentioned by her in the second film. She appears in a flashback musical sequence while "When She Loved Me" by Sarah McLachlan is played. During this sequence, Jessie tells Woody of her first experience with an owner who was Emily and why she resented being a child's toy. As a young child she was a fan of the Wild West and horses, along with the "Woody's Roundup" TV show, apparent through her love of Jessie. As she became a teenager, her interest began to shift towards makeup and gossip with her friends which lead to Jessie being neglected then thrown away through a donation box. She is mentioned by Jessie for the second time in the third film, when she fears of being thrown away by Andy, saying "I should've seen this coming! It's Emily all over again!".
Bonnie Anderson.
Bonnie Anderson appears in "Toy Story 3" as one of the kids who goes to Sunnyside Daycare, and is the second/current owner of the toys. Her mother works in the front desk. Although she has an active imagination and boisterous manner when playing with her toys, she is shy and withdrawn when she is around adults, but she quickly warms up to Andy when he donates his toys to her. She finds Woody, who was trying to escape Sunnyside, takes him home, and plays with him. Woody is impressed by what he sees at her house and ultimately gets himself (and all of Andy's other toys) donated to her. Andy briefly plays with her after handing over his toys, and tells her he needs someone "very special" to take care of them for him. Voiced by Emily Hahn.
In the short film "Hawaiian Vacation", Bonnie leaves on a vacation to Hawaii and leaves Barbie and Ken in her room.
Daisy.
Daisy is a child girl who appears in flashbacks in "Toy Story 3". She owned Lotso, Big Baby and Chuckles in the beginning, but accidentally leaves them behind at a rest area along the road. In order to pacify her, rather than finding Lotso and the rest of her toys, Daisy's parents instead bought her another Lots-O'-Huggin' Bear, which made Lotso think he had been replaced and forgotten about, and changed him into a sinister ruthless toy.
Animals.
Buster.
Buster (voiced by Frank Welker) is Andy's pet Dachshund, whom he receives at the end of "Toy Story" and he also appears in "Toy Story 2" and "Toy Story 3".
In "Toy Story 2", he is always full of energy and overall a great dog. Buster is considered to be nice to the toys in Andy's room, and is fiercely loyal to Woody, obeying all commands given to him by Woody: when Wheezy is taken by Andy's mom to be sold at a yard sale, Woody is able to command Buster to carry him down to the yard sale so he can rescue Wheezy. However, the dog does not respond to commands from Andy whatsoever. Slinky is also able to communicate with him due to the fact they are both dogs. At the beginning of "Toy Story 2", Buster finds Woody in a record of 13.5 seconds. After the toys return home, Jessie helps Buster out of the room when he needs to go out for a private time, and he is last seen with Andy and his family as they go out on another drive.
In "Toy Story 3", Buster is now 10 years older and as a result looks very aged, with mixed brown and gray fur, a gray-white snout, overweight, and too old and lazy to help Woody and the toys escape (in a direct parody of the rescue scene from "Toy Story 2"), although he remains nice to them. He is also briefly seen when Mrs. Potato Head was subsequently visualizing her missing eye, which was in Andy's room. He is last seen with Andy as he departs for college.
Scud.
Scud (voiced by Frank Welker) is Sid's vicious Bull Terrier and horrible "toy-chewing machine". He has a white body with brown spots, and a red spiked collar. He has a black patch around his right eye. He immediately goes after any toy that comes into his sight. At the end of the film, he chases after Woody and Buzz during the move until he gets trapped in a car pile-up.
Crazy Critters.
Crazy Critters are a bunch of 2-dimensional animal puppets from the "Woody's Roundup" show including an armadillo, bat, bear, beaver, bird, deer, vulture, bear cub, porcupine, flying squirrel, rabbit, skunk, snake, fox, raccoon, tortoise and bobcat. They come quickly when Jessie calls them. Woody understands them in the "Woody's Roundup" show, sometimes so well the animals are shown to be shocked. The Crazy Critters make cameo appearances as prizes determined by the score of players in "Toy Story Midway Mania!", and in the Toy Story 2 video game on the Nintendo 64.
