Ellen Kathleen Pompeo (; born November 10, 1969) is an American actress, known for playing the series protagonist, Meredith Grey, on the ABC medical drama "Grey's Anatomy". In 2011, she was named the ninth highest paid television actress, earning $7 million. In 2012, she was named the eighth highest paid television actress, earning $9 million. She has extended her contract for two more years which would have her involved with the show until the 10th season.
Early life.
Pompeo was born in Everett, Massachusetts, the daughter of Kathleen B. (née O'Keefe) and Joseph E. Pompeo, a salesman. Her father was of half Italian and half English/Irish descent, while her mother was of Irish ancestry. She was raised Roman Catholic. Her mother died of a painkiller overdose when Ellen was four, and her father remarried soon after. Her father died on September 1, 2012. She has five siblings: three sisters and two brothers. She was nicknamed "the pencil", and "Stracciatella" (an icecream flavor).
Career.
Pompeo began her career with minor roles on television shows like "Strangers with Candy", "Friends" and "Law & Order" and a handful of others. Determined to succeed in acting, Pompeo moved to Los Angeles in 2001. She participated in the movie "Mambo Café" with Thalía. A turning point came when she was selected by director Brad Silberling in 2002 for a role in his film "Moonlight Mile" playing Jake Gyllenhaal's sympathetic love interest. In 2002, Pompeo appeared in "Catch Me If You Can" and in 2003, "Old School". Television guest roles include two episodes of "Law & Order" and an episode of "Friends". She portrayed Jim Carrey's ex-girlfriend, Naomi, in the 2004 film "Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind". Although her scenes were cut from the film, she felt grateful that director Michel Gondry chose her to appear in his film.
Pompeo landed her first major role in the ABC medical drama "Grey's Anatomy", which is now in its ninth season, as the title character, Meredith Grey, a surgical resident at a prestigious hospital. In 2011, she signed a new contract for "Grey's Anatomy" that increased her salary to US$200,000 per episode. She is contracted with the show for eight seasons which is the standard length in Hollywood after which actors often demand large raises. On May 10th, 2012, the news came out that she signed a new contract for 2 more seasons which means she's signed to star in season 9 and season 10 as well.
On October 13, 2007, Pompeo was honored by the National Italian American Foundation for her achievement in entertainment at a black-tie gala in Washington, D.C.
On October 27, 2011, Deadline.com reported that Pompeo had launched her own production company called Calamity Jane which sold its first project to ABC, an untitled show about female agents on the Secretary of State's security detail. Pompeo will be the show's executive producer.
Personal life.
Pompeo married music producer Chris Ivery on November 9, 2007. New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg was the legal witness to the ceremony. She gave birth to her first child, a daughter named Stella Luna, on September 15, 2009.
