This list of highest mountains in the world includes some 100 mountains with heights of at least above sea level, all of which are located in central and southern Asia. Only those summits are included that, by an objective measure, may be considered individual mountains as opposed to subsidiary peaks.
Considerations.
The dividing line between a mountain with multiple peaks and separate mountains is not always clear (see also Highest unclimbed mountain). A popular and intuitive way to distinguish mountains from subsidiary peaks is by their height above the highest saddle connecting it to a higher summit, a measure called topographic prominence or re-ascent (the higher summit is called the "parent peak"). A common definition of a mountain is a summit with prominence. Alternatively, a relative prominence (prominence/height) is used (usually 7-8%) to reflect that in higher mountain ranges everything is on a larger scale. The table below lists the highest 100 summits with at least prominence, approximating a 7% relative prominence. A drawback of a prominence-based list is that it may exclude well-known or spectacular mountains that are connected via a high ridge to a taller summit, like the Eiger or Nuptse. A few such peaks and mountains with nearly sufficient prominence are included but not numbered in this list.
It is very unlikely that all given heights are correct to the nearest metre; indeed, the sea level is often problematic to define when a mountain is remote from the sea. Different sources often differ by many metres, and the heights given below may well differ from those elsewhere in this encyclopedia. As an extreme example, Ulugh Muztagh on the north Tibetan Plateau is often listed as to , but appears to be only to . Some mountains differ by > on different maps, while even very thorough current measurements of Mount Everest range from to . These discrepancies serve to emphasize the uncertainties in the listed heights.
Though some parts of the world, especially the most mountainous parts, have never been thoroughly mapped, it is unlikely that any mountains this high have been overlooked, because synthetic aperture radar can and has been used to measure altitudes of most otherwise inaccessible places. Still, heights and/or prominences may be revised, so that the order of the list may change and even "new" mountains could enter the list over time. To be safe, the list has been extended to include all > peaks.
The highest mountains above sea level are generally not the highest above the surrounding terrain. There is no precise definition of surrounding base, but Mount McKinley, Mount Kilimanjaro and Nanga Parbat are possible candidates for the tallest mountain on land by this measure. The bases of mountain islands are below sea level, and given this consideration Mauna Kea ( above sea level) is the world's tallest mountain and volcano, rising about from the Pacific Ocean floor. Ojos del Salado has the greatest rise on Earth— from the summit to the bottom of the Atacama Trench about away, though most of this rise is not part of the mountain. 
The highest mountains are also not generally the most voluminous. Mauna Loa () is the largest mountain on Earth in terms of base area (about ) and volume (about ), although, due to the intergrade of lava from Kilauea, Hualalai and Mauna Kea, the volume can only be estimated based on surface area and height of the edifice). Mt. Kilimanjaro is the largest non-shield volcano in terms of both base area () and volume (). Mount Logan is the largest non-volcanic mountain in base area (). 
The highest mountains above sea level are also not those with peaks farthest from the centre of the Earth, because the figure of the Earth is not spherical. Sea level closer to the equator is several miles farther from the centre of the Earth. The summit of Chimborazo, Ecuador's tallest mountain, is usually considered to be the farthest point from the Earth's centre, although the southern summit of Peru's tallest mountain, Huascarán, is another contender. Both have elevations above sea level more than 2km less than that of Everest.
Geographical distribution.
Most mountains in the list are located in the Himalaya and Karakoram ranges to the south and west of the Tibetan plateau. In fact, all peaks in the world are located in the centre of Asia (East Asia, Central Asia and South Asia) in a rectangle edged by Noshaq () on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border in the West, Peak Jengish Chokusu, (Tuōmù'ěr Fēng) () on the Kyrgyzstan - Xinjiang border to the North, Gongga Shan (Minya Konka) () in Sichuan to the East, and Kabru () on the Sikkim(India) - Nepal border to the South.
The locations of the highest mountains are shown on the composite satellite image of High Asia below. The numbers refer to the ranking in the list. For clarity, lower peaks with labels overlapping higher peaks are left out of the main image. The boxed regions are those with the highest density of summits and are enlarged in two separate images to show all peaks. 
87 | 
86 | 1
85 | 8 1
84 | 8
83 | 
82 |
81 | 8 6 6 2
80 | 9 8 5 3 2
79 | 5 4 3 3
78 | 9 8 7 6 2 2 1 0
77 | 9 9 8 8 5 5 4 1 0 0
76 |
9 7 6 6 4 1 1
75 | 7 7 5 5 4 4 4 3 3 1 1
74 | 9 9 9 9 7 6 6 6 5 5 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 0 0 0
73 | 8 8 8 8 8 6 6 5 5 5 4 2 1 1 1 0
72 | 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 7 7 6 6 5 4 4 4 3 2 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
