Jamie Jilynn Chung (born April 10, 1983) is an American actress known to reality television audiences as a cast member on the MTV reality television series, ' and its spin-off show, ', and for her appearances in television and films, such as "Premium Rush", "Sorority Row", "The Hangover Part II", "Princess Protection Program", and "Sucker Punch". Beginning in 2012, Chung also stars in the recurring role of Mulan in the ABC fantasy television series "Once Upon a Time".
She is regarded as the "Real World" alumna with the most successful media career.
Early life and education.
Jamie Chung was born and raised in San Francisco, California. She is a second-generation Korean-American, raised by "traditional" parents, and was described by MTV as someone who "tells it like it is". Chung attended the University of California, Riverside, where she was a member of Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority.
Reality TV work.
Chung was a cast member on "", the fourteenth season of MTV's long-running reality TV show, "The Real World", which first aired in 2004. At the time she was selected to be on "The Real World: San Diego", she was described by MTV as a hard-working student who worked two jobs to pay her tuition, but who also enjoyed partying. She was also described by her friends as not having the best taste in men.
Six months after Chung and her castmates left the "Real World" house, they appeared to discuss their experiences both during and since their time on the show on "2 Punk Rock 4 This: The Real World San Diego Reunion", which premiered on July 9, 2004.
After appearing on "The Real World", Chung appeared on its spin-off game show, "Real World/Road Rules Challenge", as a cast member in that show's 2005 season, during which she was a member of the "Good Guys" team, which squared off against the "Bad Asses". By the end of the season, after several cast members had been eliminated during the competition, Chung remained, along with her fellow Good Guys teammates Darrell Taylor, Landon Lueck, and Mike Mizanin. Chung and her teammates were victorious against the remaining members of the Bad Asses in the final event, and won the competition.
Acting career.
Since her stint on "The Real World", she began her acting career appearing in various minor roles in television and films, including as Cordy Han in ten episodes of "Days of our Lives", as a Hooters girl in the 2007 comedy "I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry", and in episodes of "" and "Veronica Mars". 
In 2008, she starred in her first major role as well as the series lead in the miniseries ABC Family show "Samurai Girl" which launched in September 2008. 
She later had supporting roles in the 2009 feature films "Sorority Row" and "Dragonball Evolution", in the latter as Goku's love interest, Chi Chi, as well as a role in one of the segments of the movie "Burning Palms". Chung later went to star in the Disney Channel TV movie, "Princess Protection Program" which co-starred Demi Lovato and Selena Gomez. She appeared in 2010 film "Grown Ups" and had a supporting role in the 2012 martial arts film "The Man with the Iron Fists".
Chung gained her first major feature film role in the 2012 film "Premium Rush", directed by David Koepp as well as starring as the lead in the 2012 independent film Eden, Chung plays a young Korean American girl abducted and coerced into prostitution by domestic American human traffickers. Chung currently portrays the recurring role of Mulan in the of the television series, "Once Upon a Time". Her appearance on the series was panned by Bruce Fretts of "TV Guide", who felt that she did not fit into the series' fantasy world.
Her upcoming films include "7500", "", and "Knife Fight".
Awards and recognition.
Chung won the Female Stars of Tomorrow Award at the 2009 ShoWest industry trade show along with her "Sorority Row" castmates.
