Shark Tank is an American reality television series based on the "Dragons' Den" franchise, which first premiered on ABC on August 9, 2009. The show is currently in its fourth season, which began on September 14, 2012.
Description.
The series from which "Shark Tank" is based on ("Manê no Tora") originally premiered in 2001 on Japan broadcaster Nippon Television, and is known elsewhere around the world as "Dragons' Den". Sony Pictures Television, which owned the U.S. rights to the show, shopped it around for five years before it was selected as the next project by Mark Burnett, who was familiar with the series from his visits to England, where his relatives spoke highly of it to him. The series features a panel of entrepreneurs and business executives called "Sharks" who consider offers from other entrepreneurs seeking investments for their business or product.
The show includes a panel of potential investors. Two of the panel members, Robert Herjavec and Kevin O'Leary, have also appeared on the Canadian show, "Dragons' Den". Other past and present members of the panel include the entrepreneurs: Barbara Corcoran, Daymond John, Kevin Harrington, Mark Cuban, Jeff Foxworthy and Lori Greiner.
History.
"Shark Tank" premiered on Sunday, August 9, 2009 and aired fourteen episodes through January 2010. In August 2010 it was renewed for a second season. Season 2 premiered with a “sneak peek” episode on Sunday, March 20, 2011 before resuming its regular Friday night time slot on March 25, 2011. Season 2 had nine episodes, five of them featuring new panel members. Comedian Jeff Foxworthy and Mark Cuban replaced panel member Kevin Harrington for three episodes. Kevin O'Leary, Barbara Corcoran, Daymond John and Robert Herjavec appeared in all 14 episodes. 
In Season 2 Kevin O'Leary, Barbara Corcoran, Daymond John, and Robert Herjavec appeared in all 9 episodes. Mark Cuban appeared in three, Kevin Harrington in four and Jeff Foxworthy in two.
"Shark Tank"'s third season premiered Friday, January 20, 2012. During the season Kevin Harrington was replaced by Mark Cuban, and the "Queen of QVC" Lori Greiner replaced Barbara Corcoran on four episodes. Kevin O'Leary, Daymond John, Robert Herjavec, and Mark Cuban appeared in all 15 episodes of season three. On February 27, 2012, ABC ordered two additional episodes for Season 3 using un-aired footage which brought the season's episode total to 15. 
On May 10, 2012, "Shark Tank" was renewed for a fourth season, consisting of 24 episodes. This is the first time the series has received a full season order. Kevin O'Leary, Barbara Corcoran, Daymond John, Robert Herjavec, Mark Cuban and Lori Greiner appeared in all the episodes of Season 4.
Ratings.
By 2012 the show was averaging 7 million viewers an episode, making it the most watched program on Friday nights in the 18-49-year old demographic. As a result, ABC added three more episodes to the original season order of 22. TV Guide reported that the show's panel members had invested $12.4 million in the business opportunities presented to them during that season. Those whose business ideas were not selected for investment also benefited from the publicity generated by the show. Those who appear on the show are required to give 5 percent of the company's equity to Mark Burnett Productions and 36,076 people applied to present their business ideas in the 2012 season. In July 2012 the show was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the Outstanding Reality Program category.
