, abbreviated from the Japanese title of , is a children's anime TV series, which has since been adapted for the international television markets. It is based on the Pokémon video game series and a part of the Pokémon franchise.
The "Pokémon" metaseries is split up into four chronologically sequential series in Japan, split up by the version of the video game series the anime takes inspiration from: the original series, the "Advanced Generation" series, the "Diamond & Pearl" series, and currently the "Best Wishes!" series which started its "Episode N" miniseries in January 2013. In the international broadcasts, these four series are split into 16 separate seasons. These anime series are accompanied by spin-off programming, consisting of "Pokémon Chronicles", a series of side stories featuring characters in the anime that are not its current cast of main characters, and the live action variety and Pokémon-related news shows of "Weekly Pokémon Broadcasting Station", "Pokémon Sunday", and the current incarnation of "Pokémon Smash!".
Plot.
The series follows Ash Ketchum and his friends (both human and Pokémon) that he makes on the way as he travels the world catching new Pokémon, battling Pokémon trainers, winning Gym Badges to enter tournaments, and thwarting the attempts of criminal organizations. The anime adapts a fair amount of video game logic from the original games, such as multiple lookalike characters in different regions and Ash being unable to carry more than six Pokémon with him at a time. So far, Ash has traveled to Kanto, Johto, Hoenn, Sinnoh, and now the Unova league.
Media.
TV series.
In Japan, "Pocket Monsters" has been broadcast under its original title and under three subtitled titles, with the subtitled versions denoting a change in the setting matching the different versions of the video games, rather than being divided into distinct seasons (a change in season is usually denoted by a change in the theme songs, but the title never changes). The current series being broadcast is "Pocket Monsters: Best Wishes!". In its international broadcasts, "Pokémon"s episodes have been split up into smaller seasons for the international releases, running a fixed number of episodes, using a specific opening sequence for each new season, and a new subtitle. The current season airing is "Pocket Monsters: Best Wishes! Season 2: Episode N" in Japan and "Pokémon: Black & White: Adventures in Unova" internationally.
Movies.
During each season of the main series, a starring the main characters from the TV series has been released. , there have been 15 movies and one feature length TV broadcast (released outside Japan as a direct-to-video movie titled "Mewtwo Returns"). The plot of every movie has involved an encounter with a Legendary Pokémon, although some may not conform to a strict definition of the word. The movies are also used to promote new Pokémon that appear in new versions of the game and series.
Specials.
Except main series and movies, the anime has also shown various specials and TV shorts. In English-language broadcast, these have been played or are playing as the Pokémon Chronicles or Pokémon Sunday series, alongside The Legend of Thunder! special and several Pikachu shorts, Many of these specials centered around legendary Pokémon or one or more of the main characters that is separate from the main cast during its corresponding series, while the sporadically-made later side story episodes typically air as special episodes. Another 8 additional OVAs were broadcast on numbered All Nippon Flights, as well as sold by DVD exclusively. In addition, two 3D shorts were shown during the tour of Japanese theme park Poképark.
Related spin-off.
"Pokémon Chronicles".
Pokémon Chronicles is a 4Kids-created label used for a package collection of several as of yet undubbed specials. The vast majority of the episodes making up Chronicles were taken from what was known in Japan as , which aired as part of Weekly Pokémon Broadcasting Station. The remaining portions of Chronicles consisted of the Pocket Monsters Crystal TV special, and installments from the "Pikachu's Winter Vacation" OVA series.
Airing and production.
The English adaptation dub of the series was produced in the U.S. by 4Kids Entertainment and video distribution of the series was handled by Viz Media and Pioneer Entertainment for the TV series, Warner Bros. and Nintendo for the first three movies, the thirteenth movie, and the first television special, Miramax Films, and Buena Vista Home Entertainment for the fourth movie through the seventh, Viz Media for movies eight to ten, and Universal Studios for the eleventh and twelfth films. The series and all feature films are directed by Kunihiko Yuyama, with English adaptations originally written by Norman J. Grossfeld and Michael Haigney for the first eight seasons. However, starting with the ninth season, The Pokémon Company International (operating as Pokémon USA at that time), and TAJ Productions, who worked with 4Kids on the show before taking leave after Season 5, replaced 4Kids as the show's non-Japanese producers and distributors. Most of the original voice cast was also replaced by TAJ for budget purposes, causing controversy among fans who admired the original voice actors. When TAJ closed their doors, they were replaced by DuArt Film and Video for the tenth movie and Season 11 of the anime series onward. In Canada, Pokémon first aired and has been airing on YTV since late 1998. YTV has been airing Pokémon longer than any other English network and is Subsequently YTV's longest running show. In the UK, Pokémon first aired on Sky1, then it was followed by airings on CITV in the summer of 1999 including their Saturday morning show SMTV Live and proved to be extraordinarily popular, to the point were segments and sketches of the show itself were based around Pokémon (e.g. the Pokérap). As part of their relaunching of their internet site, the full first season of the anime is being shown on the Pokemon.com web site in the USA.
The show (as of September 23, 2010, in Japan) has premiered the fourth series of the anime, "Pocket Monsters: Best Wishes!" on TV Tokyo Thursday nights at 7:00 PM JST. The metaseries had been airing on Tuesday nights in the earlier seasons. In the United States "(as of February 18, 2012)" the series is airing its second season of "Black & White" on Cartoon Network as "", with episodes premiering Saturday mornings at 8:30 AM ET/PT. An English version of "Pokémon Side Story" has now been made, titled "Pokémon Chronicles" which premiered in the UK on Toonami on May 11, 2005 at 4:30 p.m. BST, and is currently airing the 13th season on YTV in Canada. Each season also brings forth a Pokémon feature-length film, and each film up until the seventh is preceded by a Pokémon animated short. "Pokémon" CDs have been released in conjunction with the anime. The tracks feature songs that have been shown in the English dubbed version of the anime. However, some CDs have been released to promote and profit the anime.
"Pokémon Diamond and Pearl" began airing in Japan on September 28, 2006 with a three-episode arc introducing the new series' main female character Dawn "(known in Japan as Hikari)", based on the playable female player in the Diamond and Pearl games. The new series aired with a sneak preview on April 20, 2007 in the USA. The sneak preview aired on May 5 in Canada. A dubbed version of the 90-minute preview done in Japan, Diamond and Pearl takes place in the Sinnoh region, based on the new "Diamond and Pearl" games. The new series aired in prime time on Cartoon Network starting June 4 at 7:30 PM ET/PT as part of the Cartoon Network Summer 2007 programming promotion. The summer run was confirmed in the "Pokémon Ranger and the Temple of the Sea" DVD released on April 2, 2007. Pokémon Diamond and Pearl has also been airing on YTV in Canada since September 8, 2007. Ash and Brock are joined by a new coordinator named Dawn, and the trio travel through Sinnoh, collecting gym badges and ribbons. Gary returned in this series.
"Diamond and Pearl" came to an end on September 9, 2010, and two weeks later was replaced by a new series based on the games, "Pokémon Black" and "Pokémon White". On June 9, 2010, a blog posted by the storyboard writer revealed that the first four episodes of the "" series were finished and confirmed Ash returning. Two new characters would be traveling with Ash. On July 1, 2010, the official title of the 4th series - Pocket Monsters: Best Wishes! - was revealed. The series introduced two new characters traveling with Ash - Iris, whose Axew travels in her hair, and Cilan, a "Pokémon Connoisseur" ("Sommelier" in Japan) who is a Gym Leader and specializes in relationships with Pokémon and their trainers. In addition, a new rival, Trip, was introduced as well.
In the UK, the first eight series were aired on multiple channels, ITV1, ITV2, Channel 5 and Sky1. Battle Frontier and Diamond and Pearl were aired on Cartoon Network. The CITV Channel and ITV4 recently broadcast the Battle Frontier episodes for the first time on free TV, on everyday as part of Action Stations!. Battle Dimension started airing in the UK on September 6, 2008, on Disney XD (née Jetix), which is advertised confusingly as "the new home for Pokémon in the UK", however episodes airing on Jetix/Disney XD have also aired on CITV and ITV4, with ITV4 sometimes premiering new episodes. Jetix/Disney XD's various European channels also started including Pokémon in their schedules from late 2008, making it the only channel to air the newest Pokémon series in some regions. The show will air on Pop soon.
In Germany the series was shown for the first time on 1 September 1999. The English dub was used and simply re-dubbed by providing German dialogue. In Germany so far 15 Seasons was shown from RTL2.
In Australia "Pokémon: Black & White" seasons airs on Eleven on 27 February 2012 at 7am Weekdays, formerly aired between Season 1-14 from 2000 to 2012 on Network Ten, also aired on Cartoon Network from 2001 to present.
In South Asian regions such as India and Pakistan, Cartoon Network India started to air "Pokémon" on April 1, 2003 in it's English dub from the U.S. and also carried a Hindi dub as a secondary language option. Although, the English dub was collected to be served in the South Asia regions, the Hindi dub is simply a re-dub of the English dub with no changes, other then just simply provide it with Hindi speaking dialogue. Later on, it also provided Tamil and Telugu dubs as well, which were also revised dialogue translations of the English dub.
Cartoon Network India and Pakistan services, along with their Toonami UK service, also carries "Pokémon" episodes. As of October 9, 2006, Cartoon Network's online service, Toonami Jetstream, featured "Pokémon" episodes starting at the Orange League episode "The Pokémon Water War". As from November 16, 2009, Cartoon Network India is going to air the dub of "Pokémon Diamond and Pearl" while Cartoon Network Pakistan is going to air it from November 9, 2009. The last season of "Diamond & Pearl" series and thirteenth season overall, "Pokémon Diamond & Pearl: Sinnoh League Victors" premiered on October 3, 2011 in India. The last episode of "Diamond & Pearl" series that was shown on October 25, 2011 in India, while it is set to premiere on Cartoon Network Pakistan on February 1, 2012. In India, the anime series has been moved to Pogo in Early 2011, and that is where it currently airs, being available in it's English, Hindi, Tamil or Telugu dubs.
Controversy.
Pokémon has had several anime episodes removed from the rotation in Japan or the rest of the world. The most infamous of these episodes was . The episode made headlines worldwide when it caused 685 children to experience seizures and seizure-like symptoms caused by a repetitive flash of light. Although the offending sequence was caused by Pikachu's actions, the episode's featured Pokémon, Porygon, has never been seen again in the anime except for one brief cameo appearance in the movie, Pokémon Heroes and in one scene-bumper later in season 1. Its evolutions Porygon2 and Porygon-Z have never appeared either. On September 1, 2006, China banned the series from prime time broadcasting (from 17:00 to 20:00), similarly to Western animated series such as "The Simpsons", to protect its struggling animation studios. The ban was later extended by one hour.
