Mary-Kate Olsen (born June 13, 1986) is an American actress, fashion designer, producer, author, and businesswoman. She co-founded luxury fashion brand The Row and the more affordable line Olsenboye alongside her fraternal twin sister Ashley Olsen. Olsen pursued acting independently as an adult until 2012.
Birth and family.
Olsen was born in Sherman Oaks, California to David Olsen and Jarnette "Jarnie". Along with her twin, Ashley, Olsen has an older brother, Trent; a younger sister, Elizabeth, who is also an actress; and two younger half siblings, Taylor and Jake, from her father's second marriage. Olsen's parents divorced in 1995.
Career.
Along with Ashley, Olsen was cast at the age of nine months to share the role of Michelle Tanner on the ABC sitcom Full House. The Olsen twins portrayed Michelle throughout the series' 1987–1995 run. In the early 1990s, Olsen and her twin sister established a company, Dualstar, which produced a long string of TV movies and direct-to-video releases featuring the girls. The Olsens continued to release direct-to-video films up to the early 2000s, along with starring in the 1995 feature film "It Takes Two". After "Full House", the sisters starred in two other sitcoms ("Two of a Kind" and "So Little Time") and an animated series ("Mary-Kate and Ashley in Action!"), each of which lasted only one season while "So Little Time" ran for two seasons. These ventures, combined with an array of licensing deals for their names and likenesses, made Olsen wealthy at a young age. In 2004, Olsen's wealth was estimated at $137 million. 
Olsen and her sister became co-presidents of Dualstar upon their eighteenth birthday. Olsen's first solo acting appearance was in the movie "Factory Girl", released in December 2006. Olsen's one short scene was ultimately cut from theatrical release, but was included on the film's DVD. In 2007, Olsen and her twin sister said that if they became involved in movies together again it would be as producers. Olsen had a recurring role on "Weeds" as Tara Lindman. She appears in the 2008 film "The Wackness" as Union. At the Sundance Film Festival, co-star and Academy Award–winner Sir Ben Kingsley praised her.
Olsen made a one-episode appearance in 2008 on the ABC comedy "Samantha Who?", playing a self-destructive girl whom Samantha tries to help while doing community service. Olsen appeared in the movie "Beastly", which was based on the book of the same name by Alex Flinn. Olsen signed on to play Stacey in the movie "Story of a Girl", but the movie appears to have been put on hold. 
In March 2012, Olsen and her twin sister expressed an interest in quitting acting for good in order to focus on their fashion career. Olsen has expressed a desire to open up a fashion shop. Olsen has said that she considers fashion, rather than acting, as her future.
Dualstar.
In 2004, both Ashley and Mary-Kate became co-presidents of their company Dualstar (created in 1993 following the success of "Full House"), the brand currently selling in over 3,000 stores in America and 5,300 stores worldwide. Their success has been marked on Forbes "The Celebrity 100" list since 2002, and in 2007 Forbes ranked the twins as the eleventh-richest women in entertainment, with an estimated combined net worth of $ 100 million.
Fashion.
Following a high volume of public interest in their fashion choices, Olsen and her twin sister work in collaboration on a string of fashion lines available to the public. Starting as young girls, the Olsen twins started a clothing line in Wal-Mart stores across America for girls ages 4–14 as well as a beauty line called ""Mary-Kate and Ashley: Real fashion for real girls"". In 2004 they made news by signing a pledge to allow all the workers that sew their line of clothing in Bangladesh full maternity leave. The National Labor Committee, which organized the pledge, later praised the twins for their commitment to worker rights. In 2006, in an attempt to gain credibility in the fashion industry after their association with Wal-Mart tarnished their reputations, they were tapped as the faces of the upscale fashion line Badgley Mischka. As adults, the Olsen twins have devoted much of their attention to the world of fashion. They head a couture fashion label, "The Row," as well as "Elizabeth and James", "Olsenboye", and "StyleMint" retail collections. In addition, Mary-Kate has embarked on a solo fashion project with celebrity stylists Jane Belfry and Fred Holston. The line was reportedly in development as of 2009. Mary-Kate's sometimes controversial fashion choices have often found her on both the best and worst dressed fashion lists, particularly for her decision to wear fur. Mary-Kate and Ashley designed an Olsenboye Change Purse in 2011 and donated the money to "Pennies From Heaven". In 2011 Mary-Kate and Ashley teamed up with TOMS Shoes to design footwear for kids without shoes in more than 20 countries worldwide. Mary-Kate and Ashley are now the creative directors for Superga (brand). Mary-Kate and Ashley will release an Elizabeth and James perfume in Spring 2013. The girls won the top prize at the 2012 CFDA Fashion Awards. StyleMint is now available in the UK. In October 2012 Mary-Kate and Ashley won the WSJ Magazine Innovator of The Year Award.
Book.
In 2008, Olsen and her twin sister co-authored "Influence", a book featuring interviews with fashion designers that have inspired the twins' fashion lines.
Personal life.
In 2004, Olsen graduated from Campbell Hall School and began attending New York University with Ashley. Both of them withdrew from NYU the following year, a few months apart, and returned to California. Also in 2005, Olsen ended her romance with Greek shipping heir Stavros Niarchos III. "I miss him and I adore him," Olsen said. "It's a hurtful and a painful subject." When asked if there was a specific reason for her leaving NYU, she replied, "I think we can all guess." 
Olsen dated Maxwell Snow, the younger brother of the late New York-based artist Dash Snow, from September 2006 until the summer of 2007. In 2008 Olsen started dating artist Nate Lowman. The two split up in February 2010. In May 2012, it was revealed that Olsen was dating Olivier Sarkozy, half brother of former French President Nicolas Sarkozy. During a 2010 interview with Marie Claire Magazine Mary-Kate revealed that she doesn't have fond memories of being on "Full House".
Health issues.
In mid-2004, Olsen announced she had entered treatment for an eating disorder, anorexia nervosa. A Got Milk? ad featuring the twins was pulled following the announcement. On November 20, 2007, she was hospitalized for a reported kidney infection.
Death of Heath Ledger.
Mary-Kate was a close friend of late actor Heath Ledger. After discovering Ledger unconscious in his bed in January 2008, his masseuse called Olsen twice before contacting police. Olsen sent a private security guard to the scene. 
Responding to a claim by an anonymous law enforcement official that she would not speak to federal investigators without a promise of legal immunity, Olsen's attorney Michael C. Miller said, "We have provided the government with relevant information including facts in the chronology of events surrounding Mr. Ledger's death and the fact that Ms. Olsen does not know the source of the drugs Mr. Ledger consumed".
