Dianna Elise Agron (; born April 30, 1986) is an American actress, singer, and dancer. She is best known for her portrayal of Quinn Fabray in the Fox television series "Glee".
Early life.
Dianna Agron was born in Savannah, Georgia, and was raised in San Antonio, Texas and San Francisco, California. She is the daughter of Mary and Ronald S. Agron, a general manager of Hyatt hotels. Agron's father's family is originally from Russia, and their original surname, Agronsky, was altered by Ellis Island officials. Her father was born to a Jewish family, while her mother converted to Judaism; Agron attended Hebrew school and had a bat mitzvah. Agron attended Burlingame Intermediate School and then Burlingame High School in Burlingame, California, where she was in the Homecoming Court. She has been dancing since the age of three, and began teaching dance as a teenager. She says she was not "popular" in the stereotypical sense in high school, though she had many friends from different cliques around the school.
When she was 15, she found out her dad had multiple sclerosis. In an interview for "Cosmopolitan Magazine", she revealed: "Quite a bit changed after that,” she says. "At that age, you don't see mortality in your parents." The disease caused her parent's relationship to fall apart, and they decided to separate, which was devastating for her and her younger brother. "I had to play therapist to my family... be the glue." She pauses, then says, "Those kinds of things I'm not ready to speak about yet." She is also very private with her personal life.
Career.
Early work.
Agron has appeared on television shows such as "Shark", "Close to Home", "", "Numb3rs", and had a recurring role on "Veronica Mars". She then appeared as Harper on a 13-episode series of short films called "It's a Mall World", directed by Milo Ventimiglia, and airing on MTV, and then on the second season of "Heroes" as Debbie Marshall, the head cheerleader/captain of the cheer squad at Costa Verde High School. Dianna has also hosted a mini Music Festival for 826LA in Los Angeles called Chickens in Love.
She was among many young Hollywood stars selected to be in Wal-Mart's Ocean Pacific spring 2010 marketing campaign. The national campaign debuted in fashion, lifestyle and entertainment magazines such as " Elle", "Teen Vogue", "Seventeen" and "Cosmopolitan", outdoor and online at the official Ocean Pacific website. In addition, the celebrities hosted an Ocean Pacific party in Los Angeles in late April and made personal appearances on behalf of the brand.
"Glee".
Agron's most notable role to date is as Quinn Fabray, a high school cheerleader, on the Fox series "Glee". She and the other cast members were awarded the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series in 2010, and nominated in the same category the following year. and two Golden Globes for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy.
The character's accidental pregnancy storyline received mixed reviews from critics. Tim Stack for "Entertainment Weekly" deemed it "a good dramatic twist", but hoped that it would not be a long-lasting storyline. Reviews of her storyline became increasingly negative, though Agron was praised for her dramatic acting during the confrontation scene with Quinn's parents in "Ballad". Gerrick D. Kennedy, writing for the "Los Angeles Times", was critical of the ongoing pregnancy plot in the episode "Hairography", and noted that he cringed whenever Quinn appeared on screen. Conversely, Bobby Hankinson of the "Houston Chronicle" enjoyed Quinn in the episode, and wrote: "I love that she can keep her "Mean Girls" edge while being heartbreakingly sad or as joyful as she was singing "Papa Don't Preach". Reviewing the episode "Journey to Regionals", "Entertainment Weekly's" Darren Franich called Quinn's birthing scenes—interspersed with Vocal Adrenaline performing Queen's "Bohemian Rhapsody"—both "brilliant" and "terrible". He wrote, "If nothing else, it was definitely the most visually arresting way to represent the birthing process I've ever seen outside of "The Miracle of Life". But I kind of liked it. Somewhere, Freddie Mercury is nodding proudly, and saying, 'World, I forgive you for We Will Rock You.'"
Brett Berk, writing for "Vanity Fair", was positive about the scripting of the Quinn character in the second season premiere, now that the pregnancy storyline was over, and was happy to see the return of "evil Quinn". Joel Kelly of "TV Squad" criticized the decision to pair Quinn with Finn again in the Valentine's Day oriented episode. He saw it as a regression of the characters, and commented: "Yes, it feels like "Glee" Classic, because the series started with the two of them together. But both of them have changed—Quinn more so than Finn—and having them dating again seems like they're going back to the days when Quinn was the icy lead Cheerio and Finn was the nice but dumb star quarterback."
Quinn's season three reinvention attracted mixed reviews. Lesley Goldberg of "The Hollywood Reporter" listed her change as a highlight of the episode, and hoped to see more of her new attitude. "The Atlantic" Kevin Fallon called it "the most interesting thing Quinn has done since giving birth to a baby to the soundtrack of 'Bohemian Rhapsody'", but VanDerWerff suggested the development hinged on the fact the producers no longer knew how to utilize Agron.
It has been reported that she has been demoted to recurring/guest star status for Season 4. She has appeared in the Season 4 episodes; Thanksgiving, Naked and I Do.
Agron also appears on the Glee Live! In Concert! tour 2011 movie, "".
Musical performances.
Several songs performed by Agron as Quinn have been released as singles, available for digital download, also featured on the show's soundtrack albums. Agron made her musical debut at the end of the episode "Showmance" where she performed Dionne Warwick's "I Say a Little Prayer". Quinn's next solo was in the episode "Throwdown", where she performed The Supremes' "You Keep Me Hangin' On". The song was released on "". deemed the cover of "Keep Holding On", the ensemble performance on the episode, an "emotionally satisfying showstopper", however was critical of Quinn's cover of "You Keep Me Hangin' On", which he called "thin and jarring". Aly Semigran of MTV observed that Quinn spontaneously bursting into song brought "Glee" "dangerously close to "High School Musical" territory". Agron later performed a solo in the episode "Hairography" singing Madonna's "Papa Don't Preach" after her father learns she is pregnant. This performance by Agron was released as a single. She performed a rendition of James Brown's "It's a Man's Man's Man's World" in the episode "Funk". CNN's Lisa Respers France was "slightly disturbed" by Quinn's "weird" performance of "It's a Man's Man's Man's World" using pregnant teenagers as backing dancers.
In season three, Quinn sings her first solo number since the first season, "Never Can Say Goodbye" by The Jackson 5, which received mostly positive reviews. Jen Chaney of "The Washington Post" gave the song a "B−", and said it "worked much better than every track that preceded it" because it adapted the song to the show "instead of trying to out-Jackson Jackson". "Entertainment Weekly" Joseph Brannigan Lynch called it "a nice summation of her character's journey, but not vocally impressive enough to justify listening to outside of the episode" and gave it a "B". Crystal Bell of "HuffPost TV" described it as a "blah performance", but Kate Stanhope of "TV Guide" said it was "sweet and reflective". Erica Futterman of "Rolling Stone" wrote that it was "a tune well-suited for Quinn's sultry voice and the flipped meaning she gives the lyrics", and "TVLine" Michael Slezak had a similar take: he gave it an "A" and called it a "remarkably lovely fit" for her voice.
Quinn's characterization.
Quinn is described by Agron as Rachel Berry's (Lea Michele) enemy, and "terrible, the meanest girl". Agron said that her favorite part of Quinn is that "she's smart. But she's also human, and through her tough exterior, she's often a little girl lost." Interviewmagazine.com's Lauren Waterman has described her as being "lovable, but occasionally a manipulative deposed queen bee." Agron commented: "Yes, there is a stereotype with these characters and it wouldn't be fair if stereotypes didn't exist a little bit. But [co-creator] Ryan Murphy has a way of taking everything and turning it upside down. That's the great thing about this show and these characters: nobody is one note, which is amazing." Quinn was originally conceived as the antagonistic queen bee head cheerleader, a departure from Agron's actual high school experience. Agron said in an interview with HitFix: "I definitely wasn't cool in high school. I really wasn't. I did belong to many of the clubs and was in leadership on yearbook and did the musical theater route, so I had friends in all areas, but I certainly did not know what to wear, did not know how to do my hair, all those things." She added: "I think that it shows that regardless of who you are and what group you belong to, that there are so many emotions behind each person in high school. Sometimes with teens, writers or directors, anybody, short-changes them and makes them be simple, simple individuals, you're either the jock or the popular kid or the nerd. They don't show those shades. Everybody has those shades to them. This show, it really expands upon vulnerability and excitement and anger all the experiences that you probably actually go through in high school."
Quinn's role as head cheerleader is central to understanding her character. Agron said that she had never had any prior cheer experience before the "Pilot". "If I had been cheerleader, I would've ended up on crutches," she told "Emmy" magazine. In an interview with HitFix she said, "I have new respect for the craft, because I slightly hurt myself during the pilot, coming down from one of the stunts. It's better now. I didn't tear something in my knee, but I strained it. Knees are very sensitive, I've learned. It's crazy, because I've been dancing since I was three on my toes and all these things. And you should never say this, but I've never injured myself ever. I'd seen gnarly injuries with dance and all these things. You shouldn't say that, though, because every day is an opportunity to fall, hurt yourself, so that was my experience."
Other works.
In 2007, Agron appeared as Dyanna in the action drama thriller film "T.K.O.", directed by Declan Mulvey, alongside Samantha Alarcon, Daz Crawford and Christian Boeving. And she also appeared as Megan in the independent comedy film "Skid Marks", directed by Karl Kozak, alongside Tyler Poelle, Mikey Post and Kathy Uyen.
In 2009, Agron wrote, starred in, directed and executive-produced the short comedy film "A Fuchsia Elephant". The plot revolves around Agron's character, On the day before her eighteenth birthday, Charlotte Hill makes a decision to change. Not wanting to follow in the footsteps of her alcoholic mother, she enlists a sober partner named Michael (Dave Franco) to help guide her. It was shot during the "Glee" hiatus in the summer of 2009 And she also appeared in a short film comedy film "Dinner with Raphael" alongside Paul Boukadakis and Michael Bower, written and directed by Joey Boukadakis. And she also played a small role as Sadie in the independent comedy film "Celebrities Anonymous", directed by Dennis Hemphill Jr., alongside Lindsay Zir and Joey Kern.
In 2010, Agron directed the music video for "Body" by Thao with the Get Down Stay Down.
Also in 2010, Agron appeared as Minnow, the younger sister of Lila Hayes in the romantic comedy "The Romantics" alongside Anna Paquin, Katie Holmes and Josh Duhamel. And she played the small role of Natalie, fiancée to main character Ali's love interest Jack, in the film "Burlesque" alongside Christina Aguilera, Cher, and Stanley Tucci.
Agron was chosen by "People" to be part of their Most Beautiful 2010. She also came 8th in the 2011 Afterellen.com "Hot 100" list. Additionally, she came in 13th in the 2012 AfterEllen.com "Top 50 Favorite Female TV Characters" list, thanks to her character, Quinn Fabray, on "Glee". Later on that year, she and her co-stars, Naya Rivera and Heather Morris, came in the first three places at the "2012 AfterEllen Hot 100" list, with Agron at the 2nd place.
In 2011, Agron appeared as Alice alongside Steven Waddington and Tony Becker in the horror thriller "The Hunters", directed by Chris Briant. And in the science-fiction action thriller "I Am Number Four", directed by D. J. Caruso. Alongside Alex Pettyfer and Timothy Olyphant.
Agron hosted the GLAAD Media Award on June 2, 2012 in San Francisco. Her co-stars of "Glee", Naya Rivera and Cory Monteith hosted them on March 24, 2012 in New York City. Following Rivera's tradition of auctioning off kisses to an audience member, she raised $5500.
On July 13, 2012, Agron confirmed reports of her role as Belle Blake in the upcoming film "Malavita" with Robert De Niro and Michelle Pfeiffer.
In September 2012, it was announced that Dianna Agron will be part of the "Play As You Are" Nintendo campaign, that will show how games for Nintendo 3DS engage their respective interests and personalities. She will be featured in ads for Art Academy: Lessons for Everyone! The game lets players of any artistic skill level learn a wide range of painting and drawing techniques that can be applied in real life, from pencils to paints to pastels. She will also appear in spots for the puzzle-solving adventure Professor Layton and the Miracle Mask.
Personal life.
Dianna Agron dated I Am Number Four co-star Alex Pettyfer for a year.
Agron is a vegetarian and a supporter of PETA. Also, she is an avid supporter of gay rights.
In 2011, she underwent nose surgery to repair her deviated septum which was the result of a blow to the nose when she was fourteen.
Using her Tumblr account as a starting point, Agron released her website "You Me & Charlie" on December 12, 2011. Along with help from several other contributors, she writes and collects posts, which subjects vary from music, art, fashion, and daily inspiration. Vanity Fair has complimented the site, stating that the site is "full of sunshine, optimism, and pretty people".
Agron's Twitter account was hacked on December 18, 2011 and had started many trending topics. The hacker also got into her personal email, and the hacker started leaking songs, scripts and episodes.
Agron worked with The Trevor Project in 2012 to raise money in honor of her birthday. After promising to match donations, she and her fans raised over $26,000.
She has also been known to use her Tumblr account to encourage fans to donate to several organizations, such as 826LA and the Wildlife Waystation.
