Elizabeth "Lizzie" Olsen (born February 16, 1989) is an American actress and singer. She's best known for her roles in the films "Silent House", "Liberal Arts" and the critically acclaimed "Martha Marcy May Marlene", for which she was nominated for numerous awards. She is the younger sister of actresses and fashion designers Mary-Kate Olsen and Ashley Olsen.
Early life.
Olsen was born and raised in Sherman Oaks, California, the daughter of Jarnette "Jarnie" (b. 1954), a personal manager, and David Olsen, a real estate developer and mortgage banker. In 1995, Olsen's parents filed for divorce proceedings. 
As a child, she received ballet and singing lessons. Lizzie Olsen began acting at a very young age, with appearances in her sisters' films. Before the age of eleven, Olsen had small roles in How the West Was Fun, Our First Video, and the straight-to-video series The Adventures of Mary-Kate and Ashley. Of this period in her acting career, Olsen comments, "Well, that was like after-school for me. I'd hang out and they'd be like, hey, you want to be in this one? Then they'd paint half my face dark brown or something— 'Silly sister, forgot to put sunscreen on half her face.'" She has an older brother and two older twin sisters. From her father's second marriage, has 2 younger half-siblings.
Having appeared in her sisters' videos, when she was in the fourth grade, Olsen began to go on auditions for other projects. By the time she was ten Elizabeth landed a small role in a local commercial. However the auditions came at a price. Olsen found she had less time for other interests: ballet and sports. She decided to quit acting.
Olsen attended Campbell Hall School in North Hollywood, California from kindergarten through grade 12. After graduation, she enrolled at New York University's Tisch School of the Arts. In 2009, Olsen spent a semester studying in Moscow, Russia at the Art Theatre School. The young actress says of her work towards an acting career: "...I've been taking acting classes since I was 7. I took classes, kids auditioning with their mothers, and I didn't want that, I just liked the classes. I met my agent through understudying a Broadway play, and I was doing some underground stuff that nobody saw."
Career.
Olsen began acting when she was four years of age and co-starred in six of Mary-Kate and Ashley's productions; she also auditioned for the film, "Spy Kids". Olsen has received acting advice from both Mary-Kate and Ashley.
By age 16, Olsen began studying Russian theater, which resparked her interest in acting. In 2009, during her sophomore year, Olsen became the understudy for the Nicole Halladay character in the Broadway show Impressionism.
It was during this time that the youngest Olsen sister met her agent. Together they decided that theater would be the path for Elizabeth. This decision was partly motivated by the way the media had treated her older sisters after they had been thrust to the spotlight as babies.
However, Olsen still auditioned for movies, landing her first role six months after she began. The role was Zoe, Catherine Keener's character's daughter in Peace, Love and Misunderstanding. As she was preparing to begin filming, she came across the script for Martha Marcy May Marlene. After falling in love with the script and being cast as the main character—a young girl escaping from a cult—just two weeks before shooting, she drove back and forth between both sets until filming was completed on both.
The 2011 film became a film festival darling and landed high praise for Olsen's performance. In addition to receiving extensive praise for her performance, Martha Marcy May Marlene marked Olsen's first nude appearance in a film. When asked about the nudity, she said that she felt that it added to the film. She has also acted in "Silent House", in which she played the role of Sarah, and appeared in the music video "The Queen" by Carlotta. Lizzie Olsen filmed the movie "Red Lights" during mid-2011, and the movie was released in the US on July 13, 2012. She also starred in Josh Radnor's film "Liberal Arts", which was released on January 22, 2012. She and "Dreamer" and Dakota Fanning are set to star in "Very Good Girls", planned for a 2013 release. Olsen had recently joined the cast of the American remake of the 2003 South Korean film Oldboy. She will play Marie, a young social worker who develops a relationship with the protagonist, played by Josh Brolin. Olsen will play Edie Parker, Jack Kerouac's first wife and the author of the Beat Generation memoir "You'll Be Okay." in "Kill your Darlings". Kerouac will be played by Jack Huston, the grandson of the great John Huston. First time filmmaker John Krokidas will helm the project and his ex-Yale roommate Austin Bunn co-wrote the script with him.
Olsen almost quit acting in 2004 due to the media frenzy surrounding Mary-Kate's eating disorder.
In January 2013, she was nominated to the BAFTA's Rising Star Award.
Personal life.
Olsen attends New York University's Tisch School of the Arts and the Atlantic Theater Company. Beside her sisters Mary-Kate and Ashley, she has an older brother named Trent Olsen and two younger half siblings, sister Taylor Olsen and brother Jake Olsen, from her father's second marriage.
