Young Money Entertainment is an American record label founded by rapper Lil Wayne. Young Money's president is Lil Wayne's lifelong friend Mack Maine. The label is an imprint of Cash Money Records and is distributed by Republic Records. The label has released seven US No. 1 albums: "Tha Carter III", "Tha Carter IV", and "I Am Not a Human Being" by Lil Wayne, "Thank Me Later" and "Take Care" by Drake, "Pink Friday" and "" by Nicki Minaj. Current artists include Lil Wayne, Drake, Nicki Minaj, Tyga, Mack Maine, Jae Millz, Cory Gunz, Lil Twist, and Shanell among others.
History.
In October 2007, Lil Wayne said in an interview with "Vibe" that he had stepped down as President of the label, and had given the position to Cortez Bryant. As of 2009, Mack Maine is serving as President. Rapper Drake signed a joint venture between Cash Money Records and Young Money. President Mack Maine confirmed that Omarion was no longer on the label after many rumours were circulating the internet. 
To promote their collaboration album "We Are Young Money", which was released on December 21, 2009, Young Money artists embarked on the Young Money Tour.
2010–2011.
The label had three of the top 10 highest 2010 hip hop album sales with—in order—Drake's "Thank Me Later", Lil Wayne's "Rebirth" and "I Am Not a Human Being".
On March 6, 2010, Lil Wayne confirmed that rapper Cory Gunz was the latest artist to sign. In 2011 Konvict Muzik artist T-Pain signed to the Young Money roster after he and Akon agreed to part ways after his last Konvict release "RevolveR", later T-Pain revealed that he was close to sign a deal with Young Money, but it never concluded. In November 2011, Lil Wayne introduced 14-year-old singer Torion Sellers. 
2012-present.
In May 2012, Birdman signed DJ Khaled's We the Best Music Group to Cash Money, Young Money Records. Ace Hood will be the first one from We The Best to release a studio album under Young Money Records. On February 15, 2013 Mack Maine announced We the Future and Lil Wayne's 14 year old daughter Reginae Carter had signed to Young Money. 
The next albums to be released by Young Money are Lil Wayne's "I Am Not a Human Being II" and Tyga's "Hotel California". In December 2012 Mack Maine announced a second Young Money album will be released. Drake's third studio album "Nothing Was the Same" and Nicki Minaj’s third studio album "Pink Friday: The Pink Print", will both be released in 2013.
