Kristen Carroll Wiig (; born August 22, 1973) is an American actress, comedian, and writer. She is best known for her work as a cast member on the NBC sketch comedy series "Saturday Night Live" from 2005 to 2012. Wiig was a member of the improvisational comedy troupe The Groundlings, and has appeared in several films and television series, including "Bridesmaids", "MacGruber", "Flight of the Conchords", "Adventureland", and "Paul". Her voice acting credits include "Ruffnut" in "How to Train Your Dragon", "Miss Hattie" in "Despicable Me" and "Lola Bunny" in the series "The Looney Tunes Show".
In 2011, Wiig co-wrote and starred in the 2011 comedy film, "Bridesmaids", which earned her a Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Actress – Musical/Comedy, as well as nominations for the Academy Award and BAFTA for Best Original Screenplay.
Early life.
Wiig was born in Canandaigua, New York, the daughter of Laurie J. (née Johnston), an artist, and Jon J. Wiig, who ran a lake marina in Western New York. She has an older brother, Erik, who is mentally disabled. Her father is of Norwegian and Irish ancestry and her mother is of English and Scottish descent. The name Wiig comes from the area of Sogn og Fjordane in Norway. Wiig moved with her family to Lancaster, Pennsylvania, at the age of three, and attended Nitrauer Elementary School. She later moved to Rochester, New York, where she attended and graduated from Brighton High School. After a short stint at Roanoke College, Wiig attended the University of Arizona, majoring in Art. When she took an Acting class in college to fulfill a course requirement, the teacher suggested she continue to act. She dropped out of school and relocated to Los Angeles, where she joined The Groundlings while working odd jobs to support herself.
Career.
Television.
Wiig's work has mostly been in comedy, including performing at the Empty Stage Comedy Theatre. In 2003, she appeared in the Spike TV show "The Joe Schmo Show", a spoof of reality television, in which she played "Dr. Pat", the quack marriage counselor.
Wiig debuted on "Saturday Night Live" shortly into Season 31, on November 12, 2005. She survived an "SNL" budget cut, becoming a full member of the repertory cast at the beginning of Season 32 in 2006. Her characters include Penelope, a neurotic attention-seeker; Kat, half of the musical duo Garth and Kat (frequently appearing on Weekend Update alongside Fred Armisen); Dooneese Maharelle on the Lawrence Welk show; Mindy Grayson in the Secret Word sketches, Gilly, a highly mischievous schoolgirl; Sue, who can't control her excitement over surprises; The Target Lady, a clerk at the chain store and kitsch collector; Shanna, a sexy woman whose actions and stories gross people out; Cheryl Bryant, a TV game show host who gives away big prizes and is always more excited about the prize than the winners are; Judy Grimes, a nervous travel agent; Jacqueline Seka, predatory host of the "Cougar Den"; and Aunt Linda, a hard-to-please movie critic, both frequently appearing on Weekend Update. She has also played real-life people such as Björk, Suze Orman, Lana Del Rey, Kathie Lee Gifford, Elisabeth Hasselbeck, Drew Barrymore, Taylor Swift, Liza Minnelli, Christine O'Donnell, former Speaker of the House Nancy Pelosi, Congresswoman Michele Bachmann, and socialite Kris Jenner.
Wiig was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for her work on "Saturday Night Live" (2009, 2010, 2011, 2012).
In December 2009, she headlined in the Christmas Special "SNL Presents: A Very Gilly Christmas", which featured new sketches with her character Gilly and highlights of older "SNL" clips.
Wiig was featured in "Entertainment Weekly"<nowiki />'s list of 15 Great Performances for her various impersonations on "Saturday Night Live" (December 2008) and in "EW"<nowiki />'s list of the 25 Funniest Women in Hollywood (April 2009). As of 2011, she has a role as the voice of Lola Bunny in the series "The Looney Tunes Show".
Wiig's final performance as a cast member on "Saturday Night Live" was Season 37, Episode 22, which aired on May 19, 2012. The show was hosted by Mick Jagger. The closing celebration included "SNL" alumni Amy Poehler, Chris Kattan, Chris Parnell, Will Forte and Rachel Dratch, as well as Steve Martin and Jon Hamm.
Film.
Wiig appeared in Judd Apatow’s 2007 comedy "Knocked Up" as a passive-aggressive assistant. She also performed in Jake Kasdan's "", another Apatow-produced film, and in David Koepp's "Ghost Town". Wiig has also appeared in Greg Mottola's "Adventureland", Mike Judge's "Extract", and in "Whip It", Drew Barrymore's directorial debut. Wiig also had a lead role in Greg Mottola's "Paul". Wiig also appeared as the yoga teacher in "Forgetting Sarah Marshall".
In 2010, she appeared in the films "MacGruber", the animated comedy "Despicable Me", and Andrew Jarecki's "All Good Things".
In 2011, she starred in the film "Bridesmaids", which she co-wrote with fellow Groundlings performer Annie Mumolo for Universal Pictures, released on May 13, 2011. The film became both a critical and box office success, receiving two nominations for Best Picture-Musical or Comedy and Wiig herself was nominated for Best Actress-Motion Picture, Musical or Comedy at the 69th Golden Globe Awards. The film also received two Academy Award nominations, including Best Original Screenplay for which Wiig and Mumolo were nominated. The second nomination was for Best Supporting Actress for co-star Melissa McCarthy. The movie grossed over $280 million worldwide.
Personal life.
Kristen Wiig was married to actor Hayes Hargrove from 2005 until 2009. As of 2012 she is dating The Strokes drummer Fabrizio Moretti.
