Katherine Evelyn Anita "Katie" Cassidy (born November 25, 1986) is an American actress who stars as Laurel Lance on The CW superhero television series "Arrow". She has also appeared in other CW series "Supernatural" (2007–2008), "Melrose Place" (2009–2010) and "Gossip Girl" (2010 and 2012), CBS's "Harper's Island" (2009) and on the films "When a Stranger Calls" (2006), "Black Christmas" (2006), "Taken" (2008), "A Nightmare on Elm Street" (2010) and "Monte Carlo" (2011). Cassidy has roles in the upcoming films "Fencewalker" and "The Scribbler".
Early life and family.
Cassidy was born in Los Angeles, the daughter of actor David Cassidy and model Sherry Williams, who first met and dated in early 1970, then had an off and on relationship over the next sixteen years. Cassidy's paternal grandparents were actors Jack Cassidy and Evelyn Ward, and she is the niece of teen idol and television producer Shaun Cassidy and actor Patrick Cassidy. 
Cassidy grew up in Calabasas, California with her mother and stepfather, Richard Benedon, an ER physician. She has two older half-sisters, Jenna and Jamie, and a younger half-brother, Beau Cassidy.
As a child, Cassidy took to tumbling, competing and eventually became a cheerleader for the California Flyers, a competitive team. She cheered as a freshman for Calabasas High School where she attended high school and graduated with honors in 2005.
While in elementary school, Cassidy became interested in show business and participated in several community theatre productions beginning at the age of 7, and as a teenager studied with an acting coach. She did some modeling which culminated in a campaign ad for Abercrombie and Fitch in 2004. Her mother would not allow her to act professionally until completing her high school education with college prep courses.
Career.
Television.
In 2003, Cassidy made her television and acting debut appearing in an episode of the Lifetime Television Drama television series "The Division". Cassidy has continued to guest appear in television shows such as "Celebrity Apprentice 4", "Listen Up!" and "New Girl". In 2005, Cassidy appeared in a recurring role on The WB television series "7th Heaven" over the course of four episodes. That same year, she also appeared in the UPN Teen Drama television series "Sex, Love & Secrets".
In 2007, Cassidy appeared on The CW supernatural drama television series "Supernatural". Cassidy played the role of Ruby, a demon killer. Making her debut in the show's third season, Cassidy appeared in over six episodes. In 2008, though her character returned for the show's fourth season, Cassidy was replaced by actress Genevieve Cortese due to budgetary reasons. 
In October 2008, Variety announced Cassidy was cast in the CBS horror mystery mini-series television series "Harper's Island". Cassidy portrayed the role of Patricia "Trish" Wellington, a bride-to-be. The series centered on a group of family and friends who gather on an island for a wedding on an island known for its sinister past full of gruesome murders. In each episode, at least one character is killed off. Cassidy and her fellow cast members were not told about their characters' deaths until the day they received a script. The series premiered on April 9, 2009 to 10.21 million viewers. Despite ratings failing to maintain the pilot's success, CBS aired the remainder of the series with the series finale airing on July 11, 2009. 
That same year, The CW cast Cassidy in the Drama television series "Melrose Place". The series is a reboot of the 1990s series of the same name. Cassidy portrays the role of Ella Sims a publicist who resides in a West Hollywood apartment complex and centers on its residents. The series premiered on September 8, 2009 to 2.31 million viewers. Despite mixed reviews, Cassidy's performance was praised by critics and was cited as "the best thing about the Melrose reboot" by "New York" and has been cited as "the best thing about the Melrose reboot" by magazine. The CW cancelled the series in May 2010 due to low ratings.
In June 2010, The CW announced Cassidy would have a major recurring arc in the fourth season of the teen drama television series "Gossip Girl". Cassidy features as Juliet Sharp who attends Columbia and sets out to ruin the life of the show's central character Serena van der Woodsen. Cassidy made her first appearance in the season premiere and went on to appear in over 11 episodes of the season. 
In March 2011, Cassidy was cast in the ABC pilot "Georgetown". Cassidy was cast as Nikki, a smart and quick-witted junior staffer in the White House Communications Office with connections to the First Lady. The pilot was created by "Gossip Girl" creator Josh Schwartz. The series was not picked up by ABC. 
In 2012, Cassidy was cast in The CW series "Arrow", which is based on the Green Arrow comic books, as the female lead Dinah "Laurel" Lance, also known as the superhero Black Canary. The series also stars Stephen Amell and Willa Holland and premiered in North America on The CW on October 10, 2012.
Film.
In 2006, Cassidy made her film debut as Tiffany Madison in the horror film "When a Stranger Calls". Cassidy has gone on to have notable supporting roles in films "Click", "Taken" and "Live!".
In February 2006, Cassidy was cast as Kelly Prelsey in the Dimension Films horror-slasher film "Black Christmas", a remake of the 1974 film. The movie centers on an escaped maniac who returns to his childhood home on Christmas Eve, which is now a sorority house, and one by one kills all sorority sisters. The film was released on December 15, 2006 to negative reviews from critics. The film was a moderate success making over $50 million worldwide.
In April 2010, Cassidy appeared in another remake; this time the iconic horror classic "A Nightmare on Elm Street", originally released in 1984 of the same name. Cassidy portrayed the role of Kris Fowles; a high school student who becomes a victim to Freddy Krueger. Filming begin in Chicago with the film earning over $31 million in its opening weekend. Cassidy was nominated for a Teen Choice Award in the "Horror/Thriller Actress" category for her role, which she lost to Megan Fox.
Shortly after the release of A Nightmare on Elm Street, Variety announced Cassidy was cast in the Adventure Comedy film "Monte Carlo". The film, which also stars Leighton Meester and Selena Gomez, follows three friends who pose as wealthy socialites whilst on holiday in Monte Carlo. Production began in May 2010 with filming taking place in Monaco, Budapest, Paris and Texas. The film was released on July 1, 2011 and received mixed to negative reviews from critics and went on to gross $39 million worldwide.
In June 2011, Cassidy replaced actress Sienna Miller in the independent dark comedy film "Freaky Deaky" in which she stars alongside Brendan Fraser, Matt Dillon, and Craig Robinson. Cassidy portrays Robin Abbott, who plots with her ex-boyfriend to con an alcoholic movie mogul out of millions of dollars.
In May 2012, Cassidy was cast as the title character in the film adaptation of "The Scribbler" alongside Eliza Dushku, Michelle Trachtenberg and Gina Gershon. She plays Suki, a young woman with multiple personality disorder.
Personal life.
In 2012, Cassidy dated former "Entourage" star Jerry Ferrara. 
Cassidy is a spokesperson for the charity H.E.L.P. Malawi.
