Torrence Hatch (born November 14, 1982), better known by his stage name Lil Boosie, is an American rapper from Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Hatch was bestowed the nickname Boosie by his family, and he was raised in southside Baton Rouge. He is currently serving time in the Louisiana State Penitentiary (Angola); Hatch was sentenced to eight years after pleading guilty to drug charges.
Early life.
Hatch grew up in a poor neighborhood of Baton Rouge, and his father was absent from his childhood. He played basketball while attending high school but was expelled for drugs, so Hatch decided to become a rapper. He worked with rapper C-Loc and his group Concentration Camp and made his debut on C-Loc's fifth album, "It's a Gamble" in 2000 as his old alias Boosie. Shortly afterwards, Hatch joined growing record label Trill Entertainment which was backed by its CEO the late Pimp C of UGK. Soon after, Trill independently released his debut album "For My Thugz" as his new alias Lil Boosie in 2003. Later, Boosie teamed with label mate Webbie, on their collaboration albums "Ghetto Stories" and "Gangsta Musik".
Career.
2006-2008: "Bad Azz" & "Survival of the Fittest".
In 2006 Boosie's major label debut album "Bad Azz", was released. It contained the single "Zoom" featuring Yung Joc. In 2007, Boosie & Webbie was on the remix of "Wipe Me Down" by rapper Foxx. It was put on the Trill Entertainment Compilation album "" which was released in 2007, it also blew Boosie's career up as well. In 2008 Boosie was featured on the singles "Independent" by Webbie and was among several rappers to be featured on "Out Here Grindin" by DJ Khaled.
2009: "Superbad" & Bad Azz Entertainment.
In 2009 Lil Boosie released his second major album "". The first single from the album, "Better Believe It", featured Webbie and Young Jeezy. There were promotional music videos from the album such as "I'm a Dog" & "Loose as a Goose". Also in 2009 Lil Boosie had presented his debut label Bad Azz Entertainment.
2010-present: "Incarcerated" album.
As of 2010 Lil Boosie has announced while he is still in prison on charges of murder and conspiracy, and potentially facing the death penalty, he wants to move forward with his hip hop career. Boosie released his fourth studio album "Incarcerated" on September 28 on Asylum Records. According to MTV News, the project is almost entirely produced by B.J., although Mouse on Tha Track did some work on it as well. Webbie, Foxx and Lil Trill are among the featured guests.
In January 2013 Lil Boosie spoke on his prison sentence and said, "I have about 500 songs at the moment. I feel that I'm making the best music I've ever made. The more I go through in life the better my music gets and it's been crazy the last three years. I keep my music heartfelt and stick to making real music. I wouldn't even say it's Hip Hop music. My music is 'reality rap.' Hip Hop music can make you dance and bob your head, but it can't make you cry or touch your heart like reality rap" He also showed interest in releasing a memior titled "The Truth, No Lies".
Legal issues.
On October 22, 2008, Boosie was arrested after East Baton Rouge sheriff's deputies found marijuana, another unidentified drug, and a gun in Boosie's car. Boosie pled guilty to third-degree possession of marijuana on September 22, 2009 and was sentenced to two years in prison the next day. Judge James Moore doubled the sentence on November 10 after finding Boosie had violated probation while awaiting sentencing. Between his plea and sentencing, Boosie was electronically monitored and placed under house arrest.
On June 17, 2010 Lil Boosie was indicted on federal charges on first-degree murder of Terry Boyd. He also faces charges for three counts of possession with intent to distribute narcotics (Schedule II-Codeine, Schedule I-Ecstasy and Schedule I-Marijuana), three counts of "conspiracy to commit possession with intent to distribute narcotics", and two counts of "conspiracy to introduce contraband into a penal institution". He has stated that he is innocent of these charges. District attorney Hillar Moore stated that the killing seemed to be "over turf". If convicted, Lil Boosie may face the death penalty. Prosecutors have stated that they believe the rapper may have been involved in at least five other murders. On June 28, Lil Boosie entered a not-guilty plea in a Louisiana court room. While Boosie's defense addressed the fact that the rapper has several ongoing cases, they emphasized that he is not a murderer.
On November 29, 2011, Hatch was sentenced to eight years in state prison after pleading guilty to the drug charges. On May 11, 2012, a jury found Hatch not guilty of the first degree murder. 
Personal life.
Lil Boosie is married to Walnita Decuir-Hatch. The couple has three children: Torrence Hatch, Jr., Ivyana Hatch, and Tarlaysia Hatch. His mother is Jacquelyn Hatch. Shortly after "Bad Azz" was released, Boosie announced that he had diabetes. 
