Jeffrey Jacob "J. J." Abrams (born June 27, 1966) is an American film and television producer, screenwriter, director, actor, and composer. He is well known for his work in the genres of action, drama, and science fiction. 
Abrams wrote and produced feature films before co-creating the television series "Felicity" (1998–2002). He also created "Alias" (2001–2006) and co-created "Lost" (2004–2010), "Fringe" (2008–2013), "Undercovers" (2010) and produced the television series "Person of Interest" (2011–present), "Alcatraz" (2012) and "Revolution" (2012–present), among others. 
His directorial film work includes two "Star Trek" films – "Star Trek" (2009) and "Star Trek Into Darkness" (2013) – along with ' (2006), "Super 8" (2011), and he has been announced to direct ' (2015), the first film in the "Star Wars" sequel trilogy. 
Abrams produced the films "Waterworld" (1995), "The Talented Mr. Ripley" (1999), "Cloverfield" (2008), "Morning Glory" (2010), and "" (2011). 
Many of the films he has directed or produced are distributed by Paramount Pictures, while his television series were co-produced by either Warner Bros. Television or Touchstone Television. Abram's frequent creative collaborators include writers Alex Kurtzman and Roberto Orci, composer Michael Giacchino, cinematographer Daniel Mindel, and editors Maryann Brandon and Mary Jo Markey.
Early life.
Abrams was born in New York City and raised in Los Angeles, where he attended Palisades Charter High School. He is the son of television producer Gerald W. Abrams and executive producer Carol Ann Abrams. His sister is screenwriter Tracy Rosen. Abrams is Jewish and attended Sarah Lawrence College.
Career.
Abrams' first job in the movie business started when he was 16 when he wrote music for Don Dohler's film "Nightbeast." During his senior year at college, he teamed with Jill Mazursky to write a feature film treatment. Purchased by Touchstone Pictures, the treatment was the basis for "Taking Care of Business, "Abrams' first produced film, which starred Charles Grodin and Jim Belushi. He followed that up with "Regarding Henry," starring Harrison Ford, and "Forever Young," starring Mel Gibson. He also co-wrote with Mazursky the script for the comedy "Gone Fishin"' starring Joe Pesci and Danny Glover.
Abrams collaborated with producer Jerry Bruckheimer and director Michael Bay on the 1998 film, "Armageddon". That same year, he made his first foray into television with "Felicity", which ran for four seasons on The WB Network, serving as the show's co-creator (with Matt Reeves) and executive producer. He also composed its opening theme music.
Under his production company Bad Robot, which he founded with Bryan Burk in 2001, Abrams created and executive-produced ABC's "Alias" and is co-creator (along with Damon Lindelof and Jeffrey Lieber) and executive producer of "Lost." He later co-wrote the teleplay for "Lost"s third season premiere "A Tale of Two Cities." As with "Felicity," Abrams also composed the opening theme music for "Alias" and "Lost."
In 2001, Abrams co-wrote and produced the thriller "Joy Ride", and wrote .
In 2006, he served as executive producer of "What About Brian" and "Six Degrees," also on ABC. Abrams directed and wrote the two-part pilot for "Lost" and remained active producer for the first half of the season. That same year he made his feature directorial debut in 2006 with "," starring Tom Cruise.
Abrams spoke at the TED conference in 2007.
In 2008, Abrams produced the monster movie, "Cloverfield". In 2009, he directed the science fiction film "Star Trek", which he produced with "Lost" co-creator Damon Lindelof. While it was speculated that they would be writing and producing an adaptation of Stephen King's "The Dark Tower" series of novels, they publicly stated in November 2009 that they were no longer looking to take on that project.
In 2008, he co-created, executive produced, and co-wrote (along with Roberto Orci and Alex Kurtzman) the FOX science-fiction series "Fringe", for which he composed the theme music for as well.
Abrams was featured in the 2009 MTV Movie Awards 1980s-style digital short "Cool Guys Don't Look at Explosions," with Andy Samberg and Will Ferrell, in which he plays a keyboard solo.
NBC picked up Abrams' "Undercovers" as its first new drama series for the 2010–11 season. However, it was subsequently cancelled by NBC in November 2010.
He wrote and directed the Paramount supernatural movie "Super 8", while co-producing with Steven Spielberg and Bryan Burk; it was released on June 10, 2011.
Abrams is currently working in post-production on the sequel to "Star Trek", "Star Trek Into Darkness". The film is scheduled for release in May 2013.
Under development (due in 2013) is Abrams' film with Paramount Pictures and Bad Robot Productions, "Mystery on Fifth Avenue". It is based on the "New York Times" article "Mystery on Fifth Avenue" about the renovation of an 8.5 million dollar co-op, a division of property originally owned by E.F. Hutton and Marjorie Merriweather Post. In 2008, it was widely reported Abrams purchased the rights to the "Times" article for six figures, and enlisted comedy writers Maya Forbes and Wally Wolodarsky to write the adaptation. According to the article, a wealthy couple Steven B. Klinsky and Maureen Sherry purchased the apartment in 2003 and live there with their four children. Soon after purchasing the apartment, they hired young architectural designer Eric Clough, who devised an elaborately clever "scavenger hunt" built into the apartment that involved dozens of historical figures, a fictional book and a soundtrack, woven throughout the apartment in puzzles, riddles, secret panels, compartments, and hidden codes, without the couple's knowledge. The family didn't discover the embedded mystery until months after moving into the apartment. After Abrams purchased the article, Clough left him an encrypted message in the wall tiles of a Christian Louboutin shoe store he designed in West Hollywood.
Abrams will produce, under Bad Robot and with Bryan Burk, "Earthquake" for Universal Pictures. The film is being scripted by Academy Award winner Dustin Lance Black, and while it shares a title and event with Universal's 1974 feature starring Charlton Heston and Ava Gardner, it will not be a remake.
On January 25, 2013, The Walt Disney Studios and Lucasfilm officially announced Abrams as director and producer of "", the latest entry in the "Star Wars" film saga. Disney/Lucasfilm also announced that Bryan Burk and Bad Robot Productions would be producing the feature.
Following the news that he would indeed direct "Star Wars: Episode VII", speculation arose as to Abrams' future with Paramount Pictures, with whom he has released all of his previously directed feature work and which has a first-look deal with his Bad Robot Productions. Paramount Vice Chairman Rob Moore stated that Abrams will continue to have a hand in the highly successful "Star Trek" and "Mission: Impossible" franchises going forward.
Personal life.
Abrams is married to public relations executive Katie McGrath and has three children: sons August and Henry and daughter Gracie. He resides in Pacific Palisades, Los Angeles, California.
Campaigns he has contributed to include those of Bill Clinton, Barack Obama, Bill Bradley, John Edwards, Hillary Clinton, Bob Casey, Jr., Mark Udall, Harry Reid, Russ Feingold, Patrick J. Kennedy and Tim Kaine. However, he has also donated $2,000 to the Republican Robert Vasquez.
