Gaikai (Japanese for an expansive outdoor space and for "open ocean(外海)") is a cloud-based gaming service that allows users to play high-end PC and console video games rendered on remote servers via internet streaming, and instantly demo games and applications from a webpage or internet-connected device. On July 2, 2012, Sony Computer Entertainment announced that a formal agreement had been reached to acquire the company for $380 million USD with plans of establishing their own new cloud-based gaming service.
Service.
Gaikai's streaming service can be embedded on either game-related websites and microsites, social media sites like Facebook, or within specific products (such as smart mobile devices or digital TVs), as determined by the publisher. Users are not forced to navigate to an online portal in which they have to register to be able to access the games and do not need to download any software. 
Gaikai operates Open Platform and Ad Network models for its cloud gaming service. In the ad network model, at the end of the demo, the customer is given the option to purchase the game or product from a local retailer, online store or direct-to-drive download service. The open platform model allows streaming full games to PCs, digital TVs, tablets and smart mobile devices.
Gaikai's proprietary technology runs inside web browsers, in part, by using previously installed plug-ins such as Java or Adobe Flash, or without using any plug-ins as demonstrated at Google I/O 2012, where Gaikai demonstrated a version of the service using the Google Native Client (NaCL). A demo video of the service at GDC San Francisco 2010 showed "", "World of Warcraft", "EVE Online", "Spore", "Mario Kart 64" and Adobe Photoshop all running in Adobe Flash player. In May 2010, Gaikai demonstrated World of Warcraft running on the iPad using its game streaming technology. Gaikai recommends an Internet connection of 5 Mbit/s or faster, and a 3 Mbit/s connection meets the minimum system requirements. 
On February 27, 2011, Gaikai's technology officially came out of Beta test and launched internationally with "Dead Space 2", "The Sims 3", "Spore", and "Mass Effect 2". 
The Gaikai Affiliate Network was launched on June 2, 2011 reaching over 10 million monthly active users by late 2011. Websites who join the network are able to stream high-end PC games as embedded advertising, and in exchange receive a share of the marketing revenue generated from games streamed to consumers, who play the demos free of charge.
As of late 2011, Gaikai enabled games have also been integrated into YouTube, EA's Origin, and Ubisoft's UBIShop.
In April 2012, Gaikai launched its service embedded inside Facebook allowing games to be streamed directly in the Facebook canvas.
In May 2012, Gaikai announced its first mobile partnership, streaming games to the Wikipad tablet.
In June 2012, Samsung announced its cloud gaming service powered by Gaikai to stream AAA games to its high end LED Smart TVs.
On July 2, 2012, Sony Computer Entertainment announced that it had reached an agreement to acquire the cloud-based service for the equivalent of $380 million USD.
In October 2012, Gaikai launched their revamped website teasing PlayStation titles including "God of War", "Infamous" and "LittleBigPlanet" among other titles.
Investors.
Gaikai is funded by Intel Capital, Limelight Networks, Rustic Canyon Partners, Benchmark Capital, TriplePoint Capital, NEA and Qualcomm.
