Heather Laurie Holden (born December 17, 1969) is an American-Canadian actress and human rights activist. She is perhaps best known for her roles as Marita Covarrubias in "The X-Files", Adele Stanton on "The Majestic", Cybil Bennett in "Silent Hill", Amanda Dumfries in "The Mist", Olivia Murray in "The Shield", and Andrea in "The Walking Dead".
Early life and education.
Born in Los Angeles and raised in Toronto, Holden holds dual citizenship in both the U.S. and Canada. Her parents are actors Glen Corbett (aka Lawrence Holden) and Adrienne Ellis. Her parents divorced, and her mother married director Michael Anderson. Her first role was on "The Martian Chronicles" (1980), when she played Rock Hudson's daughter. A graduate of U.C.L.A, she is a member of the National Honor Society and has been the recipient of the prestigious Natalie Wood Acting Award. She is currently enrolled at Columbia University where she is acquiring her Master of Human Rights degree.
Television and film career.
Holden has starred in numerous television and film projects and has received worldwide critical acclaim and honorable recognition for her diverse and eclectic choice of roles.
Early in her career, Holden made a name for herself by costarring opposite Burt Reynolds in "Physical Evidence" (1989), Vanessa Redgrave in "Young Catherine" (1991) and William Shatner in the TV Movie "TekWar: TekLab" (1994). She played Mabel Dunham in the TV Movie "The Pathfinder" (1996) (based on the novel of James Fenimore Cooper). On stage, she starred in "Time and the Conways", written by J. B. Priestley and "The Winter's Tale", based on the play of William Shakespeare. Other stage roles include Regina in "Ghosts" and Procne in "The Love of the Nightingale".
After making various guest appearances on "Due South", "Murder, She Wrote" and ', Holden found some success playing a memorable recurring role on the seminal sci-fi series "The X-Files", that of Marita Covarrubias, a mysterious government worker who becomes an informant to Special Agent Fox Mulder starting in the fourth season of that show through the final one (1996–2002). She also had a supporting role, as Mary Travis, opposite Michael Biehn and Ron Perlman in the TV series based on the MGM classic "The Magnificent Seven" (1998–2000) for CBS. She had a role on TV series ' as Debra Campbell.
Holden's most notable roles include starring opposite Jim Carrey in Frank Darabont's film "The Majestic" (2001) (It was while performing on stage in "Cat On a Hot Tin Roof", that Holden was discovered by Darabont). As Carrey's long lost love, she received critical acclaim and praise for her performance. In 2002, she played her role of Marita Covarrubias for the final episode of "The X-Files". She also co-starred alongside Dean Cain, Jennifer Tilly and Tim Curry in the Canadian comedy "Bailey's Billion$" (2004). Other memorable roles include such hits as "Fantastic Four" (2005) (where she played Michael Chiklis' former love interest), playing cult hero Cybil Bennett in Christophe Gans' artistic-horror video game adaptation of "Silent Hill" (2006), and co-starring as Amanda Dumfries opposite Marcia Gay Harden and Thomas Jane in Stephen King's "The Mist" (2007). In 2008, Holden starred as Olivia Murray in FX's critically acclaimed series "The Shield". She has also been seen in AMC's "The Walking Dead" (since 2010), based on the graphic novels. She plays Andrea, a civil rights lawyer and one of the main characters of the TV Series. Laurie Holden is actively producing film, theatre and television projects in addition to her acting pursuits.
Honors and nominations.
Holden was named as one of the top 100 Most Creative People in Hollywood in Entertainment Weekly's It List and One of Ten Actors to Watch by Variety. She also won "The Look of The Year" Elite model search in Toronto and was nominated in 1996 for a Gemini Award for Best Performance by an Actress in a Guest Role in a Dramatic Series for "Due South" (1994). 
She was nominated in 2011 for a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress in Television for the series "The Walking Dead". For her role in this series, she was also nominated in 2011 for the Scream Award for Best Supporting Actress.
In 2013, Laurie Holden is nominated to the The 39th Saturn Awards
Human rights.
Holden is a Founding Board Member of the Canadian Somaly Mam Foundation and an Advisory Board Member of The Somaly Mam Foundation in the U.S.
