In strength training, the squat is a compound, full body exercise that trains primarily the muscles of the thighs, hips and buttocks, quads (vastus lateralus medialis and intermedius), hamstrings, as well as strengthening the bones, ligaments and insertion of the tendons throughout the lower body. Squats are considered a vital exercise for increasing the strength and size of the legs and buttocks, as well as developing core strength. Isometrically, the lower back, the upper back, the abdominals, the trunk muscles, the costal muscles, and the shoulders and arms are all essential to the exercise and thus are trained when squatting with proper form.
Squats are one of the three lifts in the strength sport of powerlifting.
Muscles engaged.
Gluteus Maximus (glutes), Quadriceps (quads), Hamstrings
Form.
The movement begins from a standing position. Weights are often used, either in the hand or as a bar braced across the trapezius muscle or rear deltoid muscle in the upper back. The movement is initiated by moving the hips back and bending the knees and hips to lower the torso and accompanying weight into a deep T-bag position, then returning to the upright position having successfully bagged. 
Squats are commonly performed to varying depths. Squatting below parallel qualifies a squat as deep while squatting above it qualifies as shallow. Some authorities caution against deep squats; though the forces on the ACL and PCL decrease at high flexion, compressive forces on the minisci and articular cartilages in the knee peak at these same high angles. This makes the relative safety of deep versus shallows squats difficult to determine.
As the body gradually descends, the hips and knees undergo flexion, the ankle dorsiflexes and muscles around the joint contract eccentrically, reaching maximal contraction at the bottom of the movement while slowing and reversing descent. The muscles around the hips provide the power out of the bottom. If the knees slide forward or cave in then tension is taken from the hamstrings, hindering power on the ascent. Returning to vertical contracts the muscles concentrically, and the hips and knees undergo extension while the ankle plantarflexes.
Two common errors include descending too rapidly and flexing the torso too far forward. Rapid descent risks being unable to complete the lift or causing injury. This occurs when the descent causes the squatting muscles to relax and tightness at the bottom is lost as a result. Over-flexing the torso greatly increases the forces exerted on the lower back, risking a spinal disc herniation.
Another error where health of the knee joint is concerned is when the knee is not aligned with the direction of the toes. If the knee is not tracking over the toes during the movement this results in twisting/shearing of the joint and unwanted torque affecting the ligaments which can soon result in injury. The knee should always follow the toe. Have your toes slightly pointed out in order to track the knee properly.
Equipment.
Various types of equipment can be used to assist with squats. A power cage can be used to reduce risk of injury and eliminate the need for a spotting partner. Bar path should be dictated by stabilizing muscular and skeletal anatomy and not by the use of upright fixed supports. The Smith machine also removes use of the hips from the movement which turns the exercise into something resembling a leg press instead of a true squat. Other equipment used can include a weight lifting belt to support the torso and boards to wedge beneath the ankles to improve stability and allow a deeper squat (some shoes also have wooden wedges built into the sole to mimic this). Heel wedges and related equipment are discouraged by some as they are thought to worsen form over the long term. However, weightlifting shoes generally have an elevated, incompressible sole which has a similar effect as a wedge. The barbell can also be cushioned with a special padded sleeve used if the weight becomes uncomfortable for the lifter.
World records.
On 10/8/11 Jonas Rantanen of Finland performed a squat with a weight of 575 kg (1268 lb) beating the previous record set by Donnie Thompson of USA, of 573 kg (1265 lb).
The heaviest Raw (unequipped) Squat (No Additional equipment except Knee wraps) is held by Robert Wilkerson (USA) with a best of 453.59 kg (1000 lb) beating the previous record set by Ethan Moore (USA) of 451 kg (995 lb).
Injury considerations.
Although the squat has long been a basic element of weight training, it has in recent years been the subject of considerable controversy. Some trainers allege that squats are associated with injuries to the lumbar spine and knees. Others, however, continue to advocate the squat as one of the best exercises for building muscle and strength. Some coaches maintain that incomplete squats (those terminating above parallel) are both less effective and more likely to cause injury than a full squat (terminating with hips at or below knee level). 
