The Honda Accord is a series of automobiles manufactured by Honda since 1976, best known for its four-door sedan variant which has been one of the best-selling cars in the United States since 1989. The Accord nameplate has been applied to a variety of vehicles worldwide, including coupes, wagons, hatchbacks and a crossover.
In 1982, the Accord became the first car from a Japanese manufacturer to be produced in the United States when production commenced in Marysville, Ohio at Honda's Marysville Auto Plant. The Accord has achieved considerable success, especially in the United States, where it was the best-selling Japanese car for fifteen years (1982–97), topping its class in sales in 1991 and 2001, with around ten million vehicles sold. Numerous road tests, past and present, rate the Accord as one of the world's most reliable vehicles.
Since initiation, Honda has offered several different car body styles and versions of the Accord, and often vehicles marketed under the Accord nameplate concurrently in different regions differ quite substantially. It debuted in 1976 as a compact hatchback, though this style only lasted through 1981, as the line-up was expanded to include a sedan, coupé, and wagon. By the Accord's sixth generation in the 1990s, it evolved into an intermediate vehicle, with one basic platform but with different bodies and proportions to increase its competitiveness against its rivals in different international markets. For the eigth generation of the Accord released for the North America market in 2008, Honda had again chosen to move the model further up-scale and increase its size. This pushed the Accord sedan from the upper limit of what the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) defines as a mid-size car
to just above the lower limit of a full-size car, with the coupe still rated as a mid-size car. The current ninth generation Accord for the North America market is again classified as a mid-size car, falls just short of full-size car classification with the combined interior space of . 
Background.
After a period of developing idiosyncratic automobiles such as the Honda 1300 that met a lukewarm response in both Japan and North America, Honda considered pulling out of automobile manufacturing altogether by the early 1970s. However, Honda released a more conventional automobile in 1972 called the Civic which immediately reversed their flagging fortunes due to its economy, reliability and low cost in an era of rising fuel prices. Honda's CVCC technology, which would be later used in the Accord helped Honda meet emission standards of the 1970s and early 1980s without an expensive catalytic converter that kept costs down. 
Buoyed by their success with the Civic, Honda turned their sights to developing a larger companion model. For the new model, Honda chose the name Accord, reflecting "Honda's desire for accord and harmony between people, society and the automobile." 
Soichiro Honda was the owner of a Pontiac Firebird, to which the Accord's predecessor, the Honda 1300 bore a striking frontal resemblance. Initial planning done by Honda for what would become the Accord was for a sporty competitor in the pony car market, at roughly the size of a contemporary Ford Mustang powered by a six-cylinder engine. 
With the continuing fuel crisis and tighter emissions regulations surrounding the automotive market, Honda engineers changed their focus on the Accord from a Mustang competitor and built upon the Civic's successful formula of economy, fuel efficiency and a front-wheel drive layout in a larger package.
In 1989, the Accord would be the first vehicle sold under an import brand to become the best-selling vehicle in the United States.
First generation (1976–1981).
The first generation Honda Accord was launched on May 7, 1976 as a three-door hatchback with , a wheelbase, and a weight of about 2,000 pounds. It was a platform expansion of the earlier Honda Civic at long. The Accord sold well due to its moderate size and great fuel economy. It was one of the first Japanese sedans with features like cloth seats, a tachometer, intermittent wipers, and an AM/FM radio as standard equipment. In 1978 an LX version of the hatchback was added which came with air conditioning, a digital clock, and power steering. Until the Accord, and the closely related Prelude, power steering had not been available to cars under two litres.
On October 14, 1977, a four-door sedan was added to the lineup, and power went to when the EL1 engine was supplemented and in certain markets replaced by the an EK-1 unit. In 1980 the optional two-speed semi-automatic transmission of previous years became a three-speed gearbox (a 'proper' self-shifting four-speed automatic transmission was not used in the Accord until the 1983 model year). Slightly redesigned bumper trim, new grilles and taillamps and remote mirrors were added on the 4-door (chrome) and the LX (black plastic) models. The CVCC badges were deleted, but the CVCC induction system remained. In 1981 an SE model was added for the first time, with Novillo leather seats and power windows. Base model hatchbacks, along with the 4-door, LX, and SE 4-door, all received the same smaller black plastic remote mirror. The instrument cluster was revised with mostly pictograms which replaced worded warning lights and gauge markings. Nivorno Beige (code #Y-39) replaced Oslo Beige (#YR-43). Dark brown was discontinued, as was the bronze metallic. The shifter was redesigned to have a stronger spring to prevent unintentional engagement of reverse, replacing the spring-loaded shift knob of the 1976 to 1980 year model cars.
The Accord competed with Japanese competitors such as the Toyota Corona, Datsun 510, Mazda 626 and Mitsubishi Galant, which were also part of the mid-size Japanese market.
Second generation (1982–1985).
Debuting on September 22, 1981 in Japan and Europe, and as a 1982 model in North America, this generation of the Accord being produced in Japan, became the first to also be built in the U.S., at Honda's plant in Marysville, Ohio. Since its first year in the American market, it also became the best-selling Japanese nameplate in the U.S., holding that position for about 15 years. In Japan, a sister model called the Honda Vigor was launched simultaneously with the new Accord. This allowed Honda to sell the product at different sales channels called "Honda Clio", which sold the Accord, and "Honda Verno", that sold the Vigor.
On May 24, 1984, it was one of the first Japanese engineered vehicles to offer computer controlled, fuel-injection with one injector per cylinder, also known as multiple port fuel injection on the EK series 1.8 L engine, known as Honda's Programmed Fuel Injection, or PGM-FI.
Modernizing both the interior and exterior, the second generation Accord was mechanically very similar to the original, using the same EK1 CVCC engine. Vehicles with a manual transmission and the CVCC carburetor earned based on Japanese Government emissions tests using 10 different modes of scenario standards, and , and with consistently maintained speeds at .
Vehicles with PGM-FI (EK3 series engine) earned based on Japanese Government emissions tests using 10 different modes of scenario standards, with , and with consistently maintained speeds at .
This automobile included popular features of the time such as shag carpet, velour cabin trim, and chrome accents. An optional extra on the 1981 Accord was an Electro Gyrocator, the world's first automatic in-car navigation system. Models were available in Silver, Sky Blue, and Beige. The LX hatchback offered a digital clock and slightly higher fuel economy (due to its lighter weight).
The U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) imposed stringent lighting requirements on U.S. models which prevented Honda from including the aerodynamic molded headlight units which were used on Accords sold outside North America. The U.S. NHTSA required the use of sealed beam glass units to prevent fogging and allow for easy and readily available replacement of units damaged by rocks or other road hazards. U.S. Accords were also required to have a side marker light installed on the side of the rear fenders. European Accords included additional rear fog lights embedded into the rear bumper (mandatory there since 1980), as well as headlamp spray washers, as required by European ECE Regulation 45. Japanese Accords were unique from all other markets in that they included adjustable ride height control and side view mirrors installed on the mid-forward fenders.
In 1983, Honda upgraded the automatic transmission to a four-speed, a major improvement over the earlier, three-speed 'Hondamatic' transmission. The manual five-speed transmission remained unchanged. A new speedometer replaced the earlier unit. The Special Edition (SE) featured Novillo leather seating, power windows, power sunroof and door locks. Gray was added as a color option.
Refresh (1984–1985).
By 1984, the Accords sold in the eastern U.S. were produced at the new Marysville plant, with quality considered equal to those produced in Japan. In late 1983, for the 1984 model year, the Accord body was restyled with a slightly downward beveled nose; and, the slightly more powerful ES2 CVCC powerplant was used, yielding . The redesign in late 1983 is often called the second series of the second generation. Honda integrated side marker lights into the side of the tail light units which satisfied the D.O.T.'s side marker requirements and ended the difference between cross market tail light configurations. European Accords however, now included signal lights on the forward fenders, just behind the wheel well. The U.S. Accord still lacked the molded head light units.
The LX offered velour upholstery, auto-reverse cassette stereo, air conditioning, cruise control, power brakes, power steering, power windows & power door locks (sedan only), a digital clock, roof pillar antenna, along with thick black belt moldings, integrated bumpers and flush plastic mock-alloy style wheels covers that resembled the trend-setting Audi 5000. Supplies were tight, as in the Eastern states, the wait was months for a Graphite Gray sedan, a then-popular color. The LX hatchback was the only 1984 version of the Accord to include dual side view mirrors.
The 1984 sedan was available in four exterior colors, Greek White and three metallic options: Columbus Gray, Regency Red (burgundy), and Stratos Blue (steel). The regular hatchback was available in Greek White, Dominican Red, and the metallic Stratos Blue. The '84 LX hatchback came in three metallic colors only: Graphite Gray, Regency Red, and Copper Brown.
In 1985, the Special Edition returned as the SE-i, capitalizing on the final year of the second generation's production. A fuel-injected, non-CVCC ES3 engine was exclusive to this model. The moniker, SE-i, was adapted from the SE trim, but included the "-i" to signify the higher trim level's fuel-injected engine. This 12-valve, engine was the first non-CVCC engine used in an Accord, and was the same basic engine design used by Honda until 1989. Like the previous SE trim in 1983, the SE-i featured Novillo leather seating, power moonroof, bronze tinted glass, a premium sound system with cassette, and 13-inch alloy wheels. The level of luxury equipment on the SE-i was essentially items that were installed on the Honda Vigor VTL-i, that was only sold in Japan.
Available options differed from market to market. The 1.8-liter engine, updated four-speed automatic transmission, and 'EX' trim level options were first made available in New Zealand during the 1984 refresh alongside the 1.6-liter 'LX' model.
Japan generally received more options earlier than the rest of the world. In 1981, the Accord offered an adjustable ride height air suspension in the Japanese market. From 1983 in Japan and 1984 in Europe, the second generation Accord was available with anti-lock brakes (called ALB) as an option. This braking system was the first time that an Accord used four-wheel disc brakes. Fuel injection became available in 1984 in the Japan market with the earlier introduction of the ES3 engine in the SE-i. Models took a year to arrive in North American and European markets with less stringent emissions laws continuing, using carburetors throughout second generation production.
Third generation (1986–1989).
The third generation Accord was introduced in Japan on June 4, 1985 and in Europe and North America later that year. It had a very striking exterior design done by Toshi Oshika in 1983, that resonated well with buyers internationally. One notable feature was the flip-up headlights. Because this generation was also sold as the Honda Vigor, the Accord received the concealed headlights. Honda's Japanese dealership channel called "Honda Verno" all had styling elements that helped identify products only available at "Honda Verno". When the Prelude was updated with concealed headlights in 1983, the upper level "Honda Verno" products, like the Honda Vigor and the Integra, also received concealed headlights. The Ballade and the CR-X were given semi-concealled headlights in 1983, that looked like pop-up eyebrows. As a result, Japanese market Accords had a "Honda Verno" styling feature, but were sold at newly established Japanese dealerships "Honda Clio" with the all-new, luxury Honda Legend sedan, and international Accords were now visually aligned with the Prelude, the CR-X, and the new Integra. Honda Accords of this generation were manufactured without the concealled headlights and sold in Europe.
The third generation Accord became the first Honda to employ double wishbones at both the front and rear ends—a layout that spread to the Legend, Civic and Prelude in 1987 and the Integra in 1989. While more expensive than competitors' MacPherson strut systems, this setup provided better stability and sharper handling for the vehicle. All had front sway bars and upper models had rear sway bars as well. Brakes were either small 4-wheel discs with twin-piston calipers (only available on the JDM 2.0-Si model ), larger 4-wheel discs with single piston calipers, or a front disc/rear drum system. ABS was available as an option on the 4-wheel disc brake models, though not in North America. Base model Accords rode on 13-inch steel wheels with hubcaps with more expensive models having the option of 14-inch alloy wheels.
The Accord's available engines varied depending on its market: Japan received the A18A, B18A, and B20A; Europe received the A16A1, A20A2, A20A4, B20A2 and B20A8, and North America received the A20A1 and A20A3.
The Accord's trim levels ranged from spartan to luxurious. In the Japanese home market, the Accord was available with a full power package, heated mirrors (optional), a digital instrument cluster (optional), sun roof (optional), cruise control, and climate control (which was also optional). Some North European export models also had heated front seats and head light washers. North American and Australian Accords were not available with most of these options, presumably (and in the U.S. in particular) because Honda was seen as a builder of economy cars, and not to cannibalize sales from the recently introduced Acura line.
Throughout the different markets, in addition to the sedan model the Accord was available with different bodystyles which included a 3-door hatchback, a 3-door shooting-brake called Accord Aerodeck, and a 2-door coupe which was added in 1987 for the 1988 model year. The 3-door hatchback was not available in Europe while the Aerodeck was not available in the USA and Canada. The coupe, which was, built exclusively in Honda's Marysville, Ohio factory, were 'reverse exported' back to Japan where it was known as the US-Coupe CA6.
Accord AeroDeck.
The third-generation Accord was sold in Japan and Europe as a three-door hatchback with a flat roof over the rear seats, known in Europe as a shooting-brake. It was offered only in Japan and Europe. The bodystyle of a flat roof hatchback was also used on the third generation Honda Civic subcompact, the second generation Honda City supermini and the first generation Honda Today "kei car". The Honda CR-X was the only three-door hatchback that adopted a fastback, sloping rear hatch, demonstrating a performance car appearance identified with "Honda Verno" products during the mid-1980s.
In North America, the Accord Coupe was offered instead, and the popularity of the coupe showed to win out over the AeroDeck, and upon the coupe's introduction in Japan and Europe in 1988, the AeroDeck was cancelled due to lack of sales at the end of the generation's production. The "Aerodeck" name was reused on the Honda Civic 5-door stationwagon (estate), sold in the UK from 1996 to 2000. In parts of Continental Europe, the Honda Accord 4-door station wagon (estate) was also called the Accord Aerodeck from 1990 until 2008, when the name of the estate was renamed the "Accord Tourer". Here's a Japanese television commercial for the Aero Deck The AeroDeck was only available in Japan at Honda Clio dealerships as a variation of the Honda Accord.
The cargo handling abilities of the AeroDeck were ceded to the fourth generation Accord station wagon (estate) in 1990. The AeroDeck was unique to the Accord model line, as the AeroDeck was not available as a Honda Vigor, as the Accord and Vigor were mechanically identical. The AeroDeck returned an aerodynamic value of .34, and the 2600 mm wheelbase returned a spacious interior for both front and rear passengers, on par with a mid-size sedan. Unfortunately, the appearance was not well received in Japan, as the introduction of the Accord Coupe was more well liked. The appearance was more popular in the United Kingdom.
The Aerodeck was equipped with a four-wheel double wishbone suspension, which gave both a comfortable ride and cornering performance. In addition, speed-sensitive power steering is included, which gives the car easy turning assistance at speeds below during operation, such as parallel parking. Note that the top model in Japan "2.0Si" is to 4w-ALB (4-wheel ABS ) are standard equipment (with option to upgrade in other trim packages).
"2.0Si" to the type B20A DOHC 16-valve 2.0L PGM-FI 160PS (145PS net output) engines are equipped with, shared with the Honda Prelude, and Honda Vigor. At that time adopted an aluminum block still rare, despite the light weight engine DOHC, in those days was the world's commercial vehicle output per engine weight. In addition, DOHC 16-valve 1.8L B18A-type CV Dual Carburetor 130ps, type A18A SOHC twelve valves 1.8L Single Carburetor 110PS, SOHC 12-valve 2.0L PGM type for the European market and A20A4-FI · 130PS, A20A2 2.0L SOHC 12-valve engine had a single Carburetor type 105PS.
Visibility from the driver's seat and passenger seat was better due to the lower instrument panel design of the front window and a large windshield. And switches are arranged efficiently and at the time was the driving position can be fine-tuned adjustments.
Because of the shape of the vehicle and the flat roof that continued to the rear of the vehicle, opening the rear hatch had some drawbacks in low clearance environments. The lower part of the hatch was not like one used on a station wagon that went all the way down to the rear bumper, so loading cargo into the back wasn't as convenient as a conventional station wagon with a one piece hatchback. The rear hatch also wrapped into the rear roof, similar to a gull wing door so that the rear glass was in two pieces, one for the back window, and another partially on the rear roof. When open, the hatch rose above the roof at a right angle, providing additional overhead clearance when the hatch was open.
Moreover, because of the emphasis on aiding rear-seat passenger entry, a longer front door was installed, and because power windows were not installed on the lower trim packages "LX", "LX-S" and as such, the window regulator opening felt heavy.
Fourth generation (1990–1993).
The 4th generation Honda Accord, introduced on the "CB" chassis, was unveiled in 1989. Although much larger than its predecessor the sedan's styling was evolutionary, featuring the same low slung design and wraparound rear window as the 3rd generation Accord. For the first time a 3-door hatchback was no longer available internationally.
This was one of the first U.S. production cars to feature optic reflectors with completely clear lenses on the headlamps replacing the more conventional lens diffused lighting. Unlike most manufacturers moving away from traditional sealed beam lighting, Honda chose to transition to a multi-reflector headlight style while maintaining the use of a glass lens instead of plastic. The styling reflected influences from the flagship Honda Legend, as Japanese Accords were now sold at "Honda Clio" dealerships, where the Legend, and the Honda Inspire, were sold. The growing popularity of the Accord internationally was evident in the ever increasing dimensions, which now matched almost exactly with the first generation Legend introduced in 1986.
For this fourth generation Accord, Honda made significant engineering design improvements. All Accords sold in North America came with a completely new all aluminium 2.2-liter 16-valve electronic fuel-injected engine standard, replacing the previous 2.0-liter 12-valve model from the past generation. Also noteworthy, all Accords equipped with automatic transmissions used an electronically controlled rear engine mount to reduce low frequency noise and vibration. The mount contained 2 fluid filled chambers separated by a computer controlled valve. At low engine speeds, fluid is routed through the valve damping vibration. Above 850 rpm, fluid is routed around the valve making the engine mount stiffer.
In the U.S., the LX-i and SE-i designations were dropped, being replaced with the DX, LX, and EX trim levels. The Canadian Accord trim levels varied slightly from the U.S. models with LX, EX and EX-R roughly corresponding to the American DX, LX, and EX, respectively. Fourth generation Japanese-assembled EXi Accords sold in Australia offered the same 4-wheel steering technology as was available optionally on the U.S. Honda Prelude, but was not included on the New Zealand-assembled versions. The four-wheel steering system was also available on the Accord's Japanese platform mate, called the Honda Ascot FTBi. U.S. Accord Coupes were available in the same DX, LX and EX trims as the U.S. Accord Sedan (LX, EX and EX-R in Canada).
A 125 horsepower (93 kW) 4-cylinder engine was offered in the DX and LX models (F22A1), while the 1990 and 1991 EX received a 130 hp (97 kW) version (F22A4). Cruise control was dropped from the DX sedan, with air conditioning remaining a dealer-installed option. The LX kept the same features as the previous generation including air conditioning, power windows, door locks, and mirrors. The 90-91 EX added 5 horsepower due to a different exhaust manifold design, slightly larger exhaust piping and a twin outlet muffler. 15-inch machined aluminum-alloy wheels, sunroof, upgraded upholstery, rear stabilizer bar and a high-power 4-speaker stereo cassette were standard on all EX models. Some models though rare were special ordered with an anti-lock braking system (at that time abbreviated as ALB, now all automakers refer to it as ABS). A redesigned manual transmission with a hydraulic clutch was standard equipment in all trims while an all-new electronically controlled 4-speed automatic transmission was optional for all models.
Some new dealer-installed accessories were now offered including a single-disc in-dash CD player or trunk mounted 6-disc CD changer, stereo equalizer, fog lights, security system, rear wing spoiler, trunk lip spoiler, luggage rack, full and half nose mask, center armrest, window visors, sunroof visor, car cover, and a cockpit cover.
Because of tightening auto safety regulations from the NHTSA, all 1990 and 1991 Accords sold in the United States came equipped with motorized shoulder belts for front passengers to comply with passive restraint mandates. These semi-automatic restraints were a two component system; a motorized shoulder belt along with a non-integrated and manually operated seatbelt. The shoulder belts automatically raced around each window frame encircling both the driver and front seat passenger whenever the front door closed. The process reversed to release them when opened. The lap belts however, still required manual fastening.
In 1991 Honda unveiled the Accord Wagon, manufactured at the Marysville, Ohio plant. The Ohio plant exported right-hand drive wagons and coupes to Europe and Japan, and in Europe the station wagon (estate) was called the "Aerodeck" (in reference to the 1985–1989 2-door vehicle). All station wagons sold outside the United States were afixed with a small badge on the "C" pillar denoting the vehicle was built at the Ohio facility. European and Japanese vehicles had options not available within the U.S. including automatic climate control systems, power seats and several other minor features. The Accord Wagons were available only in LX and EX trim in North America or just 2.2i in Japan. They had larger front brakes to compensate for the added weight and unlike other U.S. Accords, included a driver's side airbag as standard equipment. Other than a retractable tonneau cover in the rear cargo area and keyless entry on EX models, the wagons were equipped the same as their coupe and sedan counterparts.
Return of the SE (1991).
Honda reintroduced the SE (previously SE-i) model for 1991. It returned to the lineup without the traditional Bose high powered audio system but with an AM/FM stereo cassette 4x20 watt EX audio system; leather-trimmed steering wheel, leather seats and door panels, a fuel-injected engine, 4-speed automatic transmission, and ABS as standard equipment. For the first time, a manual transmission was not offered in the SE. Two colors were available: Solaris Silver Metallic with Graphite Black interior and Brittany Blue Metallic with Ivory interior. Unlike previous editions, the 1991 SE was not equipped with uniquely styled alloy wheels but instead carried the EX model wheels.
Update (1992–1993).
Accords received a minor facelift for the 1992 model year. The SE trim was dropped again but left behind its F22A6 engine for use in the EX model. This engine added 15 hp over the DX and LX trims and 10 hp over the 90-91 EX trim due to a further revised exhaust system. The system used the same EX-SE twin outlet muffler, a revised air intake tract, a revised camshaft and a revised intake manifold using IAB butterfly valves which open at 4600 rpm to increase air intake breathing at high rpm. It was similar in design to the 92-96 Prelude Si and VTEC models. For the 1992 and 1993 model years, the motorized shoulder belt system were replaced with a standard driver-side airbag and conventional shoulder/seatbelt arrangement for all but the center rear passenger. Anti-lock 4-wheel disc brakes became standard on the EX. The front and rear facias received a more rounded and updated look. Coupe and sedan models received a new grille, new headlights, clear parking lights, slightly thinner body side molding, updated wheel designs and for the first time, the EX coupe used wheels different from the EX sedan. The sedans received restyled shortened taillights with inverted amber turn signal and backup light positions. The coupe and wagon taillights though still resembled those from the 1990–1991 Accord. The coupe used the new revised inverted positioning of the signal and backup lights but the wagon taillights however remained the same as the 90-91 models. EX trim levels included a radio anti-theft function to deter stereo theft. A front driver's seat armrest was now standard on LX and EX models. Some dealer-installed accessories were dropped including the luggage rack, trunk-lip spoiler and cockpit cover. A gold finish kit was added.
10th Anniversary Edition and return of the SE (1993).
In 1993, Honda introduced the 10th Anniversary Edition sedan to commemorate the 10th year of U.S. Accord production. The 10th Anniversary Edition was based on the Accord LX sedan but came equipped with several features not available in the LX trim. The upgrades included ABS, 4-wheel disc brakes, 15" EX coupe six spoke alloy wheels, body colored side moldings, chin spoiler, and standard automatic transmission. Three colors were offered for the 10th Anniversary Edition: Frost White, Granada Black Pearl, and Arcadia Green Pearl. The 10th Anniversary models also included the same premium seat fabric found in EX models. The Frost White and Arcadia Green cars were paired with the same interior color as their LX/EX counterparts, Blue and Ivory, respectively. The Granada Black cars were paired with Gray interior, while the Granada Black EX had Ivory interior.
The SE returned for 1993 as both a sedan and, for the first time since the 1989 SE-i, as a coupe. The SE sedan featured dual front airbags; the first Accord to do so. An 8-button, 4-speaker Honda-Bose audio system, automatic transmission, leather trim, body colored bumper and body side moldings were standard. The SE coupe included a factory rear wing spoiler which differed slightly in design from the already available dealer installed accessory rear wing spoiler. In Canada, the SE came with heated front seats and heated side view mirrors. Both the sedan and coupe received distinctive 15-inch alloy wheels as well. All SE sedans in 1991 and 1993 were manufactured in Japan, while all SE coupes were produced in the U.S. The 1993 sedan was available in two colors: Cashmere Silver Metallic and Geneva Green Pearl, both with Ivory interior. The coupe was offered with two colors as well: Cashmere Silver Metallic and Atlantis Blue Pearl, both again with Ivory interior. Sadly, 1993 would be the swan song for the SE as an exclusive, high content, limited edition Accord model. Later generations would use a "Special Edition" designation rather than the previously used "SE" designation. These models were a combination of an Accord LX with several EX features similar to the 1993 10th Anniversary Edition LX.
At the end of the model life of the CB Accord, a "pillared hardtop" model called the Honda Ascot Innova was launched in Japan, based on the CB Accord chassis, but with a different, much more modern-styled body, taking cues from the 1992 Honda Prelude.
Honda Ascot.
The 4th generation Accord spawned a sister model in 1989 called the Honda Ascot which, while mechanically identical to the Accord, featured unique sedan bodywork, although it bore a resemblance to the Accord. The Ascot was sold through the "Honda Primo" network in Japan while the Accord was distributed through the "Honda Clio" network.
Honda Vigor and Honda Inspire.
Unlike previous generations of the Honda Vigor, which were simply upmarket versions of the Accord, the 3rd generation 'CB5' model was spun-off as a model in its own right and was based on a different platform which featured a longitudinal engine layout compared to the transverse set-up of the Accord. A sister model to the Vigor, the Honda Inspire, was also unveiled in 1989 and, bar a different front grille, front and rear lights and bumpers, sported identical bodywork. The Vigor was available in the USA and Canada under the Acura brand.
Fifth generation (1994–1997).
For the first time in the model's history, Honda developed two distinct versions of the Accord when the 5th generation model was launched; one version for the European market (launched in 1992) and one for the North American and Japanese market. Honda and the Rover Group created the European Accord and the Rover 600, a reflection of the past success they had with the Honda Legend and the Rover 800. This generation Accord was also sold in Japan as the Isuzu Aska, while some Isuzu products were sold as Honda products there also.
North America and Japan.
The 5th generation North American Accord was launched on September 9, 1993 and was based on the new 'CD' chassis. Larger than its predecessor, primarily to better suit the requirements of the North American market, the new model grew in width but shrunk in length, leaving it classified as a mid-size car in North America. It thus became too wide to fit within the favorable tax bracket in Japan, where its role was to be partially taken over by the slightly narrower second-generation Honda Ascot (sold at "Honda Primo" Japanese dealerships) and Honda Rafaga (sold at "Honda Verno"). Previous generations of the Accord sold in Japan were limited to a width dimension of while international models were slightly wider, however this generation no longer complied. The engines offered with the Accord also exceeded the maximum limit of 2000cc to remain in the favorable "compact" tax bracket. The final design was selected on December 18, 1990 and refined in during March and April 1992. Design patents were filed in the United States on December 16, 1992. Production later began at Marysville assembly on August 24, 1993.
Honda of Japan marketed four different size engines in the Japan-Spec Accord Sedan:1.8, 2.0, 2.2 VTEC and 2.2 DOHC VTEC. The Japanese-spec Accord models were marketed as the following: EF, EX, 2.0EX, 2.0EXL, 2.2VTE, 2.2VTL, 2.2VTS and SiR. All Honda Accord versions were sold at "Honda Clio" locations in Japan.
 
The DX, LX and EX models remained the American trim lines while Canada retained the LX, EX and EX-R. The 5-speed manual transmission remained mostly unchanged, while the 4-speed automatic noted for its hard shifts, now included Honda's "Grade-Logic" shift program, which would prevent "gear-hunting" by holding the current gear while driving on a sloped incline. All Accord models received a more ergonomic interior with standard safety features such as dual airbags and reinforced side-impact beams. Exclusive to the EX was the F22B1 SOHC VTEC version of previous generation 2.2-liter 4-cylinder (making up from on the previous generation EX), anti-lock brakes (now an option for the LX), 4-wheel disc brakes, 15-inch alloy wheels, and a rear stabilizer bar. Leather was an option in the EX trim with leather equipped models now being referred to as EX-L. DX and LX models came equipped similarly to the previous generation and were fitted with a revised version of the previous generation's 2.2-liter non-VTEC 4-cylinder engine. This F22B2 engine was rated at up from the previous generation. The Accord was again named Motor Trend Import Car of the Year for 1994. The Accord coupe as in the previous generation looked almost exactly like the sedan, and was the last generation of the Accord to offer a wagon variant in North America until the introduction of the Accord Crosstour in 2009.
Honda of Japan produced three high-performance models of the Accord (sedans, coupes, and 96–97 wagons) for the Japanese market (JDM) referred to as the SiR which was available for sale at "Honda Clio" dealerships in Japan. The sports car approach to the Accord SiR was aimed at aligning the Accord with the "Honda Verno" sports sedan that replaced the Vigor, called the Honda Saber a platform mate shared with the Honda Inspire. The compact sedan role the Accord previously filled was now relegated to the Honda Rafaga and Ascot. The Honda Accord SiR models were not hard to tell apart from the Accord EX model; they came equipped with the Japan-spec H22A DOHC VTEC engine instead of the F22B1 SOHC VTEC engine found in the EX. The Japan-spec H22A DOHC VTEC engine specs were at 6800 rpm; peak torque at 5500 rpm with a compression ratio of 10.6:1. The Japan-spec H22A DOHC VTEC engine was similar to the H22A1 engine found in the North America market used in the Prelude DOHC VTEC of the same era. The Japan-built Accord SiR Sedans (94–97) came available with a 5-speed manual transmission as standard equipment or an optional "Grade-Logic" four-speed automatic transmission. The Honda of America-built (HAM) Accord SiR Coupes and then the 96–97 Accord SiR Wagons had the "Grade-Logic" four-speed automatic transmission as standard equipment (5-speed manual transmission were not available for these two models). It came with cloth sport seats styled similar to the Prelude or optional leather seats, both exclusive to the SiR. The SiR also had some power options found on the Accord EX. The Accord SiR Coupes (94–97) and the Accord SiR Wagons (96–97) were exclusively available for the Japanese market (JDM). Honda Accord SiR chassis codes for the sedan were the CD6, the coupe-CD8 and the 96–97 wagon-CF2. The Accord SiR Coupes and the Accord SiR wagons (96-97) which were exclusively built in the U.S. at Honda's Marysville Ohio plant (HAM) but were marketed for Japan export only for this particular model was not offered in North America. The Accord SiR Coupes and then the Accord SiR Wagons were built with the Japan-spec H22A DOHC VTEC powertrains which were shipped from Japan and were installed into the HAM-built Accord SiR models. The 1994–1997 "CD" Accord chassis was designed for the H22A DOHC VTEC powertrain to be installed; because the firewall was curved at the top to allow more space for the tilting backwards of the H22A DOHC VTEC engine near the middle of the firewall. The H22A DOHC VTEC engine was the most powerful inline four-cylinder engine Honda built for the Prelude and the Accord before the 1995 U.S.-spec V6 sedan. The Accord SiR suspension was improved with stiffer front sway bar(27.2mmXt4.0 mm), stiffer rear sway bar (16 mm), stiffer front coil springs and stiffer rear coil springs. Features for the 94–95 Accord SiR models (sedans and coupes) included the following items: cruise control, automatic climate control (Similar to the first generation Acura CL), Bose stereo system, 7,400 redline tachometer, optional electronic traction control and optional limited slip differential for automatic transmission, optional SRS and airbags, factory installed driving lights, optional factory installed "pop up" navigation radio head unit, sound insulation liner under front hood, black housing front headlights, no side molding was available on the Accord SiR sedan, optional rear sunscreen, optional sunroof and power retractable outside mirrors. Features for the 96–97 Accord SiR models (sedans, coupes and wagons) included the same as above while adding; optional cruise control, rear window wiper on the sedan, optional leather interior and a colored side molding for the sedan as well.
In 1994, the 1995 Accord debuted a V6 engine, the 2.7L "C27" borrowed from the first generation Acura Legend, in the U.S. market. The V6 was offered in both the LX and EX versions of the sedan, LX models being referred to as LX-V6 and EX models as EX-V6. EX-V6 models came equipped similarly to the EX-L with leather seats being the only option in the EX-V6. Addition of the taller C27 engine required substantial alterations to the CD platform, with V6 models sporting a redesigned engine layout, taller front fenders, and a different hood than I4 models; however, these differences are difficult to spot without both models parked side-by-side. Both versions of the V6 received a dual-outlet exhaust, a 4-speed automatic transmission, 15-inch machined aluminum alloy wheels on the EX-V6 and 15-inch steel wheels with full covers on the LX-V6, and a slightly updated front grille. The Accord saw very few other changes for 1995 with the exception of a few different exterior and interior color combinations.
In 1995, the Accord underwent the usual mid-generation facelift for 1996. More rounded bumpers, a slightly modified front fascia with new signal lights and rear taillights gave the Accord a softer look. All Hondas now complied with the federal government's requirement of OBD II engine diagnostics though all three engine choices remained the same. In order to increase the Accord's competitiveness against its rivals in different international markets, Honda CEO Nobuhiko Kawamoto decided on one basic platform for the sixth-generation Accord, but with different bodies and proportions for local markets. In the U.S. the 1996 model lineup included the 25th Anniversary Edition, a model positioned between the DX and LX.
In 1997, Honda released the "Special Edition" version of the Accord (not to be confused with the SE). It was offered in three colors: Heather Mist Metallic, San Marino Red and Dark Currant Pearl. The Special Edition received a factory installed security system with keyless entry, single-disc CD player, body colored side molding, distinctive alloy wheels and a sunroof. It was offered in an automatic transmission only and was fitted with the same engine as the LX.
In New Zealand, the 5th generation Accord was assembled at Honda's manufacturing site in Nelson and was released in March, 1994. It was available in LXi, EXi and EXi-S trim levels. A facelift was released in December 1995, which coincided with the release of VTEC engines in the upper-spec models. Trim levels were LXi, VTi, and VTi-S. These were the first NZ-market Accords to have airbags – two in the VTi-S, one in the VTi.
U.S. built coupe and wagon models of this generation were shipped to Europe with both left and right hand drive but there was no V6 option.
This generation of Accord is one of the most frequently stolen cars in the U.S.A. with the 1994 model being stolen more frequently than its siblings. The Acura Integra and Honda Civic are also popular targets for car theft.
European model.
The 5th generation Accord for the European market was launched towards the end of 1992 and was not related directly to the North American 'CD' Accord. It was in fact the JDM Honda Ascot Innova which was based on the previous 4th generation 'CB' Accord. It was the result of a joint effort with the Rover Group that provided Rover with the 600 series.
In 1997, the European Accord received a minor facelift and was given a new front end (new headlights, bumper, bonnet and grill) and slightly different taillights (see images). The styling of the facelifted Accord remained identical to the styling of the Ascot Innova (although the frameless doors were replaced with conventional items) and featured the design language first introduced on the 5th generation Honda Civic. The styling of the European Accord differed dramatically from the North American which featured a more conventional saloon styling compared to the European model's low slung, fastback inspired look which also incorporated rear quarter windows. The facelifted Accord was also equipped with two airbags as standard.
However, the European Accord did not spawn an estate or coupe version, Honda instead opting to import the coupe and estate (Aerodeck) versions of the North American Accord.
Rover 600.
As part of the tie-up with the Rover Group the European Accord spawned Rover's replacement for the Austin Montego in 1993. Called the 600, the car shared its platform with the European Accord and, with the exception of the front doors, lower rear doors and windscreen, sported unique styling which dispensed with the rear quarter windows. The interior design of the 600 was very similar to the Accord's however, while the dashboard design was identical.
Sixth generation (1998–2002).
For the sixth generation, Honda split the Accord into three separate models, designed for the Japanese, North American, and European markets. However, the wagon was discontinued in North America while the coupe was discontinued in Japan.
Japan.
The Japanese models, introduced September 4, 1997, became narrower than the previous generation, returning to the favorable compact car tax bracket, except for Euro R and wagon, which were classified as the larger mid-sized classification. A nearly identical sister car, the Honda Torneo, replaced the previous Honda Ascot and the Honda Rafaga in Japan, which was sold at both "Honda Verno" and "Honda Primo" Japanese dealerships, while the Accord remained at "Honda Clio" locations. This was the last generation that was badge engineered as the Isuzu Aska.
When the previous generation Accord grew in exterior dimensions, this reclassified the Accord as a midsized car in Japan. The second generation Honda Inspire was manufactured in two platforms, with the smaller G20A five-cylinder engine installed in a shorter and narrower sedan that complied with "compact" regulations. This effort reflected Honda's positioning of "Honda Clio" as a luxury car dealership that sold the luxury sedans Honda Legend and Honda Inspire, similar to their efforts in North America with the Acura brand. Honda continued to offer the Accord station wagon in Japan. All trim levels sold in Japan were available with Honda's newly created, internet-based telematics service called Internavi.
Performance models.
Accord/Torneo Euro R (CL1, 2000–2002).
 Euro R included an H22A engine, 5-speed manual transmission, Recaro seats, leather-wrapped MOMO steering wheel, helical-torsen LSD, sports suspension, sports exhaust (including 4-2-1 stainless headers) and an aluminum-alloy gear shift knob. It was also fitted with a unique factory body kit that included flares and was available in some colors not available to other accords (such as Milano Red). The Accord (sold at "Honda Clio" locations) and the Torneo (sold at "Honda Verno" and "Primo" locations) are the same car, aside from minor cosmetic differences in the exterior.
The 2002 model was named the Euro-Rx. This model came with a few slight modifications from the 2000/2001 model. These included factory rear privacy glass, a titanium gear knob, optional Red-checker interior (original gold-checker) and bronze coloured alloy wheels. The high-stop spoiler also became standard on all models. Honda also addressed two common issues that had become apparent. The ECU was upgraded to resolve the issue of cold-starts causing hesitation on acceleration and the gearbox syncros were upgraded to a higher quality alloy to lengthen their lifespan.
Accord SiR-T (CF4, 1997–2000).
The SiR-T model included a 2.0L F20B engine rated at 7200 rpm ( automatic) and at 6600 rpm, 11.0.1 compression, 85 mm X 88 mm (Bore and Stroke) 7800 rpm redline. The H-series DOHC VTEC engines were limited to 7800 rpms. The F20B had a unique blue valve cover and like all the larger displacement Honda engines, the F20B was mounted with a tilt towards the driver. F20B engines could rev at higher rpms than H22As because it had a shorter stroke. The F20B had an 85 mm x 88 mm bore and stroke when compared to an H22A which had a 87 mm x 90.7 mm bore and stroke. The F20B was also classified as a low emissions engine.
Accord SiR (CF4, 1997–2002).
The Accord SiR was based on the SiR-T, but used the S-Matic automatic transmission. The engine was rated at but with better midrange characteristics. Moving the gear-stick over to the right allowed manual selection of 1st, 2nd, 3rd, or 4th gear using up and down shift actions just like the sequential gearboxes used on the JGTC NSX. When a particular gear is selected, the gear stays in position at all rpm. When pushed against the rev limiter, the engine would bounce against it just like a manual. However, the gear ratios for each gear were the same as the normal mode. The transmission still worked like a normal automatic transmission in all other operating modes.
Accord Wagon SiR (CH9 FWD 1999–2001, CL2 AWD 2000–2001).
The SiR wagon model included the only 2.3-liter H23A DOHC VTEC H-series engine in the Honda line-up. The H23A engine was rated at 200 hp / 190 hp (AWD) at 6,800 rpm and torque of at 5,300 rpm, 10.6:1 compression, X bore and stroke, and a 7300 rpm redline like other H-series VTEC engines from factory. The H23A also came with a blue valve cover and was the largest displacement of the H-series Honda engines. The H23A was mounted with a tilt towards the driver. The H23A had a longer stroke than the H22A. Specifications for the H23A were; X bore and stroke and H22A has X bore and stroke. The H23A had better acceleration because the peak torque occurred sooner at lower rpm when compared to the H22A.
North, Central and South America, Australia and Philippines.
The American Accord was only available in sedan and coupe form, becoming the largest Accord to date, sharing a platform with the JDM Honda Inspire/Acura TL. While previous generations of the Coupe were considered two-door versions of the sedan, the 1998 Coupe was the first to be given an exclusive front fascia, rear tail lights (which resemble those found on the NSX), wheels, and many other body panels, and was now marketed as a somewhat separate model, the "Accord Coupe", to set it away from the more family-oriented sedan version. It also allowed the Coupe, which was exported to other markets, to fit in more easily with the local Accord versions. The tail light appearance was duplicated on the Japanese market Honda Domani for the second generation of production.
Starting with this generation, cabin air filters (also known as pollen filters) were installed as standard equipment and are located behind the glove compartment internationally.
For the 1998 model year, the sedan was offered in DX, LX, EX, and EX-V6 trims while the Accord Coupe was offered only in LX, EX, and EX-V6 trims. The DX model was fitted with a 2.3L I4 engine rated at (from the past generation Accord), while the LX and EX included a 2.3L I4 VTEC engine rated at . All 4-cylinder models came with a 5-speed manual transmission standard, and with a 4-speed automatic as optional equipment. The DX remained the value-oriented trim with no audio system, manual windows, manual locks, no cruise control, rear drum brakes, and 14-inch steel wheels. The DX Value Package added a radio-cassette player, air conditioning, and cruise control; this was known as the Accord DX in Canada where it was the base model of the lineup. The LX trim added power windows, power locks, door courtesy lights and 15-inch steel wheels; an SE (special edition) package available since 2000 added 15-inch alloy wheels. The EX trim added ABS, alloy wheels, keyless entry, rear disc brakes, and upgraded cloth. Leather seating, CD player, and power sunroof were factory installed options for the EX. All V6 sedan and coupe models received a new 3.0L V6 SOHC VTEC engine rated at and (from the Acura 3.0 CL), ABS and automatic transmission. Some dealer-installed options included: gold finish kit, gold finish exhaust tip(s), gold finish wheel center caps, 6-disc in-dash CD changer, tape deck, fog lights, wing spoiler, alarm system, sunroof visor, car cover and accessory chrome wheels.
In 2001, both the American-market Accord sedan and coupe underwent a minor facelift. A new front fascia, rear bumper, side skirt alteration, new taillights and wheel designs freshened the Accord's look. The interior saw few changes with the exception of some fabric and audio configuration changes. The LX and LX-V6 now included a standard CD player, and the EX 4-cylinder now included a 6-disc in-dash CD changer with cassette player while the EX-V6 offered that stereo plus automatic climate control. All V6 models also included a traction control system that could be disabled by a switch, the first Accord to have such a system included. The Special Edition returned to the coupe and sedan models for its final model year, 2002. It included all the features of the LX, but added exclusive alloy wheels, keyless entry and a single CD/cassette radio. In the Philippines, only the sedan was available and offered in VTi and VTi-L trims. The VTi model was fitted with a 2.0L I4 VTEC engine rated at while the top VTi-L trim was fitted with a 2.3L I4 VTEC engine rated at . Both models are available with either a 5-speed manual transmission or a 4-speed automatic transmission.
Honda made the decision to continue this generation of Accord an extra year. Previously, the Accord ran four years on a single body-style and facelift before being redesigned. The typical Accord generation cycle was a 2:4 trend, with a newly released model running for years 1 and 2 unaltered, then getting a facelift for years 3 and 4 before a major redesign. This generation would run a total of 5 years in a 3:5 trend, with the facelift occurring in year four. Accord sales remained steady despite the additional year.
Despite the Accord's reputation for reliability, the V6 models were plagued by transmission failures and prompted class action lawsuits against the company (4-cylinder models were also affected, but not to the same extent). This caused Honda to extend the warranties for the 2000 through 2001 models to seven years or . 1998, 1999 and 2002 cars were considered for extended coverage on a case-by-case basis. No formal recall occurred. In Canada, recall letters were sent out to owners who fell within a certain VIN range; this warranty was later re-extended for some owners to seven years in length.
Beginning in 1998, Honda Accord keys were equipped with immobilizer microchips. In 1999, the Accord was given foldable mirrors. In 2002, the Special Edition was added and the DX Value-Package was re-introduced.
The 1998 Accord was also assembled in New Zealand at the very end of overall CKD car production due to the abolition of import tariffs on built cars which made local assembly uneconomic. 1,200 examples of the car (the mid-sized U.S. sedan version) were built before the Honda New Zealand factory was closed; the very first Honda-owned factory operation to be closed down) and the equipment (which included a paint shop acquired from Nissan when that automaker closed its Australian manufacturing unit in 1994) was shipped to other Honda assembly units, mainly in Asia. Small numbers of Accords were imported (right hand drive) from the U.S. before sourcing switched to Thailand once Accord assembly began there. The Thai factory continues to supply New Zealand with the latest generation Accord and now also ships that line and other Honda models to Australia and elsewhere in South East Asia.
Concerns over airbag safety plague the Japanese automaker. The company announced it was recalling vehicles citing driver's airbags that deploy with too much force during collisions. Honda says 2,430 faulty airbags were installed as repairs to customer vehicles after a collision. But since the company cannot accurately track down which Honda received the flawed airbags, Honda broadened its search to include the 2001–2001 Accord. Since November 2008, Honda has recalled some 1.7 million of its cars for airbag concerns. At its last similar expanded recall in February 2010, Honda said the too-powerful airbags have been involved in 12 incidents, including one fatality.
Europe.
The European Honda Accord, also made in Swindon, became very different from its cousins in terms of styling, and was also shorter than the JDM and American-market Accords. It was available as a sedan and a 5-door hatchback (liftback), with the U.S.-imported Coupe completing the range. It was a platform improvement of the previous generation "European Accord", a joint project with the Rover Group that created the Rover 600 as well as the Honda Ascot Innova.
The standard trim (and quality of interior) of the Honda Accord was above the standard of similar cars (Ford Mondeo, Peugeot 406, Vauxhall Vectra etc.) in its class. The basic S came with ABS, alarm, engine immobilizer, and air-conditioning as standard equipment, with the SE adding the options of metallic paint, cruise control, climate control and later, satellite navigation. The 1998–1999 ES came equipped with all those features (except satellite navigation still optional) and with a full walnut and leather trimmed interior with heated front seats. This was replaced by the SE Executive model in late 1999.
The EU version had a minor facelift in 2001 including a revised grill, alloy wheels, bumpers and both rear and front lights. In 2001 the trim range was expanded with a Type-V; coming fully loaded with leather trim as standard equipment, satellite navigation and a tiptronic automatic transmission as optional. The Sport model which was as the SE, came with adjusted styling, spoiler, and a color-coded side skirt (as opposed to black plastic).
Performance models.
The Accord Type-R (CH1) model was sold in European markets. The I4 H22A7 VTEC engine was rated at 7,200 rpm and at 6700 rpm. Recaro seats, LSD (Limited Slip Differential) and stiffer suspension came standard. Other engines in this model included a 1.8L F18B VTEC engine rated at ,a 2L F20B6 VTEC engine rated at as well as a 1.6 which was the entry level engine not offered in the United Kingdom, it produces 85 kW.
The Type-V model (2001-2003) included the F23Z5 VTEC engine, it was the largest engine that the Accord 6th gen offered.
The Type-R, Type-V, and Sport can be recognized by a badge on the front grill and hood lid, though the pre-facelift models only signified Type-R on the front. The top of the range SE Executive only became identified as such in 2000 with a badge 'SE EXECUTIVE' on the hood lid. Walnut trim interior was also dropped for the SE Executive during the facelift, and a more intuitive Climate Control system was added.
Seventh generation (2003–2007).
The seventh generation of the Accord was launched in 2002 (2003 model year in North America), and consists of two separate models; one for the Japanese and European markets, and the other for North America. However, both were in fact sold in many other markets, fueled by the popular Cog advertisement for the Accord.
Japan and Europe.
The European and Japanese Accords were integrated on the previous Japanese Accord's chassis, but with a new body. No longer made in Swindon, those Accords were made in Japan, and came in both sedan and estate form.
This model was sold in certain markets such as Fiji/New Zealand as the "Accord Euro" and in North America as the Acura TSX.
Accord Euro R (CL7, 2002–2007).
The Honda Accord Euro R (CL7) was launched in October 2002. A lightened and more sports focused variant of the Japanese car the Accord Euro-R was powered by the K20A 2.0L DOHC i-VTEC engine with 220 horsepower and 21.0 kg-m (206 Nm @ 7000 rpm) of torque through a lightweight 6-speed manual transmission. The Accord Euro-R was only available to the Japanese Domestic Market. Some features that distinguish it are the Recaro seats, the body kit, a MOMO steering wheel and a special metal gearknob found only in Honda's Type-R variants.
North America.
The North American Accord grew in size yet again, becoming a vastly different car than its Japanese and European counterpart. This generation was available in both coupe and sedan forms, while a hybrid model was introduced in 2005. In 2006, it was significantly updated. This generation Accord was the first to use wheels with five lug nuts instead of the traditional four on 4-cylinder models. The 4-cylinder version came with and ( and for 2005-2007 models) K24A1 2397 cc 4 cyl engine mated to a 5-speed automatic or 5-speed manual. In 2003, Honda began to offer a more aggressive Accord Coupe, equipped with the and ( and for 2005-2007 models) J30A4 2997cc V6 mated to a 6-speed manual transmission borrowed from the Acura CL Type S (without a limited slip differential). This coupe came with 17-inch wheels (that varied between the 03-05 and 06-07 models), strut tower bar, perforated leather seating, carbon fiber dash pieces, and an upgraded 180 watt stereo system. Because of the ability to maintain activation of the VTEC system all the way through hard acceleration, the Accord EX V6 6-speed ran from 0-60 MPH in just 5.9 seconds according to Car and Driver, more than a second faster than the automatic version. In 2006, Honda offered this engine and transmission combination in the sedan, which only lasted through 2007.
This model was also sold in Japan as the Honda Inspire from 2003 to 2008. In China the model got the name "Guangzhou-Honda Accord" and was sold from 2003 up to December 2009.
Eighth generation (2008–2012).
Accord in Japan and Europe and Spirior in China.
The updated Honda Accord for the Japanese and European markets went on sale in mid-2008. It is also sold as the Accord Euro in the Australia and New Zealand markets, and as the Acura TSX in North America. It is available as both a sedan and a station wagon. In the People's Republic of China, a version of the sedan is sold as the "Spirior". Production started in August 2009 in China, by Dongfeng Honda.
Accord in North America and China and Inspire in Japan.
The North American version of the Accord has a different body from its Japanese counterpart. This shape is sold as the Honda Inspire in Japan, and is not sold in Europe.
It was discontinued in Japan in September 2012. Larger than the previous model, the sedan is now classified as a full-size car by EPA standards. A coupe version is available, as well as a Crosstour fastback model, which was introduced in the US for the 2010 model year. Engines include a 2.4 Liter 4-cylinder rated at 177 bhp (132 kW) with for Lx-Se sedans and 190 bhp (142 kW) with for EX-Ex-l sedans and coupes; as well as a 3.5 Liter V6 rated at 272 bhp (203 kW) and .
In Australia, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, Indonesia and Singapore, this car which is assembled in Thailand, is sold as the Honda Accord in left or right hand drive forms. In Malaysia, the Accord is locally assembled. In Hong Kong, this car is made in Japan and sold as Honda Accord, and in Taiwan, the Accord is locally assembled. In China, Guangqi Honda also makes this vehicle with 2.0L, 2.4L and 3.5L engines. Guangqi began making the Accord Crosstour in 2010.
Ninth generation (2013–present).
Honda revealed the Accord Coupe Concept at the 2012 North American International Auto Show in Detroit. In August 2012, the company released initial details pertaining to the 2013 Accord sedan, and production versions of both the sedan and coupe were fully unveiled in early September 2012. The Accord sedan went on sale on September 19, 2012 in the United States, with the coupe following on October 15. Corresponding release dates in Canada for the sedan and coupe models are September 24, 2012 and November 1, 2012, respectively. In February 2013, Accord is scheduled to enter Russian market.
The ninth-generation Accord offers three powertrains: A new direct injected "Earth Dreams" 2.4 liter 16-valve DOHC 4-cylinder rated at to of torque paired with either a 6-speed manual or continuously variable transmission, an updated 3.5 liter 24-valve SOHC V6 mated either to a 6-speed manual or automatic rated at and , and a hybrid powertrain that integrates a 2.0 liter Atkinson Cycle gasoline engine with an electric motor and lithium-ion battery pack. The hybrid uses a continuously variable transmission and is rated at and . Both conventional and plug-in hybrid configurations will be offered, with the former expected to be released in summer 2013 and the latter in early 2013.
Two additional trim levels are added in North American markets. The Accord Sport Sedan is slotted between the LX and EX models and features a 2.4-Liter 16-valve DOHC 4-cylinder rated at to of torque, 18" wheels and tires, dual exhaust, a decklid spoiler, fog lights, and steering wheel mounted paddle shifters on models equipped with the continuously variable transmission. The Accord Touring Sedan is the lineup's flagship. It is available with either four cylinder or V6 engines in Canada; U.S. Touring models are equipped with the V6 engine exclusively.
The front double wishbone suspension has been replaced with a MacPherson strut design, while the rear retains a multi-link setup. The Accord's body now utilizes 55.8% high strength steel, a total of 17.2% are either of 780, 980 or 1,500 MPa yield strength types which were not used in the previous generation. The Accord's previous steel front subframe has been replaced with an aluminum and steel component that weighs less and is manufactured using friction stir welding. Overall the body weight sheds .
All Accords come with standard an 8-inch 480 x 320 pixel WQVGA resolution LCD display screen, single angle backup camera, dual zone automatic climate control and alloy wheels. The available navigation system adds a 6-inch touchscreen and the 8-inch screen uses a higher 800 x 480 pixel resolution WVGA display. A tri-angle (normal, wide and top view) backup camera and wide angle passenger blind spot side view camera are also available. New safety features include an optional forward collision warning system, lane departure warning system and blind spot monitor. Highline models (EX, EX-L, and Touring grades) offer Smart Key, LED daytime running lamps, headlamps, and tail lamps; and an adaptive cruise control system.
Accord Plug-in Hybrid.
The production version of the 2014 Accord Plug-in Hybrid was introduced at the 2012 Los Angeles Auto Show. The Accord PHEV pricing starts at and sales began in the U.S. in January 2013, with availability limited to California and New York .
Honda unveiled the platform for a mid-size plug-in hybrid electric vehicle at the 2010 Los Angeles Auto Show. The plug-in platform showcased Honda’s next-generation two-motor hybrid system, which continuously moves through three different modes to maximize driving efficiency: all-electric, gasoline-electric and an engine direct-drive mode. The plug-in hybrid also uses regenerative braking to charge the battery. In all-electric mode, the vehicle uses a 6 kWh lithium-ion battery and a 120 kW electric motor. The all-electric mode achieves a range of approximately in city driving and a top speed of . Fully recharging the battery will take 2 to 2.5 hours using a 120-volt outlet and 1 to 1.5 hours using a 240-volt outlet. Honda announced at the 2012 North American International Auto Show in Detroit that first US application of both a 2.4-liter direct-injected engine and two-motor plug-in hybrid system to be implemented on the Accord ninth generation, the 2013 Honda Accord Plug-in Hybrid, with sales scheduled for late 2012 or early 2013. Production of the Accord Plug-in Hybrid began on December 21, 2012. 
In September 2012 Honda announced that the 2014 model year Honda Accord Plug-in Hybrid sedan will be built in Sayama, Japan. Honda also explained the plug-in will be available in a single highly equipped trim level based on the standard features of the Accord Touring. The 2014 Accord Plug-in Hybrid is scheduled for release in early 2013, and it will serve as the basis for the conventional hybrid version of the Accord Sedan that will go on sale by mid 2013. The production version will feature a 6.7 kWh lithium-ion battery pack to power a 124 kW electric motor mated with the new Earth Dreams i-VTEC 2.0-liter 4-cylinder Atkinson-cycle gasoline engine producing 137 hp (102 kW) at 6200 rpm, and together the total system output is 196 hp (146 kW), which surpasses that of the Toyota Prius Plug-in Hybrid (134 hp), Chevrolet Volt (149 hp) and future Ford Fusion Energi plug-in hybrid. 
Honda expected the 2014 Honda Accord Plug-in Hybrid to deliver an all-electric range of up to and a total driving range of more than based on the U.S. EPA tests as determined by Honda. The carmaker also expected the fuel economy for the Accord Plug-in Hybrid to exceed 100 miles per gallon of gasoline equivalent (MPG-e) (2.4 L/100 km; 120 mpg-imp equivalent), and also expects it to receive an Enhanced AT-PZEV rating from the California Air Resources Board (CARB).
The official EPA ratings for the plug-in hybrid are of all-electric range with a combined fuel economy rating of 115 miles per gallon of gasoline equivalent (MPG-e), the highest in its class. EPA ratings for operation in hybrid mode are in combined city/highway cycle, in city, and in highway driving. The 2014 Honda Accord PHEV is the first car in the U.S. to meet the new LEV3/SULEV20 emissions standards, and will get single-occupant carpool access in California.
