Sophia Anna Bush (born July 8, 1982) is an American actress, director, and spokesperson. She starred in the CW television series "One Tree Hill" where she portrayed Brooke Davis. Bush is additionally known for her film portrayals in "John Tucker Must Die" (2006), "The Hitcher" (2007), and "The Narrows" (2008).
Early life.
Bush was born in Pasadena, California. She is the only child of Maureen, a photography studio manager, and Charles William Bush, an advertising and celebrity photographer. Bush has Italian ancestry. She graduated from Westridge School for Girls in 2000 in Pasadena, California, where she was a member of the volleyball team. At Westridge, she was required to participate in the theatre arts program. Bush stated: "Part of my school's requirement was to do a play. I was really irritated because I wanted to play volleyball and I had to go and do this play. But there was a moment after the performance when I realized I had gone and been somebody else. I thought, 'If I could do this for the rest of my life, I am set.' It was like love at first sight."
At the age of 17, Bush was named the Tournament of Roses Parade Queen. She attended the University of Southern California (USC) as a journalism major until her junior year, where she was a member and Social Chair of the Kappa Kappa Gamma sorority.
In 2003, Bush was cast to play the role of Brooke Davis on "One Tree Hill". Subsequently, she stopped attending USC.
Career.
Bush made her first big screen appearance in the comedy feature film "Van Wilder". Following this, she made appearances in several television shows, such as "Nip/Tuck", "Sabrina, the Teenage Witch", and "Punk'd". She was cast as Kate Brewster in "", but was replaced by Claire Danes because the director thought she was too young for the role. 
In 2003, she landed the role of Brooke Davis in the CW television series "One Tree Hill". Her character, Brooke Davis, evolved from a trouble-making vixen to a fiercely loyal friend. After Bush gained mainstream fame, she became a spokesperson for high-profile brands. She posed on the cover of several mainstream magazines such as "Entertainment Weekly", "Lucky", "Maxim", "Glamour", and "InStyle" and has had several endorsement deals, one of her latest endorsements is for Op's fall campaign OPen Campus. Bush and her "One Tree Hill" co-stars were endorsers for MasterCard, Kmart, Chevy Cobalt and Cingular wireless. She directed three episodes of the series including the penultimate episode of the ninth and final season. 
In July 2006, Bush starred in the 20th Century Fox feature film "John Tucker Must Die" alongside Jesse Metcalfe and Brittany Snow. The film was a commercial success grossing over 60 million worldwide. The same year, she also starred in Buena Vista Pictures' thriller film, "Stay Alive" alongside Frankie Muniz and Adam Goldberg. The film opened at number 3 in the U.S. box office, and is considered a box office success due to its production budget of nine million dollars.
In 2008, Bush starred in François Velle's independent film "The Narrows" with Kevin Zegers, Eddie Cahill, and Vincent D'Onofrio. She played the beautiful, intelligent, and self-assured Kathy Popovich. The film is based on Tim McLoughlin's novel "Heart of the Old Country" and it premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in September 2008. Her most recently released role is in the 2011 film "Chalet Girl".
In February 2012, it was reported Bush had joined the cast of CBS's comedy "Partners." The series was cancelled in November 2012.
Personal life.
On April 16, 2005, Bush married actor Chad Michael Murray, her "One Tree Hill" co-star. They dated for almost two years before they were married in Santa Monica. They announced their separation on September 26, 2005 after five months of marriage when Bush filed court papers to have their marriage annulled citing fraud. In December 2006, Bush and Murray's divorce was finalized. Bush later said, "It devastates me now that I have been reduced to a Hollywood statistic–another joke marriage. I never expected to be married more than once...because I knew what I was getting into and will always believe in love."
On October 27, 2008, Murray confirmed a romance between Bush and fellow "One Tree Hill" star James Lafferty. "Sophia and I are both professional and mature enough to get through it ... and now it's just easy. We're just friends. And she's got James, and James and I are friends," he stated.
On May 25, 2010, Bush confirmed that she has been dating fellow "One Tree Hill" co-star Austin Nichols on and off for the past four years. It was also revealed that Nichols took a job on "One Tree Hill" to be with Bush. In February 2012, it was reported the couple had broken up. 
On January 8, 2011, Bush's nine-year-old second cousin, Christina-Taylor Green, was fatally shot in the assassination attempt on Rep. Gabrielle Giffords in Tucson, Arizona. Green was the youngest victim of the massacre, which claimed the lives of six and injured 14.
Activism.
Bush often uses Twitter, Facebook, and her blog to raise awareness of world events and/or fundraisers in which she takes part. Bush is a part of fundraisers such as F Cancer, Run For the Gulf, and Global Green Gulf Relief.
Bush has been involved in political issues, supporting Barack Obama for president in the 2008 election. In February 2008, she made several appearances in Texas in support of the Obama campaign in the Texas Presidential primary election. She was joined in Dallas, Fort Worth, and Waco by fellow actor Adam Rodríguez. Touring mostly college campuses, they urged young voters to get involved politically.
In April 2009, along with stars including Sarah Chalke, Jason Lewis, Alicia Silverstone, Jane Lynch and Lance Bass, Bush appeared in a video on Funny or Die called "A Gaythering Storm", which parodied a NOM video objecting to same-sex marriage. 
Bush has stood as a proud gay rights activist and in May 2009, she showed up at a rally in protest of Proposition 8. She carried a sign saying "I Do support the freedom to marry" and a shirt which had the words "Legalize Gay" across it. 
In an interview in January 2012, Bush said about the 2012 Republican candidates: "I will not vote for a candidate who thinks you can 'pray away the gay,' I will not vote for a candidate who thinks that he has more rights to my uterus than I do, I will not vote for a candidate who thinks that it's okay to dump toxic waste in the ocean. I'm afraid for our country that people like this could even be thought of as the president. I live in a country where I believe all men are created equal, not just wealthy white guys. I believe all men, all women, regardless of race, gender, socioeconomic background, you deserve the same rights."
Bush set up a fundraiser intended to help people living in the area of the Gulf of Mexico affected by the environmental disaster of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, which occurred on April 20, 2010. The actress has visited Louisiana and testified in interviews the horror she felt when she visited those places. The fundraiser is on the Internet through crowdsourcing website Crowdrise.com. The actress, to support the fundraiser, said that next November she's going to run a half marathon, despite having asthma and a year-old knee injury.
Bush has additionally teamed up with Dosomething.org to raise more environmental awareness among teens. She was chosen as the spokesperson to endorse the launch of eMission, a Facebook game with the social mission to engage America's youth in fighting climate change created through the joint efforts of Do Something and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) Energy Star program.
In 2011, she won the Do Something Twitter Award for having spread the word via her Twitter account on how her followers could help with the cleanup after the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill. She was voted "fan favorite" by Facebook users on Dosomething.org.
In 2011, Bush also became involved in the Pencils of Promise organisation, that builds schools and increases educational opportunities in the developing world.
In December 2011, Bush competed with other stars in the Mozilla Firefox Challenge, a one-month fundraising contest whose winner is granted $25,000 to put toward a favorite cause, and eventually won the contest in January 2012. Bush represented "F Cancer", a Vancouver-based charity dedicated to early detection education. Earlier in the year, she and actor Adrian Grenier took part in a F-Cancer campaign by sharing their awkward sex talk experiences.
Image.
Bush is often spotlighted for her looks. In April 2007, she ranked No. 90 in the British popular men's magazine "FHM", in their countdown of 100 Sexiest Women of 2007. Subsequently, she ranked No. 89 in the US edition of the same magazine. In May 2007, Bush ranked high at No. 24 in the "Maxim" Hot 100 List of 2007. She has also appeared on the cover of the November 2006 edition of "Maxim" with "One Tree Hill" co-stars Hilarie Burton and Danneel Harris. In previous years, Bush has ranked No. 3 on Femme Fatales: The 50 Sexiest Women of 2004 and named No. 15 on MuchMusic's 20 Hottest Women of 2004.
Bush has been featured in "People's" "Beautiful at Every Age" and "Most Beautiful" for several years.
