Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola is a political satire film produced by Vishal Bharadwaj along with Fox Star Studios. Besides co-producing, Bharadwaj has also directed, co-scripted and scored the music for the film. The film starred Pankaj Kapur, Imran Khan and Anushka Sharma in the titular roles, while Arya Babbar and Shabana Azmi played supporting roles. The film was released worldwide on 11 January 2013.The film is a Plus. Plus is a Film which recovers investment & yields some profit.
Plot.
Set in the rustic surroundings of a village in Haryana, the film is a comedy-drama about Harry Mandola (Pankaj Kapur), a wealthy industrialist who loves his drink, his daughter Bijlee (Anushka Sharma) and the unusual bond they both share with Harry’s Man Friday, Matru (Imran Khan). Matru studies LLB in Jawaharlal Nehru University(However, there is no such course in the University, factually) but does not get a job upon graduation and returns to his village to take up his family profession of serving the Mandola family. Also Bijlli is in love with him. Bijlee later goes to Oxford University where she meets Badal (Arya Babbar), the son of a powerful politician, Chaudhari Devi(Shabana Azmi), and pretends to fall in love with him to make Matru jealous. Much to her father's delight, Bijlee seems all set to marry Baadal. This alliance, far from a simple love story of two young people, becomes the basis for a complex, political narrative, that brings twists and turns in the lives of Matru, Bijlee and Mandola.
Production.
Filming.
The film has been released on 11 January 2013, and presented by TABCAB.
Trailers and release.
The first trailer of the film was released on Youtube in October 2012 which created a lot of buzz. About her character in the film, Anushka says, "I play a strong, bull-headed, outspoken girl in the film. My look highlights the bold approach of the character." The actress also seemed appreciative of Imran's look. "Imran looks hot", she said. One other thing which caught the attention of people was the pink buffalo, "Gulabi Bhains". In the movie, Anushka Sharma will be sporting a tattoo on her lower waist which reads "Dekho Magar Pyaar Se" ("Look, but with affection"), which was unveiled in a press conference on 4 December 2012. The Censor Board of India gave the film an 'A' (Adult) certificate, which director Vishal Bhardwaj refused; therefore the film was rechecked and was given an U/A certificate by the Censor Board.
Soundtrack.
The music is composed by Vishal Bhardwaj with lyrics by Gulzar. The soundtrack was released by Sony Music. The title song is by Sukhwinder Singh and Ranjit Barot. The title song was released as a single track on 30 November 2012. Another single track "Oye Boy Charlie" by Rekha Bhardwaj, Mohit Chauhan and Shankar Mahadevan was released on 12 December 2012. The full album released on 19 December 2012 on Saavn.com. Musicperk.com rated the album 8/10, saying it is "Well-worth a listen".
Critical reception.
Roma Heer and Gautam Batra of Wassupbollywood.com gave the film 2.5/5 stars, saying ""Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola" is a completely boring and itchy drama. It has nothing exciting despite Pankaj Kapur's performance. Watch it only if you are a die hard fan of Pankaj Kapur."
Raja Sen for Rediff.com awarded it 4/5 stars, opining that "Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola" has enough substance to warrant repeated viewings.
Indicine rated the film 2.5/5 and commented that ""Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mondala" is Bhardwaj's most commercial film to date. It isn't his best work[;] far from it. But the film has his moments, the north Indian audience will understand and enjoy it a little more. Pankaj Kapoor's flawless performance itself is worth the price of your ticket." Anupama Chopra of the "Hindustan Times" rated the movie 2.5/5. She reasoned that "Parts of the film soar[,] but many are saggy and ultimately I was just underwhelmed." Shivesh Kumar of "IndiaWeekly" awarded the movie 3 out of 5 stars.
Vivek Kaul at First Post praised the movie, calling it the new "Jaane Bhi Do Yaaron".
Box office.
India.
"Matru Ki Beejlee Ka Mandola" opened below the mark where business at multiplexes is little better than single screens. It collected on its opening day. It failed to show any growth on its second day and managed around nett. The film had a low first weekend with a collection of including paid previews. The film netted a poor collection of around in its first week. It further dropped 77% and netted around in its second weekend. It netted in its second week.
Overseas.
"Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola" did a collection of $1.5 million in first 10 days of release overseas, as reported by Box Office India.
