TED (Technology, Entertainment and Design) is a global set of conferences owned by the private non-profit Sapling Foundation, formed to disseminate "ideas worth spreading."
TED was founded in 1984 as a one-off event. The annual conference began in 1990, in Monterey, California. TED's early emphasis was technology and design, consistent with its origins in the Silicon Valley. 
The TED main conference is held annually in Long Beach, and its companion TEDActive is held in Palm Springs. Both conferences will move from Long Beach and Palm Springs to Vancouver and Whistler, respectively, in 2014. TED events are also held throughout the U.S. and in Europe and Asia, offering live streaming of the talks. They address a wide range of topics within the research and practice of science and culture, often through storytelling. The speakers are given a maximum of 18 minutes to present their ideas in the most innovative and engaging ways they can. Past presenters include Bill Clinton, Jane Goodall, Malcolm Gladwell, Al Gore, Gordon Brown, Richard Dawkins, Bill Gates, Google founders Larry Page and Sergey Brin, and many Nobel Prize winners. TED's current curator is the British former computer journalist and magazine publisher Chris Anderson.
Since June 2006, the talks have been offered for free viewing online, under Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs Creative Commons license, through TED.com. As of November 2011, over 1,050 talks are available free online. By January 2009 they had been viewed 50 million times. In June 2011, the viewing figure stood at more than 500 million, and on Tuesday November 13, 2012, TED Talks had been watched one billion times worldwide, reflecting a still growing global audience.
Background.
 (primary source)</ref>
The TED staff of about 90 people is headquartered in New York City and Vancouver.
History.
TED was conceived by architect and graphic designer Richard Saul Wurman, who observed a convergence of the fields of technology, entertainment and design. The first conference, organized by Wurman and Harry Marks in 1984, featured demos of the Sony compact disc, and one of the first demonstrations of the Apple Macintosh computer. Presentations were given by famous mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot and influential members of the digerati community, like Nicholas Negroponte and Stewart Brand. The event was financially unsuccessful, however, and it took six years before the second conference was organized. From 1990 onward, a growing community of "TEDsters" has been gathering annually at the invitation-only event in Monterey, California, until 2009, when it was relocated to Long Beach, California due to a substantial increase in attendees.
Initially, the speakers came from the fields of expertise behind the acronym TED, but during the nineties, the roster of presenters broadened to include scientists, philosophers, musicians, religious leaders, philanthropists and many others.
Chris Anderson (The Sapling Foundation).
In 2000, Wurman, looking for a successor at age 65, met with new-media entrepreneur and TED enthusiast Chris Anderson to discuss TED's future. In November 2001, Anderson's non-profit The Sapling Foundation (motto: ""fostering the spread of great ideas."") became the owner of TED. In February 2002, Anderson gave a TEDTalk in which he explained his vision of the conference and his future role of curator. Wurman left after the 2002 conference.
In 2006, attendance cost was $4,400 and was by invitation only. The membership model was shifted in January 2007 to an annual membership fee of $6,000, which includes attendance of the conference, club mailings, networking tools, and conference DVDs.
TEDGlobal.
In 2005, under Anderson's supervision, a more internationally oriented sister conference was added, under the name TEDGlobal. It was held, in chronological order: in Oxford, UK (2005), in Arusha, Tanzania (2007, titled "TEDAfrica), and again in Oxford (2009 and 2010). Additionally there was TED India, in Mysore (2009). In 2011 and 2012 TEDGlobal took place in Edinburgh, Scotland. 
TED's European director (and curator of TEDGlobal) is Swiss-born Bruno Giussani.
TED 2011, "The Rediscovery of Wonder", was held in Long Beach, California, from February 28 to March 4, 2011. The TED conference has a companion conference, TEDGlobal, held in the UK each summer. The 2009 TEDGlobal, "The Substance of Things Not Seen", was held in Oxford, UK, July 21–24, 2009. 2010's TEDGlobal (again in Oxford) was themed "And Now The Good News"; in 2011 the conference moved to a new home in Edinburgh and was held from July 12–15 with the theme "The Stuff Of Life". The 2012 TEDGlobal conference "Radical Openness" was held in Edinburgh from June 25–29.
TED Prize.
The TED Prize was introduced in 2005. Until 2010, it annually granted three individuals $100,000 and a "wish to change the world". Each winner unveils their wish at the main annual conference. Since 2010, in a changed selection process, a single winner is chosen to ensure that TED can maximize its efforts in achieving the winner's wish. In 2012, the Prize was not awarded to an individual, but to a concept connected to the current global phenomenon of increasing urbanization. For 2013, the prize amount has been increased to $1 million.
TED.com.
In 2005, Chris Anderson hired June Cohen as Director of TED Media, and she recruited online video specialist Jason Wishnow. In June 2006, after Cohen's idea of a TV show based on TED lectures was rejected by several networks, a selection of talks that had received the highest audience ratings was posted on the websites of TED, YouTube, and iTunes, under Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs Creative Commons license. Initially, only a handful of talks were posted, to test if there was an audience for them. In January of next year, the number of TED Talks on the site had grown to 44, and they had been viewed more than three million times. On the basis of that success, the organization pumped hundreds of thousands of dollars into its video production operations and into the development of a Web site to showcase about 100 of the talks.
In April 2007, the new TED.com was launched, developed by design firm Method. In subsequent years, the Web site has won many prizes, among which seven "Webby Awards", iTunes' "Best Podcast of the Year" (2006-2010), the "Communication Arts Interactive Award" for "Information Design" in 2007, the "OMMA award" fsor "video sharing" in 2008, the "Web Visionary Award" for "technical achievement" in 2008, "The One Show Interactive Bronze Award" in 2008, the "AIGA Annual Design Competition" (2009) and a Peabody Award in 2012. Since late 2009, there have been free apps for iOS (iPhone, iPad), Android, webOS and Windows Phone 7.
In July 2012, a total of 1300 TED talks had been posted. Every week 5-7 new talks are being published. In January 2009 the then amount of video's had been viewed 50 million times. In June 2011 the amount of views totaled 500 million, and on 13 November 2012, TED reached its billionth video view.
Coe, Julie "TED’s Chris Anderson". Departures.com March 2012.</ref>""
In March 2012, Netflix announced a deal to stream an initial series of 16 two-hour shows, consisting of TEDTalks covering similar subjects, from multiple speakers. The content will be available to subscribers in the U.S., Canada, Latin America, the U.K. and Ireland. Hosted by Jami Floyd, "TED Talks NYC" debuted on "NYC Life" on March 21, 2012. 
Open Translation Program.
TED Open Translation Project started in May 2009, and aims to "out to the 4.5 billion people on the planet who don't speak English," according to TED Curator Chris Anderson. The OTP utilises crowd-based video captioning and subtitling platforms to translate the text of TED videos (with its technology partner dotSUB until May 2012, and recently with open source translation tool Amara). At the time of the launch, 300 translations had been done by 200 volunteer transcribers in 40 languages. In December 2012, more than 32700 translations had been completed by (an all-time total of) 8382 volunteer translators in 93 languages.
The project contributed to a significant increase in international visitors to TED's website, with traffic from outside the US growing 350%, 600% percent growth in Asia, and more than 1000% in South America.
TEDx.
In 2009 TED started granting licenses to third parties to organize independent TED-like events internationally. These TEDx events are prohibited from making profit, although sometimes a fee ($100 max.) can be charged to cover running costs. The licences are free, but franchisees are vetted by TED and events are subject to conditions. Speakers are not paid and they must agree to give TED the right to edit and distribute their presentation under a Creative Commons licence. As at the end of 2012, more than 16,000 talks have been given at more than 5,000 TEDx events in 1,200 cities in 133 countries. In June 2012, five TEDx events on average were being organized every day, in one of 133 countries.
TED Fellows.
TED Fellows were introduced in 2007, during the first TEDAfrica conference in Arusha, Tanzania, where 100 young people were selected from across the continent. Two years later, during TEDIndia, 99 Fellows were recruited, mainly from South Asia. In 2010, the Fellows program was initiated in its present form. For every TED or TEDGlobal conference, 20 Fellows are selected out of more than 1200 applicants; a total of 40 new Fellows a year. Out of the 40 Fellows selected in the previous year, 15 people are chosen each year to participate in the two-year Senior Fellows program (in which they will attend four more conferences). Hence, every year, there are 40 new Fellows plus 30 Senior Fellows from the two previous years.
Acceptance as a Fellow is not based on academic credentials, but mainly on past and current actions, and plans for the future. Besides attending a conference free of charge, each Fellow takes part in a special program with mentoring by experts in the field of spreading ideas, and he or she can give a short talk on the "TED Fellows" or "TED University" stage, the day before the conference starts. Some of these talks are subsequently published on TED.com. Senior Fellows have additional benefits and responsibilities (like hosting a TEDx event for 50+ people).
Controversies and criticism.
TED drew some controversy in 2010 when comedian Sarah Silverman was invited to speak at the conference, and in response to her speech about adopting a "retarded" child, TED organizer Chris Anderson posted to his Twitter account, "I know I shouldn’t say this about one of my own speakers, but I thought Sarah Silverman was god-awful ..." Anderson later deleted his tweet, but Silverman responded via her Twitter account "Kudos to Anderson for making TED an unsafe haven for all! You're a barnacle of mediocrity on Bill Gates' asshole." Anderson apologized for his tweet on his Posterous account, but also wrote "Call me stuffy, but I still think humor about terminally ill 'retarded' kids is an acquired taste ... And not a taste I personally want to acquire."
Nassim Taleb accused TED of intellectual dishonesty and lack of substance in the latest edition of "The Black Swan" (2010). He calls TED a "monstrosity that turns scientists and thinkers into low-level entertainers, like circus performers." Taleb spoke at TED2008. He claimed that the curators did not initially post his talk "warning about the financial crisis" on their website on purely cosmetic grounds.
Sarah Lacy of "BusinessWeek" and "TechCrunch" has criticized TED with claims of elitism. Lacy cites TED's $6,000 ticket price, poor treatment of less important attendees, and such events as a friend being "de-invited to TED after quitting an ostensibly prestigious San Francisco job." As evidence of her claims, independent blogger Robert Scoble described her stance as motivated by jealousy. Lacy did credit TED for moving the event to a larger venue in Long Beach and posting videos of its talks online for free. 
TED attracted controversy when it chose not to link venture capitalist Nick Hanauer's speech at TED University on their website. The speech analysed the top rate of tax versus unemployment and economic equality. In a private email to Hanauer, Chris Anderson commented on his decision, noting: "Nick, I personally share your disgust at the growth in inequality in the US, and would love to have found a way to give people a clearer mindset on the issue, without stoking a tedious partisan rehash of all the arguments we hear every day in the mainstream media. Alas, my judgement is that publishing your talk would not meet that goal." Anderson later pointed out that TED only posts one talk every day, selected from many. "Forbes" Staff writer Bruce Upbin described Hanauer's talk as "shoddy and dumb".
