Willow Camille Reign Smith (October 31, 2000) is an American child actress and pop singer. She is the daughter of Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith, and the younger sister of Jaden Smith. Smith made her acting debut in 2007 in the film "I Am Legend" and later appeared in "" alongside Abigail Breslin. She received a Young Artist Award for her performance.
Apart from her acting she launched a music career in the fall of 2010 with the release of her singles "Whip My Hair", "21st Century Girl", and signing to her current mentor Jay-Z's record label Roc Nation, becoming the youngest artist signed to the label. "Whip My Hair" has peaked at #11 on the "Billboard" Hot 100. The video was nominated for Video of the Year at the BET Awards of 2011.
Personal life.
Willow Smith is the daughter of musician-actor Will Smith and actress Jada Pinkett Smith. She has an older half-brother, Trey Smith, and an older brother, Jaden Smith; both are also child actors. Smith is African-American, and also has West Indian Creole ancestry. Smith and her brothers are youth ambassadors for Project Zambia, which provides assistance for Zambian children orphaned by AIDS in conjunction with Hasbro.
Acting career.
Smith made her acting debut in "I Am Legend" alongside her father. Her next film, ', was released on July 2, 2008. In 2008, she voiced the character of young Gloria in ', alongside her mother as older Gloria.
On January 20, 2011, Will Smith announced he is planning to produce a remake of the famous comic strip "Little Orphan Annie" starring Smith in the title role. Jay-Z is also in talks to provide the music for the film and possibly create brand new songs.
Music career.
2010–present: "Knees and Elbows".
In June 2010, Smith's mother Jada Pinkett Smith announced in an interview on "Lopez Tonight" that Smith would be releasing an album. Smith then released her first single, "Whip My Hair", which went platinum in the US and peaked at number 11. In the UK the single peaked at number 2. Smith soon after announced her next single, "21st Century Girl". After she performed the song on "The Oprah Winfrey Show", she released it the next day on February 3, 2011. The video was released March 9, 2011. Smith opened for Justin Bieber on the European leg of his My World Tour. The single had poor chart performance both in the US and UK. 
On October 6, 2011, "Fireball", a collaboration between Smith and rapper Nicki Minaj, was released. "Fireball" was a commercial failure, failing to chart in any type of music market, except the US R&B chart, charting at 121. and her first song to miss the "Billboard" Hot 100. Smith's producer announced that they were almost finished working on her debut album, and it should be done soon. He also said it has a similar style to "Whip My Hair". The title of the album was later announced to be "Knees and Elbows". It was slated that it would be released around April 2012, but was announced that it will be released later this year. On May 1, 2012, she dropped the "Do it Like Me (Rockstar)" music video out, saying that it was the "First video ever!!!". On July 2, 2012, Smith released "I Am Me" music video at the BET Awards. On July 17, she released her fourth single "I Am Me" via iTunes and Amazon. Later on, she had released a new song called "Sugar and Spice".
