"Bob's Burgers" is an American animated sitcom created by Loren Bouchard for the Fox Broadcasting Company. The series centers on the Belchers – parents Bob and Linda, and their children Tina, Gene, and Louise – who run a hamburger restaurant.
The family was conceived by Bouchard after developing "Home Movies" for UPN.
Since its debut on January 9, 2011, the show has broadcast 31 episodes and the second season started airing on March 11, 2012. While reviews for the first season were mixed, subsequent reviews have been positive. The series premiere, "Human Flesh", drew in 9.38 million viewers, making it the highest-rated series premiere of the season and also finished 9th in the ratings for the week it aired. The first season received an average of approximately 5 million, and it ranked 59th in ratings share, tied with "60 Minutes", "The Middle", and "Outsourced".
The third season premiered on September 30, 2012.
On October 16, 2012, Fox renewed "Bob's Burgers" for a fourth production cycle of 22 episodes.
Plot.
The show centers on the Belcher family, who run a hamburger restaurant. Creator Loren Bouchard said "Bob's Burgers" came about because Fox's animation brand centers mostly on family, but he also wanted to dabble in workplace comedy. The show is said to fill the void created by the conclusion of "King of the Hill", which "Bob's Burgers" executive producer Jim Dauterive worked on for nearly its entire run.
Characters.
The Belcher family are a typical family and run a hamburger restaurant. Bob is the restaurant's owner, and is a father. Linda is Bob's wife. Tina is the oldest child, who helps around Bob's restaurant along with Gene, the only boy, and Louise, the youngest girl.
There are various recurring characters in the series including Jimmy Pesto, owner of a pizzeria and Bob's rival, and his sons Jimmy Jr. (Tina's love interest), and the twins Andy and Olly, who are hyperactive and are friends of Louise. Other recurring characters include Bob's friend Mort, who owns the crematorium next door, and Teddy Francisco, a regular customer at Bob's Burgers.
Production.
Proof of Concept.
The original pilot can be seen on the DVD release of the first season, released on April 17, 2012.
Development.
"Bob's Burgers" first appeared on the development slate at Fox on August 6, 2009. On December 1, 2009, Fox ordered 13 episodes for the first season. On May 17, 2010, Fox placed the series on the primetime slate for the 2010–11 television season. A special preview aired on Thanksgiving on November 25, 2010.
Executive producers.
Creator Loren Bouchard serves as the executive producer, alongside developer Jim Dauterive. They have served as executive producers since the first season.
Writing.
The team of writers includes: Loren Bouchard, Jim Dauterive, Scott Jacobson, Lizzie Molyneux, Wendy Molyneux, Holly Schlesinger, Nora Smith, Steven Davis, Kelvin Yu, Dan Fybel, Rich Rinaldi, Kit Boss, Greg Thompson, and Jon Schroeder. After the writing has been completed, the voice actors read the script as intended, but later are allowed to improvise lines on the spot. The editors and director decide what improvised lines make the final cut.
Voice cast.
"Bob's Burgers" has five main cast members: H. Jon Benjamin, John Roberts, Dan Mintz, Eugene Mirman, and Kristen Schaal. Benjamin voices Bob Belcher, Roberts voices Linda Belcher, Mintz voices Tina Belcher, Mirman voices Gene Belcher, Schaal voices Louise Belcher.
Hallmarks.
Opening sequence.
The opening sequence begins with a burger, after which the Belcher family appears, with their restaurant sporting a "Grand Opening" sign in the background. The restaurant is then shown being damaged in a series of incidents (a fire, an encounter with a fallen utility pole, an invasion of vermin), each time returning with a sign announcing the "Grand Re-Opening", "Grand Re-Re-Opening", and so on. Finally, the view zooms in to the "Bob's Burgers" sign/logo and fades into the start of the episode.
As with two other Fox animated series, "The Simpsons" and "American Dad!", the show has a changing element in the show's opening credits; the store (on the other side of Bob's from Mort's funeral home) changes from one episode to the next. However, during episodes, it is almost always vacant. Additionally, beginning in Season 2, a different company is named on the pest control truck for each episode's opening credits.
Credits sequence.
The credits sequence of Bob's Burgers features the Belcher family at work. The scene is the kitchen of Bob's Burgers drawn with a black outline over a white background, with the credits off to the right hand side.
Daily special.
Every episode features a "Today's Special" on a chalk board on the wall behind the counter. The name of the special is usually a play on words that indicates what comes on the burger (e.g. "It's Fun to Eat at the rYe M C A Burger": Comes with Rye, Mustard, Cheese, and Avocado).
Home media.
The first season of the show is available on the iTunes Store for download and was released on DVD on April 17, 2012. The first season is also available for streaming on Netflix. The first 2 seasons and all episodes are available from Amazon Instant Video, along with season 3 episodes. Note: Season 3 is in progress, the most recent episodes become available with a few days of their TV airing.
Reception and achievements.
Success.
Initial reviews were mixed, with a Metacritic score of 54 out of 100. "The Washington Post" described the show as "pointlessly vulgar and derivatively dull", while Reuters stated that "It's unwise—and unnecessary—to launch an animated sitcom on Fox that appears intent to ape the vulgarity quotient of "Family Guy"." "USA Today" stated that ""Bob's Burgers" isn't very tasty" describing the comedy as just "lop along, stumbling from one tasteless moment to the next" "The New York Times" described the show as having "a lackadaisical vibe; its humor, no matter how anarchic, slides by in a deadpan monotone." The Parents Television Council, a conservative media watchdog group, named two of the shows episodes ("Sheesh! Cab, Bob?" and "The Belchies") as the Worst TV Show of the Week. 
However, as Season 1 progressed and concluded and Season 2 began, critics began giving the series praise. Rowan Kaiser of "The A.V. Club" has recalled, "...the show was amusing, yes, and there was certainly potential, but it took half a dozen episodes before it really began to meet that potential." "Season 2" has a Metacritic of 78 out 100.
"Entertainment Weekly" gave the show an A- grade in its review, remarking that "a comedy this well done is very rare indeed." Ain't It Cool News called "Bob's Burgers" "perhaps the funniest half-hour currently airing on broadcast TV." In its review, CNN called the show "wickedly funny" and said there are "too many highlights to list here." On blogcritics.org, JeromeWetzelTV commented that "hile not preachy, Bob's Burgers is certainly the most wholesome of the Sunday night cartoons. The series is not all about the heart, though. There are plenty of great jokes. For instance, when Gene wins a gold medal in the race, his mother, Linda (John Roberts), wants to have it bronzed. This is just one example of the off-beat brand of humor that Bob's Burgers brings to a night full of the same type of show, setting it apart." Speaking about the show during its second season, The A.V. Club's Rowan Kaiser said "After an uneven start, Bob’s Burgers is becoming one of television’s best comedies!" Since the debut of season two of the series, the show's positive reception has increased.
The AV Club voted Bob's Burgers as the 10th best TV show of 2012.
Accolades.
"Bob's Burgers" was nominated for a Primetime Emmy in 2012 along with fellow FOX shows "The Simpsons, American Dad", Comedy Central's "Futurama" and Nickelodeon's "The Penguins of Madagascar".
Ratings.
After airing, the show became the highest-rated series premiere of the season and also finished 9th in the ratings for the week it aired. Despite this, the ratings went on a slide with Bill Gorman of "TV by the Numbers" calling it a "toss up" for renewal before the series was renewed for a second season which premiered on March 11, 2012.
In popular culture.
On January 6, 2011, some Fatburger locations were re-branded as Bob's Burgers for the day as a promotion. It also offered limited-time offers, such as a free burger giveaway, and a special, "The Thanks a Brunch Burger" on the menu until February 2011. There were also "Bob's Burgers" coupons offered for a free medium FatBurger special. Across the United States, 4 locations were re-branded as Bob's Burgers, in California, New Jersey, Nevada, and Illinois.
In the "Family Guy" episode, "Space Cadet", Chris gets in trouble and his parents come to the principal's office. The principal shows Lois and Peter a picture of Bob Belcher, which was Chris's advanced art project. 
The season 4 premiere episode of "Archer" features a crossover where Bob is revealed to be Sterling Archer (also voiced by H. Jon Benjamin) in a fugue state. The menu board plays on once-amnesiac fictional secret agent Thomas Elphinstone Hambledon in a novel series by Manning Coles.
