January Kristen Jones (born January 5, 1978) is an American actress and model. She is best known for playing Betty Draper on "Mad Men" and Emma Frost in "".
Early life.
January Jones was born and raised in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, the daughter of Karen, who manages a sporting goods store, and Marvin Jones, a coach, gym teacher, and fitness director. She is named after January Wayne, a character in Jacqueline Susann's "Once Is Not Enough". She has two sisters – Jacey and Jina.
Career.
Jones has had supporting roles in "Anger Management" (2003), "Love Actually," and "". In 2005, she appeared as a U.S. border guard's frustrated wife in the film "The Three Burials of Melquiades Estrada" directed by and starring Tommy Lee Jones. In "We Are Marshall" (2006), she played the role of Carol Dawson, wife of football coach William "Red" Dawson.
She had the lead female role in the movie "Love's Enduring Promise" as a pioneer family's oldest child. Her character falls in love with a mysterious man who saves her father's life. She currently appears in the AMC original television drama series "Mad Men" as young suburban housewife and mother Betty Draper Francis. She is also known for her role as Cadence Flaherty, the love interest of both Steve Stifler and Paul Finch in the 2003 comedy "American Wedding", the third installment of the "American Pie" film series.
She appeared in the season 18 "Law & Order" episode "Quit Claim," playing a con artist who matches wits with Assistant District Attorney Michael Cutter, in which she is the lone surviving suspect connected to a real estate scam involving organized crime. She also appeared in "The Boat That Rocked", a British film about offshore pirate radio in the 1960s, renamed "Pirate Radio" for North American release in 2009.
Jones was ranked No.82 on the "Maxim" Hot 100 Women of 2002. She appeared on the cover of "The Hot Issue" of British "GQ" magazine in May 2009.
On November 14, 2009, Jones hosted an episode of "Saturday Night Live" which featured the musical guest The Black Eyed Peas, giving a performance that was met with negative reviews.
In 2011, she starred alongside Liam Neeson and Diane Kruger in the thriller film "Unknown", directed by Jaume Collet-Serra, and portrayed Emma Frost in "".
Personal life.
She announced in "Vanity Fair" in 2009 that she has joined Oceana as a celebrity spokesperson, working to save endangered sharks. Jones dated singer-songwriter Josh Groban from 2003–06.
Jones gave birth to a son, Xander Dane Jones, on September 13, 2011 and took capsules made from her dried placenta (see Human_placentophagy) which, along with a healthy diet and vitamins, she credits with helping her get back to work.
