Good Kid, M.A.A.D City (stylized as good kid, m.A.A.d city) is the second studio album by American hip hop recording artist Kendrick Lamar, released on October 22, 2012, by Top Dawg, Aftermath Entertainment, and Interscope Records. The album serves as Lamar's major label debut after Lamar's signing to Aftermath and Interscope. It was preceded by the release of Kendrick's first official studio album "Section.80" (2011), released exclusively through iTunes independently.
The album was recorded mostly at several studios in California with producers Dr. Dre, Just Blaze, Pharrell Williams, Hit-Boy, Scoop DeVille, and T-Minus, among others. Billed as a "short film by Kendrick Lamar" on the album cover, the concept album follows the story of a teenage Lamar's experiences in the gang lifestyle of his native Compton, California. Upon its release, "Good Kid, M.A.A.D City" received rave reviews from music critics, who praised its thematic scope and Lamar's lyrics.
The album debuted at number two on the "Billboard" 200 chart, selling 242,000 copies in its first week – earning the highest first-week hip hop album sales of 2012 from a male artist, along with the best-selling debut from a male artist of the year. The album generated 2.8 million streams through Spotify, becoming the second highest first week stream total of the year. It became Lamar's first album to enter the UK Albums Chart, peaking at number 16, and entering the UK R&B Albums Chart at number two. It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) and, as of February 2013, has sold 731,000 copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan.
Background.
After the release and success of his 2011 studio album "Section.80", Lamar signed a major label record deal with Interscope and Dr. Dre's Aftermath. He told HipHopDX he did not want to work with high-profile producers, but with those he had established himself with, mainly producers from Top Dawg's in-house production team Digi+Phonics.
In an interview for "XXL", Lamar said that the album would not sound like "Section.80", but will return to his Compton, California roots: "I couldn’t tell you what type of sound or where I’ma be in the next five years as far as music ... Going back to the neighborhood and going to different spots, chilling with my homeboys, put me back in that same space where we used to be, bringing back them thoughts, reminiscing how I was feeling. I got myself right back in that mode and I got inspired by that. So this album won’t sound like "Section.80". Completely nothing like it.”
Lamar also said that the album will showcase the influence of his hometown: "The kid that’s trying to escape that influence, trying his best to escape that influence, has always been pulled back in because of circumstances that be". Before the album title's was officially revealed, fans had already been calling Lamar's major label debut "Good Kid, Mad City" or "Good Kid in a Mad City", as it was a nickname of some sort that Lamar had given himself. The album's title mainly refers to Lamar's childhood innocence and how the notorious city of Compton, California affected that and his life. After keeping the album title's acronym concealed, Lamar later revealed "M.A.A.D" is an acronym with two meanings: ""My Angry Adolescence Divided"" and more importantly ""My Angel's on Angel Dust"", with Lamar stating: "That was me. I got laced. The reason why I don't smoke, and it's in the album. It's in the story. It was just me getting my hands on the wrong thing at the wrong time, being oblivious to it."
Recording and production.
Recording sessions for the album took place at PatchWerk Recording Studios in Atlanta, Encore Studios in Burbank, TDE Red Room in Carson, and "At My Mama's Studio" in Los Angeles. Lamar stated "Good Kid, M.A.A.D City" will sound “nothing” like Section.80. “I couldn’t tell you what type of sound or where I’ma be in the next five years as far as music,” he said. “It’s a big difference from the next project compared to the last. And that’s what happened with this album. Going back to the neighborhood and going to different spots, chilling with my homeboys, put me back in that same space where we used to be, bringing back them thoughts, reminiscing how I was feeling. I got myself right back in that mode and I got inspired by that. So this album won’t sound like Section.80. Completely nothing like it,” he told to XXL. The first track Kendrick and Dr. Dre ever worked on together was the song "Compton".
On August 15, 2012, Lady Gaga announced via Twitter that she had collaborated with Kendrick on a song titled "Partynauseous" for his upcoming album, and that it would be released on September 6, 2012. However, on August 23, 2012, Gaga announced that the song was no longer being released on that date and apologized to fans for the delay. Eventually, it was confirmed that Lady Gaga would not be featured on the album due to timing issues. Another collaboration she did included a verse and the hook on "Bitch Don't Kill My Vibe" which on the album just features Kendrick. Kendrick later expressed surprise and happiness that Gaga released her version of the song as it showed confidence in her and his work together.
Music and lyrics.
"Good Kid, M.A.A.D City" has a low-key, downbeat production, with atmostpheric beats and subtle, indistinct hooks. It eschews contemporary hip hop tastes, and generally features tight bass measures, subtle background vocals, and light piano. Writers draw comparisons of the music to OutKast's 1998 album "Aquemini". Andrew Nosnitsky of "Spin" cites the music's "closest point of reference" as "the cold spaciousness of "ATLiens"-era OutKast, but as the record progresses, that sound sinks slowly into the fusionist mud of those sprawling and solemn mid-2000s Roots albums." Sasha Frere-Jones of "The New Yorker" finds its use of "smooth" music as a backdrop for "rough" scenarios to be analogous to Dr. Dre's G-funk during the early 1990s, but adds that "Lamar often sounds like Drake ... whose various dreamy styles have very little to do with the legacy of the West." Okayplayer's Marcus Moore writes that its "expansive and brooding" instrumentals eschew "California's glossy West Coast funk" for a "Dungeon Family aesthetic."
Lyrically, the album chronicles Lamar's experiences in his native Compton, California and its harsh realities, in a nonlinear narrative. The songs address issues such as economic disenfranchisement, retributive gang violence, and downtrodden women, while analyzing their residual effects on individuals and families. Lamar introduces various characters and internal conflicts, including the contrast of his homesickness and love for Compton with the city's plagued condition. Del F. Cowie of "Exclaim!" observes a "transformation" by Lamar's character "from a boisterous, impressionable, girl-craving teenager to more spiritual, hard-fought adulthood, irrevocably shaped by the neighbourhood and familial bonds of his precarious environment." Slant Magazine's Mark Collett writes that Lamar executes the character's transition by "tempering the hedonistic urges of West Coast hip-hop with the self-reflective impulses of the East Coast." David Amidon of PopMatters views that the album provides a "sort of semi-autobiographical character arc", while MSN Music's Robert Christgau writes that Lamar "softspokenly" enacts a "rap-versus-real dichotomy".
The album features naturalistic, vérité-like skits that dramatize the characters' limitations. Jon Caramanica of "The New York Times" finds them to be a part of the album's "narrative strategy", with "prayers and conversations and different voices and recollections and interludes, all in service of one overarching story: Mr. Lamar's tale of ducking Compton's rougher corners to find himself artistically." Pitchfork Media's Jayson Greene feels that they reinforce the album's theme of "the grounding power of family", interpreting "family and faith" to be "the fraying tethers holding Lamar back from the chasm of gang violence that threatens to consume him."
Lamar exhibits a tempered delivery on the album, and raps with dense narratives, internal rhyme, double and triple time flow, and multiple voices for different characters. Music journalist Jody Rosen characterizes him as "a storyteller, not a braggart or punch-line rapper, setting spiritual yearnings and moral dilemmas against a backdrop of gang violence and police brutality."
Promotion.
Singles.
The album's first single, "The Recipe", was released on April 3, 2012. The song features his mentor, record producer and fellow rapper Dr. Dre and was produced by Scoop DeVille. It peaked at number 38 on Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs and at number 3 on Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles. Kendrick shot a video for it featuring Dr. Dre at a mansion in Los Angeles in May 2012. He also claimed the video will have a feel of 2Pac's California Love clip. 
In the week of the album's release, "Backseat Freestyle" debuted on the "Billboard" Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart at number 106. It was later announced to be released as the third single in the United Kingdom on January 7, 2013. The music video was released on January 2, 2013. Lamar's father appears in the video. "Poetic Justice" was released third single in North America, featuring Drake and production from Scoop DeVille. Before released as single, the song debuted at number 76 on "Billboard" Hot 100. Poetic Justice was released on October 17, 2012. The song is set to impact American rhythmic contemporary radio on January 15, 2013.
Short film.
After titling the album "a short film" by Kendrick Lamar, in an interview with GQ he said "he plans on doing a short film to bring his story to life." He also expressed interest in directing this short film too. Lamar also threw out names like Tristan Wilds to portray him, Taraji P. Henson (as his mother) and Rihanna (as Sherane) as potential names he'd want to have if he could choose anybody to work with.
Critical reception.
In a mixed review, Hazel Sheffield of "NME" asserted that the album "might lack the raw appeal of" "Section.80", "but it's a big-budget reminder that hasn't forgotten his roots." Alex Macpherson of "The Guardian" criticized "Lamar's depiction of downtrodden women" as "unnecessarily prurient and unconvincing", but praised his "ability to pull the listener inside the action while retaining an alienated detachment". Although he observed "some degree of self-indulgence", Andrew Nosnitsky of "Spin" found the album's production "surprisingly cohesive" and commented that Lamar "manages to hold everything together in the midst of such chaos through sheer craftsmanship." Jody Rosen of "Rolling Stone" felt that the album "warrants a place in that storied lineage" of "Seventies blaxploitation soundtracks and Nineties gangsta-rap blaxploitation revivals". Greg Kot of the "Chicago Tribune" commended Lamar for giving "gangsta tropes ... a twist, or sometimes upend[ing them completely", and wrote that the album "brims with comedy, complexity and the many voices in Kendrick Lamar's head." Robert Christgau of MSN Music felt that its "commitment to drama has musical drawbacks", but stated, "the atmospheric beats Dr. Dre and his hirelings lay under the raps and choruses establish a musical continuity that shores up a nervous flow that's just what Lamar's rhymes need."
Accolades.
"Good Kid, M.A.A.D City" appeared on several year-end top albums lists by music critics. It was named the best album of 2012 by BBC, "Complex", "Fact", "New York", and Pitchfork Media. The album was also ranked number two by "Billboard", the "Chicago Tribune", MTV, "Spin", and "Time", number four by "Filter", Jon Pareles of "The New York Times", and Ann Powers of NPR, number five by "The Guardian", number six by "Rolling Stone", and number eight by "Entertainment Weekly". In December 2012, "Complex" also named "good kid, m.A.A.d city" one of the 25 classic albums of the last 10 years. The magazine and Pitchfork Media also ranked its album cover as the best of 2012.
Commercial performance.
The album debuted at number two on the US "Billboard" 200 chart, with first-week sales of 242,000 copies. In terms of online streaming the album generated 2.8 million streams through the popular music streaming service Spotify, becoming the second highest first week stream total of the year behind "Babel" by Mumford & Sons. The album entered the UK Albums Chart at number 16 on October 28, 2012, as well as entering at number 2 on the UK R&B Albums Chart. In its second week it sold 63,000 copies. In its third week it sold 41,000 copies. In its fourth week it sold 33,000 copies. In its fifth week it sold 49,000 copies. In its sixth week it sold 29,000 copies. In its seventh week it sold 25,000 copies bringing its total to 481,000 copies. On December 14, 2012, the album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), for shipments of 500,000 copies in the United States. As of February 20, 2013, it has sold 731,000 copies, according to Nielsen SoundScan.
Following the album's release, one song entered the "Billboard" Hot 100; "M.A.A.d City" featuring MC Eiht at number 94. Complex named the song number 25 on their list of the best 50 songs of 2012. 
Controversy.
On October 23, 2012, after receiving much acclaim from the hip hop community, outspoken rapper Shyne took to twitter to run down on the album calling it trash and the beats horrible. Schoolboy Q and rapper Game quickly took offense to this with the latter calling Kendrick non-confrontational in that he wouldn't respond to Shyne. Kendrick had responded to Shyne's comments on October 26, saying that he wasn't a sensitive person and was unfazed. In addition, his album wasn't necessarily a "classic" as some have called it but "classic worthy" if enough time passed. Kendrick also referred to it in his song "The Jig Is Up" saying "I pray to God this beat good enough for Shyne". After Shyne stood by his comments and called Game his "little son", the rapper responded with a freestyle dissing Shyne titled "Cough Up a Lung". Shyne then responded with his own diss towards Game in "Psalms 68 (Guns & Moses)."
Track listing.
 (add.) Additional production (co.) Co-producer
Personnel.
Credits for "Good Kid, M.A.A.D City" adapted from Allmusic.
