Dota 2 is an upcoming multiplayer online battle arena video game being developed by Valve Corporation and the stand-alone sequel to the popular "Defense of the Ancients" mod for ' and its expansion pack, '. Formally announced on October 13, 2010, via "Game Informer", the game is currently available for early test access purchase, with a free-to-play business model when released. "Dota 2" will be released via download by Valve's content delivery platform Steam, on which the game has been developed to run exclusively for both release and update delivery. "Dota 2" will run on Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X.
"Dota 2" consists of session-based online multiplayer activity, with the primary objective of each match being for teams to destroy their opposing team's fortified stronghold. Each player controls a player character called a "hero", who is given the responsibility of participating in team combat, which generally takes place along a series of lanes that connect their opposing bases, lined with defensive towers. The gameplay elements are largely incorporated from "Defense of the Ancients", with the game's lead designer, IceFrog, being the longest-serving and current developer of the "Warcraft III" mod.
Gameplay.
"Dota 2" combines the real-time strategy element of traditional top-down perspective, while also incorporating leveling and itemization functions of a role-playing video game. Players are pitted against each other as two distinct factions called the Radiant and the Dire. The Radiant is a faction based at the southwest corner of the map, while the Dire is a faction based at the northeast corner. Players assume the role of one of ninety-eight "heroes" – strategically powerful units with special abilities, who, through combat experience, may progress to a maximum level of twenty-five. The heroes' methods of combat are heavily influenced by their primary property, which can be physical strength, agility, or intelligence. The basic setup of "Dota 2" places two strongholds containing critical structures called "Ancients" at opposing ends of a geographically balanced map. These bases are connected by three main paths (referred to as "lanes"), which are guarded by defensive towers and groups of weaker units commonly referred to as "creeps" periodically spawned, which traverse their lanes, attacking enemy units and structures upon sight. Players are split into two teams, each consisting of up to five players, to compete as the primary defenders for each Ancient.
The overall objective of each match is to battle through the opposing force's defenses, in order to arrive at and destroy the opponents' Ancient. Because "Dota 2" is highly team-oriented, players must coordinate with their teams in order to achieve victory. The towers and stronghold defenses are invulnerable to attacks so long as the towers nearest to the enemy side still stand.
The currency of the game is gold, which is granted periodically, but typically accumulates at a more practical level by killing enemy units, which grants a distributed amount of gold to the killer's team, with the greater portion being retained by the killer themselves. A common technique utilized to prevent the opposing faction from accumulating gold from a kill is "denying", which constitutes killing an allied unit or destroying an allied structure and can be employed when said unit or structure is close to death or destruction. Players also gain experience, which accumulates to gain higher levels. The greatest portion of gold and experience originates from destroying higher priority forces, such as enemy heroes and towers.
Featured along the Dire side of the river is a "boss" called "Roshan". Typically, multiple team members are required for killing Roshan, who drops powerful items. Following his death, Roshan respawns after the completion of a cooldown timer.
Development.
Concept.
According to Valve's founder and managing director, Gabe Newell, the company's investment in "Dota" was sparked from the collective interest of several veteran employees, including "Team Fortress" designer Robin Walker, programmer Adrian Finol and project manager Erik Johnson, all of whom had attempted to partake in team play at a competitive level. As their interest in the game intensified, they began corresponding with "DotA"s developer, IceFrog, over a series of emails, inquiring what long-term plans he had for the mod. The emails eventually culminated in an invitation from Erik Johnson, offering IceFrog a tour of the company's facilities and as a result, hired him to develop a sequel. The first public notification regarding the development of "Dota 2" was a blog post made by IceFrog on October 5, 2009, stating that he would be leading a team at Valve. No official word was given until its official announcement on October 13, 2010, when the website of magazine "Game Informer" revealed specific details about the game and its development, creating traffic on the website to the extent of crashing their servers. Erik Johnson addressed the confusion over the written form of the brand name, citing it as ""Dota,"" rather than ""DotA,"" due to its increasing context as a concept, rather than an acronym for ""Defense of the Ancients"".
Shortly following a by IceFrog on PlayDotA.com, the "Defense of the Ancients" official website, elaborating upon his recruitment by Valve, a trademark claim was filed by the company on August 6, 2010. Steve "Guinsoo" Feak, the original developer of the "DotA Allstars" variant and Steve "Pendragon" Mescon, the creator of dota-allstars.com, both employees of Riot Games, expressed their concern that Valve did not maintain the right to a trademark for the "DotA" name, due to their views that it was a community asset. On August 9, 2010, Mescon filed an opposing trademark for "DOTA" on behalf of DotA-Allstars, LLC, (a subsidiary of Riot Games), in order to "protect the work that dozens of authors have done to create the game". Rob Pardo, the executive vice president of Blizzard Entertainment, the developer of "", expressed a similar concern, explaining that the "DotA" name was an asset of the "Warcraft III" community. Blizzard acquired DotA-Allstars, LLC from Riot Games in 2011, to enforce their claim as not only the creators of the "World Editor", but to have the rights from the company that made a claim to the mod previously. During the game's unveiling at Gamescom 2011, Gabe Newell explained Valve's perspective on acquiring the trademark, which was that IceFrog desired to develop a direct sequel to "DotA" and that players would likely recognize it as such. Blizzard filed an opposition against Valve in November 2011, citing the "Warcraft III World Editor" and their ownership of DotA-Allstars, LLC as a proper claim to the franchise. On May 11, 2012, Blizzard and Valve announced that the dispute had been settled, with Valve retaining the commercial franchising rights to the term ""Dota"", while Blizzard would change the name of their map, "Blizzard DOTA", to ""Blizzard All-stars"".
Design.
As the sequel to "Defense of the Ancients", the development cycle of "Dota 2" has been concentrated primarily upon fully transferring the aspects of its predecessor to the Source engine, as well as building upon the core gameplay. "Dota 2" recreates the factions of the Sentinel and the Scourge from "Defense of the Ancients" with the Radiant and the Dire, with cornerstone features of the characters' alignment reserved, while ultimately re-establishing the familiar qualities in a new form. "Warcraft III" composer Jason Hayes was contracted by Valve to collaborate with Tim Larkin for developing "Dota 2"s musical score. Character names, abilities, items, map design and other fine details remain virtually unchanged, but the integration of these features to the Source engine allows for continued, scaled development to bypass limitations from the "Warcraft III World Editor". Further support for the competitive experience is developed through the use of "Dota" account matchmaking, which scales a player's automated placement in accordance to their estimated skill level. Non-computed and unranked practice matches are made available through the use of either human players, AI bots or solo games. In the debut Q&A, IceFrog stated that "Dota 2" will serve as the long-term continuation of the mod, building upon the original gameplay without making too many significant core changes that may alter the overall experience. According to Valve, the company contracted major contributors for "DotA"s popularity to assist in developing "Dota 2", including the mod's original creator known as "Eul", as well as loading screen artist Kendrick Lim of Imaginary Friends Studios. IceFrog has stated that in order to further emphasize "Dota 2"'s premise as a continuation of "DotA", contributions would remain consistent from sources outside the main development team.
To accommodate "Dota 2", Valve has worked to upgrade the Source engine to include new features, such as high-end cloth modeling, improved global lighting, as well as improvements to Steamworks, which includes a wider expansion of utilities, such as player guides and the coaching system. "Dota 2" utilizes Valve's Steam software in order to provide social and community functionality for the game. Steam accounts save personal files and settings on the online accounts using the Steam Cloud. "Dota 2" also features multiple options of live spectating, in tradition of competitive Valve titles. The game host has the option to fill open slots with AI bots. Another option allows the host to determine if AI bots or other human players will be used to fill the vacated slot of a disconnected player. Valve is introducing a coaching system to allow for more experienced players to tutor newer players. The game will also feature tutorial sessions for further assisting players to mount the steep learning curve before competitive play. In addition to the online platform established by Steam, "Dota 2" will support local area network (LAN) multiplayer connectivity.
To coincide with "Dota 2"'s public debut at Gamescom 2011, Valve opened the sign-up for invites for the beta, with invites being sent out following the conclusion of Gamescom. During the debut, Gabe Newell revealed that "Dota 2" would likely ship in 2012, despite original plans for a full release in late 2011. On September 23, 2011, Valve scrapped its previous development and release plans for "Dota 2", which would have kept the game in its beta phase for over a year, in order to accommodate the full transfer of creative materials developed for the original "DotA". The new plan described by IceFrog looked to release the "Dota 2" beta at the nearest possible date and to implement the remaining heroes afterwards. Simultaneously, Valve announced that the non-disclosure agreement for the beta was being lifted, allowing testers to discuss the game and their experiences publicly.
Beginning with the second edition of The Defense tournament hosted by joinDOTA in June 2012, Valve implemented the tournament support feature. Tournaments may be available for spectating in-game via the purchase of a tournament pass in the Dota Store, which provides an alternative to viewing live streams online. This feature supports previous and live matches from tournaments. In addition, teams may be formally identified by the game's software, which automatically recognizes games with players as being team matches and catalogs them as such.
Free-to-play.
As part of a plan to create a social network based around "Dota 2", Gabe Newell announced in April of 2012 that the game would be free-to-play, with an accentuation on player contributions to the community. On June 1, 2012, the "Dota" development team at Valve formally confirmed that the game would be free-to-play with no added cost for having the full roster of heroes and item inventory readily available. Income for "Dota 2" would be maintained, however, through the exclusively cosmetic "Dota Store", where players could purchase in-game items. Until the game's release, players may still purchase an early access bundle, which includes the game, along with several in-game cosmetic items. The "Dota Store" is composed of custom creations developed by Valve, as well as products from the "Steam Workshop", which is a system in which users may submit creations for review by Valve and if successful, would be permanently incorporated into "Dota 2". The market model was fashioned after "Team Fortress 2", which became successful in June 2011 and had reimbursed cosmetic designers with $3.5 million of income as of the free-to-play announcement.
Publishing and distribution.
In order to abide by the standards set by the economic legislation of individual countries, Valve has opted to utilize nationally-based developers for publishing. On October 19, 2012, the leading Beijing-based video game developer and publisher, Perfect World, announced the acquisition of the exclusive rights to publish and distribute "Dota 2" in China. On November 9, 2012, a similar deal was made with the Tokyo-based developer and publisher, Nexon Co. Ltd., with publishing and distribution for Japan and South Korea being provided by the company.
Cultural impact.
Reception.
Following the first public showing of "Dota 2", the game won IGN's public opinion-based People's Choice Award, defeating other anticipated games, including "Battlefield 3", "Diablo III", "" and "Guild Wars 2". In December of 2012, "PC Gamer" listed "Dota 2" as a nominee for the 2012 Game of the Year award, as well as the best electronic sports title of the year.
Professional competition.
In a 2008 article of video game industry website Gamasutra, editor Michael Walbridge cited "Defense of the Ancients" as the most popular mod in the world, as well as one of the most popular competitive titles, with its strongest presence in Asia, Europe and North America. To ensure the transition of "DotA" players to "Dota 2", Valve invited and sponsored 16 of the most accomplished teams to compete and showcase the game's capabilities with its public debut at The International, a global championship hosted at Gamescom 2011 in Cologne, Germany, with a grand prize of one million dollars. The International became an annual championship tournament, with the venue changing to Seattle, Washington, United States, the following year. Erik Johnson commented in an interview that the implementation of the game's LAN feature would be intended to promote smaller, independent competitions and local tournaments.
Following the inaugural event of The International, several electronic sports tournaments began to transition from "DotA" to "Dota 2", including the Electronic Sports World Cup, which is noted as being one of the most internationally-convergent competitions that maintained "DotA" a cornerstone title since 2008. DreamHack, the world's largest computer festival, would also support "Dota 2" in 2011, following a year without support for the original, on account of other competing multiplayer online battle arena titles, including "Heroes of Newerth" and "League of Legends". By the end of its first year in its beta phase, "Dota 2" had become one of the highest-paying eSport titles of 2011, second only to "StarCraft II". "Dota 2" was announced as an official title for the World Cyber Games annual event, beginning with the 2012 qualifiers at Gamescom. Beginning in 2013, a seasonal tournament for "Dota 2" called the RaidCall EMS One was debuted by the Electronic Sports League. In conjuction with a tournament with identical precedents for "", the tournament serves as not only the inaugural major tournament for the Electronic Sports League, but also the largest independent tournament for either game to date.
