Mass Effect is a series of science fiction action role-playing third-person shooter video games developed by the Canadian company BioWare and released for the Xbox 360, PlayStation 3 and Microsoft Windows, with the third installment also released on the Wii U. The first game in the trilogy centers on a player-created character named Commander Shepard and his or her mission to save the galaxy from a race of mechanical beings known as the Reapers, and their followers, including Saren Arterius. The first game sees Shepard facing Sovereign, a Reaper left as a vanguard, who plans to allow the Reaper fleet currently hibernating in extra-galactic dark space to invade the Milky Way, and destroy all sentient organic life, continuing a mysterious cycle of destruction. The second game takes place two years later, and sees Shepard battling the Collectors, an alien race abducting entire human colonies in a plan to help the Reapers return to the Milky Way. The third and final game in the trilogy (but possibly not the final game in the series as BioWare has expressed interest in an additional game) centers on the final battle against the Reapers.
The series has been a major critical and financial success. All three games have received critical acclaim for their storyline, characters, romances, voice acting, choices and the depth of the galaxy. Video game website GamesRadar called "Mass Effect" the best new franchise of the generation, saying that the galaxy was so well-constructed that it felt like a decades-old franchise and that it represented "a high-water mark for video games as a story-telling medium."
Games.
A trilogy of games has been released, each continuing the previous game's story in chronological order. The "Mass Effect" series combines action role-playing game elements, with the main series games being in third-person perspective. The protagonist can use two AI-controlled squad members in battle, which usually consist of members he or she has recruited from various places and for various reasons, and taken onto the "Normandy", Shepard's starship. The player could make perspective decisions depending upon the situation. At these times, the player has multiple sets of dialogue choices with which to respond to NPCs, separated by tone. Starting from "Mass Effect 2", the player can interrupt cut-scenes calmly or aggressively. The games often have various mini-games in them as well, such as drinking, dancing and romancing characters. A fourth major game has been rumoured at by tweets by Casey Hudson, as he asked "We're in early stages of designing a completely new "Mass Effect" game. What would you want to see in it?"
Main trilogy.
"Mass Effect" (2007).
The first game in the series was originally created as an exclusive title for the Xbox 360 but was later ported to Microsoft Windows by Demiurge Studios, and to the PlayStation 3 by Edge of Reality. The game focuses on the protagonist, Commander Shepard, and his/her quest to stop the rogue Spectre Saren Arterius from leading an army of geth to conquer the galaxy. During pursuit of Saren, Shepard learns of a far greater threat in the form of the Reapers. Saren has been mentally enslaved by the Reaper vanguard Sovereign, sent into Citadel Space to initiate the purge of all advanced sentient life in the galaxy, a cycle repeated by the Reapers every 50,000 years. "Mass Effect" was received with critical acclaim by many industry reviewers, and has garnered a large fan-following.
"Mass Effect 2" (2010).
The second main game in the series was released on January 26, 2010 in North America and January 29 in Europe. A great deal of secrecy surrounded the game prior to launch, with few details emerging other than Casey Hudson, Project Director for BioWare, stating that "players should keep their save files, because decisions made by the player in the first game will continue to have influences on their character in the sequel." The game takes place two years after the events of "Mass Effect". Human colonies are being attacked, their colonists disappearing without a trace. The game's protagonist, Commander Shepard, is forced into an uneasy alliance with the pro-Human paramilitary organization, Cerberus, in an effort to discover the cause. Evidence emerges pointing to the 'Collectors', an advanced, enigmatic race of insect-like humanoids. Adding to the threat is the revelation that the Collectors are working for the Reapers. Shepard sets out on a "suicide mission" to stop the Collectors, accompanied by a hand-picked team of soldiers, assassins, mercenaries, and specialists. "Mass Effect 2" has received overwhelming critical praise since its release, for its characters, storyline, voice acting, and refined combat and gameplay with many critics calling it a major improvement over the original and an easy Game of the Year contender despite its January release. At Gamescom 2010, it was announced that a PlayStation 3 version would become available, which was released on January 18, 2011.
"Mass Effect 3" (2012).
The third and final installment in the "Mass Effect" trilogy, the game was released on March 6, 2012. Casey Hudson commented that "Mass Effect 3" "will be easier develop because we don't have to worry about continuity into the next one." However, decisions will still be imported from the two previous titles to "Mass Effect 3", as to keep continuity within the series. In the final chapter of the trilogy, the Reapers have returned in force, and have begun their purge of the galaxy, attacking the human home world of Earth. During this attack Commander Shepard is on Earth and forced to flee. After fleeing Earth Commander Shepard must hurry and rally the advanced races of the galaxy to make one final stand, not only to save Earth, but also to break a cycle that has continued for millions of years. Casey Hudson stated in an interview at the Consumer Electronics Show that "Mass Effect 3" would complete the story arc of Commander Shepard, and would pull in over 1,000 variables from "Mass Effect" and "Mass Effect 2" to shape how players experience the final chapter. The first official trailer was unveiled on December 11, 2010 during the Spike TV Video Game Awards.
"Mass Effect" Trilogy Edition.
On September 26, 2012, BioWare announced the "Mass Effect Trilogy Edition", a re-release of all three games in one pack. The bundle included a new premium foil box featuring artwork of Commander Shepard, and the multiplayer component of "Mass Effect 3" was still available. The pack was released on November 6, 2012 for Xbox 360 and Microsoft Windows, and on December 4, 2012 for the PlayStation 3 (coinciding with the PlayStation Network release of the first game).
Future of the franchise.
On November 12, 2012, BioWare announced that they are working on a new "Mass Effect" project and that it would use the Frostbite Engine 2, much like "Dragon Age III".
The game will be produced in Montréal.
According to BioWare community manager Chris Priestly, BioWare does not want people to refer to the next game as "Mass Effect 4". 
This statement was followed up by BioWare Edmonton chief Yanick Roy. 
Expanded Universe.
Action figures.
Two series of action figures were released by DC Direct and Big Fish Toys for "Mass Effect 2" and "Mass Effect 3". Series one included action figures of Commander Shepard, Grunt, Tali, and Thane. Series two included Garrus, Legion, Miranda, and Mordin. Each highly detailed figure features game-accurate accessories and can be found in game and hobby shops and various online retailers. The figures tied to "Mass Effect 3" include bonus downloadable content, which is exclusive and different for each character.
Characters.
Main game series characters.
Note: Some characters may or may not appear in "Mass Effect 3", depending on their fate in the previous games. Some of the characters in "Mass Effect 2" only appear if the player has installed the relevant downloadable content (DLC).
Reception.
All three major installments of the "Mass Effect" trilogy have been met with commercial success as well as critical acclaim. The series is highly regarded for its narrative, character development, voice acting, universe and emphasis on player choice affecting the experience. The story is often cited for its cinematic nature and its emotional resonance, having been compared to "Star Wars" and "The Lord of the Rings".
The ending of "Mass Effect 3" received negative feedback by many fans of the series, due to the lack of closure and new plot elements being introduced. As a result, several groups, such as "Retake Mass Effect 3", were created to convince BioWare to rewrite the ending, leading to the release of the Extended Cut DLC.
