The International Bank Account Number (IBAN) is an internationally agreed means of identifying bank accounts across national borders with a reduced risk of propagating transcription errors. It was originally adopted by the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS), and later adopted as an international standard under ISO 13616:1997. The current standard is ISO 13616:2007, which indicates SWIFT as the formal registrar. Initially developed to facilitate payments within the European Union, it has now also been implemented by most European countries and many other countries, especially in the Middle East and in the Caribbean. 
The IBAN consists of up to 34 alphanumeric characters: first the two-letter ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country code, then two check digits, and finally a country-specific Basic Bank Account Number (BBAN). The check digits enable a sanity check of the bank account number to confirm its integrity even before submitting a transaction. The BBAN format is decided by each national banking community under the restriction that it must be of a fixed length of case-insensitive alphanumeric characters. It includes the domestic bank account number, branch identifier, and potential routing information.
Background.
Before IBAN, differing national standards for bank account identification (i.e., bank, branch, routing codes, and account number) were confusing for some users. This often led to necessary routing information being missing from payments. Furthermore, routing information as specified by ISO 9362 does not contain check digits, so simple errors of transcription were not detectable and it was not possible for a sending bank to validate the routing information prior to submitting the payment. Routing errors caused delayed payments and incurred extra costs to the sending and receiving banks and often to intermediate routing banks as well.
In 1997, to overcome these difficulties, the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) published ISO 13616:1997. This proposal had a degree of flexibility which the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) believed would make it unworkable and they produced a "slimmed down" version of the standard which, amongst other things, permitted only upper case letters and required that the IBAN for each country have a fixed length. ISO 13616:1997 was subsequently withdrawn and replaced by ISO 13626:2003. The standard was revised again in 2007 when it was split into two parts. ISO 13616-1:2007 "specifies the elements of an international bank account number (IBAN) used to facilitate the processing of data internationally in data interchange, in financial environments as well as within and between other industries" but "does not specify internal procedures, file organization techniques, storage media, languages, etc. to be used in its implementation". ISO 13616-2:2007 describes "the Registration Authority (RA) responsible for the registry of IBAN formats that are compliant with ISO 13616-1 the procedures for registering ISO 13616-compliant IBAN formats". The official IBAN registrar under ISO 13616-2:2007 is SWIFT.
IBAN imposes a flexible but regular format sufficient for account identification and contains validation information to avoid errors of transcription. It carries all the routing information needed to get a payment from one bank to another wherever it may be; it contains all the key bank account details such as Bank Identifier Codes, branch codes (known as sort codes in the UK and Ireland) and account numbers and it contains "check digits" which can be validated at source according to a single standard procedure. Where used, IBANs have reduced trans-national money transfer errors to under 0.1% of total payments.
Practicalities.
The check digits enable the sending bank (or its customer) to perform a sanity check of the routing destination and account number from a single string of data at the time of data entry. This check is guaranteed to detect any instances where a single character has been omitted, duplicated, mistyped or where two characters have been transposed. Thus routing and account number errors are virtually eliminated.
Permitted IBAN characters are the digits "0" to "9" and the 26 upper case Latin alphabetic characters "A" to "Z". This applies even in countries (e.g., Israel) where these characters are not used in the national language.
Features.
The underlying rules for IBANs is that the account-servicing financial institution should issue an IBAN, as there are a number of areas where different IBANs could be generated from the same account and branch numbers that would satisfy the generic IBAN validation rules. In particular cases where 00 is a valid check digit, 97 will not be a valid check digit, likewise if 01 is a valid check digit, 98 will not be a valid check digit, similarly with 02 and 99.
The UN CEFACT TBG5 has published a free IBAN validation service in 32 languages for all 57 countries that have adopted the IBAN standard. They have also published the Javascript source code of the verification algorithm.
A similar English language IBAN checker which is restricted to ECBS member country bank accounts is available on their website.
Algorithms.
Validating the IBAN.
An IBAN is validated by converting it into an integer and performing a basic "mod-97" operation (as described in ISO 7064) on it. If the IBAN is valid, the remainder equals 1. The algorithm of IBAN validation is as follows: 
If the remainder is 1, the check digit test is passed and the IBAN might be valid.
Generating IBAN check digits.
According to the European Committee for Banking Standards (ECBS) "generation of the IBAN shall be the exclusive responsibility of the bank/branch servicing the account". The ECBS document replicates part of the ISO/IEC 7064:2003 standard as a method for generating check digits in the range 02 to 98. Check digits in the ranges 00 to 96, 01 to 97, and 03 to 99 will also provide validation of an IBAN, but the standard is silent as to whether or not these ranges may be used.
Modulo operation on IBAN.
Any computer programming language or software package that is used to compute "D" mod "97" directly must have the ability to handle integers of more than 30 digits. In practice, this can only be done by software that either supports arbitrary-precision arithmetic or that can handle 128 bit integers, features that are often not standard. If the application software in use does not provide the ability to handle integers of this size, the modulo operation can be performed in a piece-wise manner (as is the case with the UN CEFACT TBG5 Javascript program). 
The result of the final calculation in step 2 will be "D" mod 97 = "N" mod "97".
Example of IBAN check digit test.
In this example, the above algorithm for "D" mod 97 will be applied to "D" = 3214282912345698765432161182. (The digits are colour-coded to aid the description below.) If the result is one, the IBAN corresponding to "D" passes the check digit test. 
From step 8, the final result is "D" mod 97 = 1 and the IBAN has passed this check digit test.
Adoption.
International bank transactions use either an IBAN or the current ISO 9362 Bank Identifier Code system (BIC or SWIFT code) in conjunction with the BBAN.
The banks of most countries in Europe publish account numbers using both the IBAN format as well as the nationally recognised identifiers – this being mandatory within the European Economic Area. In addition, the banks in many other countries including most states of the Middle East, North Africa and the Caribbean have implemented the IBAN format for account identification.
Banks in the British dependencies (except Gibraltar and the Crown Dependencies) do not use the IBAN, presumably due to internal banking regulatory issues. Banks in the Dutch West Indies also do not use the IBAN. Some banks outside Europe may not recognize IBAN, though this is expected to diminish with time. Non-European banks usually accept IBANs for accounts in Europe, although they might not treat IBANs differently from other foreign bank account numbers. In particular, they might not check the IBAN's validity prior to sending the transfer.
Banks in the United States do not use IBAN as account numbers for US accounts. Any adoption of the IBAN standard by US banks would likely be initiated by ANSI ASC X9, the US financial services standards development organization, but to date it has not done so. However a Working Group (WBAB20) was established as an X9 subcommittee to generate an IBAN construction for US Bank accounts. 
Canadian financial institutions have not adopted IBAN and use bank transit numbers issued by the Canadian Payments Association for domestic transfers, and SWIFT for international transfers. There is no formal governmental or private sector regulatory requirement in Canada for the major banks to use IBAN.
Financial institutions in Australia and New Zealand do not use IBAN. They use Bank State Branch codes for domestic transfers and SWIFT for international transfers.
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA).
The IBAN designation scheme was chosen as the foundation for electronic straight-through processing in the European Economic Area. The European Parliament mandated that a bank charge needs to be the same amount for domestic credit transfers as for cross-border credit transfers regulated in decision 2560/2001 (updated in 924/2009). This regulation took effect as of 2003. Only payments in euro up to €12,500 to a bank account designated by its IBAN were covered by the regulation.
The Euro Payments regulation has been the foundation for the decision to create a Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The European Central Bank has created the TARGET2 interbank network that unifies the technical infrastructure of the 26 central banks of the European Union (although Sweden and the UK have opted-out). SEPA is a self-regulatory initiative by the banking sector of Europe as represented in the European Payments Council (EPC). The European Union made the scheme mandatory through the Payment Services Directive published in 2007. Since January 2008, all countries must support SEPA credit transfer, and SEPA direct debit must be supported since November 2009. The regulation on SEPA payments increases the charge cap (same price for domestic payments as for cross-border payments) to €50,000.
With a further decision of the European Parliament, the IBAN scheme for bank accounts shall fully replace the domestic numbering schemes until 31 December 2012. On 16 December 2010, the European Commission published proposed regulations that will make IBAN support mandatory for domestic credit transfer by 2013 and for domestic direct debit by 2014 (with a 12 and 24 months transition period respectively). Some countries have already replaced their traditional bank account scheme by IBAN. This includes Switzerland where IBAN was introduced for national credit transfer on 1 January 2006 and the support for the old bank account numbers has not been required from 1 January 2010.
Based on a 20 December 2011 memorandum, the EU parliament resolved the mandatory dates for the adoption of the IBAN on 14 February 2012. From 1 February 2014, all national systems for credit transfer and direct debit must be abolished and replaced by an IBAN-based system. Moreover, the usage of the BIC along with the IBAN may be dropped no later than 1 February 2014 for national transactions, and no later than 1 February 2016 for all cross-border SEPA transactions (Article 5 Section 7). The IBAN will be sufficient to identify an account for home and foreign financial transactions in SEPA countries.
