Allegory is a device in which characters or events in a story, poem, or picture represent or symbolize ideas and concepts. Allegory has been used widely throughout the history of art, and in all forms of artwork. A reason for this is that allegory has an immense power of illustrating complex ideas and concepts in a digestible, concrete way. In allegory a message is communicated by means of symbolic figures, actions or symbolic representation. Allegory is generally treated as a figure of rhetoric; a rhetorical allegory is a demonstrative form of representation conveying meaning other than the words that are spoken.
As a literary device, an allegory in its most general sense is an extended metaphor. One of the best known examples is Plato's "The Allegory of the Cave." In this allegory, there are a group of people who have lived chained to the wall of a cave all of their lives, facing a blank wall. The people watch shadows projected on the wall by things passing in front of a fire behind them, and begin to ascribe forms to these shadows. According to the allegory, the shadows are as close as the prisoners get to viewing reality.
Etymology.
First attested in English 1382, the word "allegory" comes from Latin "allegoria", the latinisation of the Greek ἀλληγορία ("allegoria"), "veiled language, figurative", from ἄλλος ("allos"), "another, different" + ἀγορεύω ("agoreuo"), "to harangue, to speak in the assembly" and that from ἀγορά ("agora"), "assembly."
Types.
Northrop Frye discussed what he termed a "continuum of allegory," ranging from what he termed the "naive allegory" of "The Faerie Queene," to the more private allegories of modern paradox literature. In this perspective, the characters in a "naive" allegory are not fully three-dimensional, for each aspect of their individual personalities and the events that befall them embodies some moral quality or other abstraction; the allegory has been selected first, and the details merely flesh it out.:)
Many ancient religions are based on an astrologic allegories, that is, allegories of the movement of the Sun and the Moon as seen from the Earth. Examples include the cult of Horus/Isis.
Classical allegory.
In classical literature two of the best-known allegories are the cave in Plato's "Republic" (Book VII) and the story of the stomach and its members in the speech of Menenius Agrippa (Livy ii. 32). In Late Antiquity Martianus Capella organized all the information a fifth-century upper-class male needed to know into an allegory of the wedding of Mercury and "Philologia," with the seven liberal arts as guests; Capella's allegory was widely read through the Middle Ages.
Other early allegories are found in the Hebrew Bible, for instance in the extended metaphor in Psalm 80 of the Vine, which is Israel and Ezekiel 16 and 17.
Medieval allegory.
Medieval thinking accepted allegory as having a "reality" underlying any rhetorical or fictional uses. The allegory was as true as the facts of surface appearances. Thus, the bull "Unam Sanctam" (1302) presents themes of the unity of Christendom with the pope as its head in which the allegorical details of the metaphors are adduced as facts on which is based a demonstration with the vocabulary of logic: ""Therefore" of this one and only Church there is one body and one head—not two heads as if it were a monster... If, then, the Greeks or others say that they were not committed to the care of Peter and his successors, they "necessarily" confess that they are not of the sheep of Christ" .
In the late 15th century, the enigmatic "Hypnerotomachia", with its elaborate woodcut illustrations, shows the influence of themed pageants and masques on contemporary allegorical representation, as humanist dialectic conveyed them.
The denial of medieval allegory as found in the 11th-century works of Hugh of St Victor and Edward Topsell's "Historie of Foure-footed Beastes" (London, 1607, 1653) and its replacement in the study of nature with methods of categorization and mathematics by such figures as naturalist John Ray and the astronomer Galileo is thought to mark the beginnings of early modern science.
Modern allegory.
Since meaningful stories are nearly always applicable to larger issues, allegories may be read into many stories, sometimes misinterpreting their author's intent. For instance, many people have suggested that "The Lord of the Rings" is an allegory for the World Wars. But the author, J. R. R. Tolkien, emphatically stated in his introduction to the second edition, "It is neither allegorical nor topical... I cordially dislike allegory in all its manifestations, and always have done so since I grew old and wary enough to detect its presence."
Examples by genre.
Not every resonant work of modern fiction is an allegory. Arthur Miller's "The Crucible", for instance, is character-driven historical drama with contemporary relevance, but is not an allegory in spite of its parallels with McCarthyism, linking the hunt for communists in the 1940s and 1950s to the hunt for witches in the late 17th century. L. Frank Baum's "The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" is plot-driven fantasy narrative in an extended fable with talking animals and broadly-sketched characters. J.R.R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings is another example of a work sometimes seen as allegorical, yet, as the author explained, it is not - rather it is an example of what he referred to as applicability.
