A piranha or piraña (, , or ; ) is a member of family Characidae in order Characiformes, an omnivorous freshwater fish that inhabits South American rivers. In Venezuela, they are called caribes. They are known for their sharp teeth and a voracious appetite for meat.
Taxonomy and evolution.
Piranhas belong to the subfamily Serrasalminae, which includes closely related omnivorous fish such as pacus. Traditionally, only the four genera "Pristobrycon", "Pygocentrus", "Pygopristis" and "Serrasalmus" are considered to be true piranhas, due to their specialized teeth. However, a recent analysis showed that, if the piranha group is to be monophyletic, it should be restricted to "Serrasalmus", "Pygocentrus" and part of "Pristobrycon", or expanded to include these taxa plus "Pygopristis", "Catoprion", and "Pristobrycon striolatus". "Pygopristis" was found to be more closely related to "Catoprion" than the other three piranha genera.
The total number of piranha species is unknown and contested, and new species continue to be described. Estimates range from fewer than 30 to more than 60.
Distribution.
Piranhas are found in the Amazon basin, in the Orinoco, in rivers of the Guyanas, in the Paraguay-Paraná, and the São Francisco River systems. Some species of piranha have broad geographic ranges, occurring in more than one of the major basins mentioned above, whereas others appear to have more limited distributions. 
Aquarium piranhas have been introduced into parts of the United States, with specimens occasionally found in the Potomac River, Lake of the Ozarks in Missouri and even as far north as Lake Winnebago in Wisconsin, although they typically do not survive cold winters. Two girls fishing in a pond on Staten Island, New York City, caught a red-bellied piranha. Piranhas have also been discovered in the Kaptai Lake in southeast Bangladesh. Research is being carried out to establish how piranhas have moved to such distant corners of the world from their original habitat. Some rogue exotic fish traders are thought to have released them in the lake to avoid being caught by antipoaching forces. Piranhas were also spotted in the Lijiang River in China.
Description.
Piranhas are normally about 14 to 26 cm long (5.5 to 10.25 inches), although some specimens have been reported to be up to 43 cm (17.0 inches) in length.
"Serrasalmus", "Pristobrycon", "Pygocentrus" and "Pygopristis" are most easily recognized by their unique dentition. All piranhas have a single row of sharp teeth in both jaws; the teeth are tightly packed and interlocking (via small cusps) and are used for rapid puncture and shearing. Individual teeth are typically broadly triangular, pointed and blade-like (flat in profile). There is minor variation in the number of cusps; in most species, the teeth are tricuspid with a larger middle cusp which makes the individual teeth appear markedly triangular. The exception is "Pygopristis", which has pentacuspid teeth and a middle cusp usually only slightly larger than the other cusps. In the scale-eating "Catoprion", the shape of their teeth is markedly different and the premaxillary teeth are in two rows, as in most other serrasalmines.
Ecology.
Piranhas are important ecological components of their native environments. Although largely restricted to lowland drainages, these fish are widespread and inhabit diverse habitats within both lotic and lentic environments. Some piranha species are abundant locally, and multiple species often occur together. As both predators and scavengers, piranhas influence the local distribution and composition of fish assemblages. Certain piranha species consume large quantities of seeds, but unlike the related "Colossoma" and "Piaractus", herbivorous piranhas thoroughly masticate and entirely devour all seeds eaten and consequently do not function as dispersers.
Piranha have a reputation as ferocious predators that hunt their prey in schools. Recent research, however, which "started off with the premise that they school as a means of cooperative hunting", discovered that they are timid fish that schooled for protection from their own predators, such as cormorants, caimans, and dolphins. Piranhas are "basically like regular fish with large teeth".
Research on the species "Serrasalmus" aff. "brandtii" and "Pygocentrus nattereri" in Viana Lake, which is formed during the wet season when the Rio Pindare (a tributary of the Rio Mearim) floods, has shown that these species eat vegetable matter at some stages in their life; they are not strictly carnivorous fish.
Piranhas lay their eggs in pits dug during the breeding and swim around to protect them. Newly hatched young feed on zooplankton, and eventually move on to small fish once large enough.
Relationship with humans.
Piranha teeth are often used to make tools and weapons by the indigenous population. Piranhas are also popular as food, although if an individual piranha is caught on a hook or line, it may be attacked by others.
Piranhas are commonly consumed by subsistence fishermen, and often sold for food in local markets. In recent decades, dried specimens have been marketed as tourist souvenirs. Piranhas occasionally bite and sometimes injure bathers and swimmers. A piranha bite is considered more an act of carelessness than that of misfortune, but piranhas are a considerable nuisance to commercial and sport fishers because they steal bait, mutilate catch, damage nets and other gear, and may bite when disturbed or threatened.
Several piranha species appear in the aquarium trade. Piranhas can be bought as pets in some areas, but they are illegal in many parts of the United States. It is illegal to import piranhas into the Philippines and violators could face six months to four years of jail.
The most common aquarium piranha is "Pygocentrus nattereri", the red-bellied piranha. Piranhas can be bought fully grown or as babies, often no larger than a thumbnail. It is important to keep "Pygocentrus" piranhas alone or in groups of four or more, not in pairs, since aggression among them is common, not allowing the weaker fish to survive, and is distributed more widely when kept in larger groups. It is not rare to find individuals with one eye missing due to a previous attack.
Attacks.
Attacks resulting in deaths are recurring in the Amazon basin. In 2011 a drunk eighteen-year-old man was attacked and killed in Rosario del Yata, Bolivia. In 2012, a five-year-old Brazilian girl was attacked and killed by a shoal of "Pygocentrus nattereri". Some Brazilian rivers have warning signs about lethal piranhas. In 2011, in the Brazilian state of Piauí, there were brutal and recurring attacks resulting in one hundred people being injured. In the State of São Paulo another attack in the Tietê river resulted in 15 injured people. In the city of Palmas, Tocantins, 190 piranha attacks were reported in the first half of 2007. Biologists and experts warn that entering unknown rivers can be dangerous and fatal. Contrary to what many think, piranhas can be found in all regions of Brazil, including rivers, lakes, and coastal areas.
Legendary reputation.
There are various myths about piranhas such as how they can dilacerate a human body or cattle in seconds. These myths refer specifically to "Pygocentrus nattereri", the red-bellied piranha. A recurrent myth is that they can be attracted by blood and are exclusive carnivores. A Brazilian myth called "piranha cattle" states that they sweep the rivers at high speed and attack the first of the cattle entering the water allowing the rest of the group to traverse the river. These myths were dismissed through research by Helder Queiroz and Anne Magurran and published on "Biology Letters". Nevertheless, a study in Suriname found that piranhas may occasionally attack humans, particularly when water levels are low.
Theodore Roosevelt.
When American President Theodore Roosevelt visited Brazil in 1913, he went on a hunting expedition through the Amazon Rainforest. While standing on the bank of the Amazon River, he witnessed a spectacle created by local fishermen. After blocking off part of the river and starving the piranhas for several days, a cow was pushed into the water and was quickly torn apart by a school of hungry piranhas.
Roosevelt would later present the piranhas as vicious creatures in his 1914 book "," indicating that
</ref>
In popular culture.
Films have often painted piranhas as aggressive, insatiable predators. An example of this perception in media appears in the 1967 James Bond film "You Only Live Twice", where a piece of meat is shown being fed to pet piranhas owned by the film's main antagonist, Blofeld, then only a bone is raised from the water. Later on, a woman is thrown into the piranha pool, although all that is seen is water bubbling vigorously. 
"Piranha" (1978) and "" (1981) perpetuated the piranha's sinister image by showing murderous piranha fish biting and eating humans.
"Piranha 3D" (2010) is another Hollywood film, this time portraying the incident as starting with an under-water fault opening and allowing prehistoric piranha into a lake (versus an accidental addition as in the 1978 film).
